Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea): Mr. President,
I would like to begin by expressing to you the gratitude
of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea for having
convened this important open debate on the methods
of work of the Security Council less than a week after
having assumed the presidency of the Council. I would
also like to thank the Executive Director of Security
Council Report, Mr. Ian Martin, for the praiseworthy
and lofty work he is doing at the head of the important
body he heads and for having come here to brief us on
this key issue.

We would also echo previous speakers in warmly
congratulating Japan for the role it played in the context
of adopting Note 507 on the question of the working
methods of the Security Council.

Since 2011 the Security Council has regularly
held an open debate, a practice that has now become
customary, on the item entitled "Implementation of the
note by the President of the Security Council: working
methods of the Security Council". This practice has
been revitalized annually since it was initiated in
December 1994 by France, which organized for the first
time a debate on the Council's working methods.

Today this practice has evolved in the light of the
two contradictory demands that are made of the Security
Council. The Council is expected to, on the one hand,
adopt decisions that ensure rapid and effective action
to maintain international peace and security, and, on
the other hand, to obtain the support of a large majority
of the membership of the United Nations so that its
decisions can be fully implemented.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea would stress
that Note 507 makes no mention of issues pertaining to
sanctions committees, which continue to be governed
by the working methods as adopted by individual
sanctions committees and the notes and statements by
the President of the Security Council listed in the note
by the President of the Security Council of 7 February
2006 (S/2006/78).

With respect to issues that are not mentioned in
this note, working methods pertaining to interaction
with troop- and police-contributing countries continue
to be governed by resolution 1353 (2001) and by the
statement of the President of the Security Council of
31 December 2015 (S/PRST/2015/26), as well as other
relevant documents of the Security Council.

Furthermore, we welcome the continuing progress
made by the Security Council since 2006, when Note
507 of the President of the Council was adopted
for the first time as a compilation of the Council's
methods of work that clearly sets out its best practices,
without limiting the flexibility necessary to carry out
the Council's work. In 2010, the Council adopted the
revised Note 507, aimed at enhancing its work.

We believe, therefore, that this debate is a clear
sign of the genuine interest of all States Members of
the United Nations in enhancing the transparency,
inclusiveness and openness of the work of the Security
Council, in order to ensure that the Council truly acts on
behalf of all Member States, in conformity with Article
24 of the Charter of the United Nations. Equatorial
Guinea is a member of the group of States that support
not only a code of conduct pertaining to the methods of
the Security Council, in response to genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes, but also the French-
Mexican initiative on the suspension of the use of the
veto in cases involving mass atrocities.

At the same time, we are convinced that the
existence of the veto is an important obstacle to the work
of the Council. The veto has on occasion prevented the
Council from making clear to all nations of the world
that there is no place for impunity.

Respect for the Charter of the United Nations is
undermined by the fact that its Article 27, paragraph
3, continues to be disregarded. It is vital that clear
procedures be established in order to ensure respect
for this Article so that it can be fully implemented.
From an impartial and objective perspective, it is clear
that the Security Council should not have to confront
insurmountable obstacles, especially internal ones, in
organizing field missions. In that respect, we welcome
the initial measures that were adopted in 2010 that were
aimed at introducing certain official guidelines relating
to the use of this important instrument of the Council.

Equatorial Guinea is in favour of continuing
discussions within the Council to develop and enhance
provisions regarding Security Council missions.
We believe that the Council should clearly define
the following important elements: mission planning
and the decision-making process on deployment;
mission composition; the timeline for the submission
of reports and the way in which they are crafted;
and the decision-making process of the Council on a
mission's outcome.

The adoption by the Security Council of the revised
Note 507 by consensus consolidated, simplified and
restructured the original Note 507 of 2010 and all
additional independent presidential notes that have
been issued since then, including S/2016/619, which
was mentioned earlier. In addition, as highlighted in the
press release, the revised note 507 contains some new
and important elements for improving the Council's
effectiveness in areas such as the monthly programme of
work. We believe that improving the Council's working
methods did not end with the adoption of revised note
507. It is an open, dynamic and continuous process
involving collective efforts. And while codifying best
practices is a useful exercise, it is not an end in itself.
The most important thing is the Security Council's
implementation and actual practice.

A core component of the Council's responsibility
revolves around the work of its subsidiary bodies,
which are central to the implementation ofits decisions.
They carry out a wide range of tasks, ranging from
monitoring implementation and evaluating compliance
to coordination and cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations. In that regard, we fully
support efforts to make their work more streamlined
and coordinated, since a better understanding of the
work of the subsidiary bodies contributes to better
and more effective implementation of the Council's
decisions. In that regard, there are reasons to improve
coordination among the subsidiary bodies, especially
those that deal with related issues or have a similar
geographical scope.

The note by the President contained in document
S/2014/268, on drafting resolutions, refers to three
elements - consultations with members, penholdership
and consultations with other stakeholders. On the
first element, consultations with Council members,
the note states that penholders should consult with
and ensure an exchange of information among all
Council members. That frequently does not happen.
The permanent members prepare the drafts, consult
each other and finalize the process with very little time
for discussion. When elected members wish to make
comments or suggestions, the deadline has passed and
there is no time to incorporate new suggestions, which
means that non-permanent members have only two
options - accepting a fait accompli and finding a reason
to vote in favour; or abstaining or voting against, since
sometimes they agree with the substance of the issue
but not with the language used. This process should be
much more inclusive in order to improve transparency
in deliberations among all members of the Council.

Equatorial Guinea insists that the reforms of
the working methods included in note 507, as well
as of the Council's provisional rules of procedure,
should be permanent, so that the Council can be held
accountable and have predictable and transparent
standards. Equatorial Guinea endorses South Africa's
suggestions on strategic cooperation, particularly
between the Security Council and the African Union
Peace and Security Council, and so as to promote the
rule of law in conflict and post-conflict situations.The
Security Council has also adopted various documents,
such as resolution 2033 (2012), which recognizes that
the situation of regional organizations is conducive to
understanding the nuances and complexity of conflicts
and that their proximity enables them to have a direct
influence on the prevention or resolution of conflicts in
their regions.

Among other things, resolution 2033 (2012)
outlined concrete steps to be taken by the Council to
establish a more strategic relationship with the African
Union, which would greatly strengthen regional
competencies and local approaches to conflicts. In
this regard, Equatorial Guinea pays a well-deserved
tribute to Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for his
promotion of strengthened the relations between the
United Nations and the African Union in general, and
the African Union Commission in particular. This close
cooperation is no longer limited to conflict resolution
but now also includes sustainable development, as
reflected in the memorandum recently signed between
the United Nations and the African Union under the
auspices of Mr. Guterres and Moussa Faki Mahamat,
Chairperson of the Commission.

In accordance with Article 24 of the Charter of
the United Nations, Member States acknowledge that
in carrying out its functions, the Security Council
is acting on their behalf. The work of the Council is
therefore the collective responsibility of all Member
States, and its resolutions and presidential statements
should reflect the views expressed by Member States,
and in particular the States directly concerned or
particularly affected.

The issue of the veto is intrinsically linked to
the Council's working methods, particularly the
decision-making mechanism. It is an anachronistic and
anti-democratic privilege that should be re-evaluated
with a view to evolving more inclusive and democratic
decision-making measures. We believe that the
much-needed reforms of the Council will allow for
greater representativeness of the various regions and
adjustments in working methods, including limiting or
removing the veto privilege. The veto should no longer
be an untouchable element. In this regard, we regret that
the General Assembly has still not reached a conclusion
on expanding the permanent membership - with all
its privileges - and non-permanent memberships of
the Security Council. We urge the facilitators of the
intergovernmental negotiating process to draw on the
documents produced at the sixty-ninth, seventieth
and seventy-first sessions of the General Assembly
to produce a single document forming the basis for
negotiations on Security Council reform, which should
now be launched.

In conclusion, we welcome the initiative of electing
non-permanent members of the Security Council six
months earlier than before and allowing them to audit all
Council meetings and have access to documents three
months prior to joining the Council as actual members.
Another innovation, introduced by Kazakhstan during
its presidency in January, has been the ceremony in
which the representatives of the newly elected members
place their countries' flags in the Council Chamber.
We congratulate Kazakhstan on this innovation, which
should be instituted as a practice to be followed each
January before the Council begins its work for the year.

