Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased, Mr. Minister, to see you
presiding over the work of the Security Council today.
We are grateful to Ms. Coomaraswamy, Ms. Veneman
and the representative of civil society for the updated
information they provided on the situation with regard
to the protection of children in armed conflict.

The Russian Federation is committed to ensuring
the rights of children and will continue its active
endeavours to that end. These include, in particular,
our intention to ratify the relevant Optional Protocol to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child in the near
future.

We thank the Secretary-General for having
prepared his report (S/2007/757), which we have
studied with great attention. We take note of its focus
on practical measures and its copious compilation of
facts. We share the Secretary-General's concern at the
deteriorating situation of children in Afghanistan and
Iraq. We lay stress on the responsibility of all parties,
including the multinational forces, to ensure the safety
and security of civilian populations and to ensure strict
compliance with the norms of international
humanitarian law. Unfortunately, the report does not
touch on the deaths of children due to the actions of
private security firms in Iraq. We support inclusion of
the Taliban in the report's appended list of violating
parties, which opens the door for consideration of the
situation in the Council's Working Group.

Suitable attention should be paid to Iraq. A few
days ago a tape was publicly released in which
Al-Qaida terrorists are teaching Iraqi child soldiers to
kidnap and kill people. Another alarming indicator is
the large number of children incarcerated in military
prisons of the Multinational Forces. The report refers
to 800 such children, but other information puts that
figure much higher. We believe UNICEF should pay
attention to the causes and conditions of their captivity.
We are convinced of the need for prompt deployment
of the monitoring and reporting mechanism in such
situations.

We support the Secretary-General's proposal to
send child protection advisors to Afghanistan, Iraq and
Lebanon and including them in operations in Darfur,
Chad and the Central African Republic.

We welcome some progress made in Cote
d'Ivoire, which has resulted in the parties to the
conflict being de-listed from the annex to the
Secretary-General's report. We agree on the need to
persist in our focus on these kinds of situation so that
the improvement will not be short-lived.

We again state our support for the notion of an
equal approach to all serious violations, including not
just the use of child soldiers but the five other
categories of violations, including the murder and
maiming of children. The proposal for equal
consideration for all situations requires clarification, as
do the recommendations for deploying the monitoring
and reporting mechanism in all situations of concern.
We believe the priority regarding resolution 1612
(2005) should be given to the more acute and
widespread armed conflicts on the Council's agenda.

It is not possible to protect children without
interaction with the Governments of countries gripped
with conflict or in the post-conflict reconstruction
state. In that regard, the United Nations and its
Security Council should focus more on supporting
national measures to strengthen that protection, on
effective implementation of programmes to demobilize
and reintegrate underage minors, on establishing
social, economic and legal conditions for preventing
recruitment and on other crimes against children.

We wish to express the hope that the
comprehensive, systemic efforts of the Organization, in
cooperation with interested States, will result in
concrete results, easing the situation of children in
armed conflict.

