Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan): I would like to begin by
expressing to you, Mr. President, our appreciation for
convening today's debate. We are gratified that the
Security Council has finally come round to addressing
an issue on which discussion has been long overdue. It
is an issue that is not only important, but deserves the
utmost attention of the United Nations, especially the
Security Council, in terms of actions, not words.

The image of peacekeeping operations is one of
United Nations troops arriving in war-torn regions to
keep apart armies or warring groups and factions; to
help in providing succour to the hapless, innocent
victims of conflict; and to renew the hope that peace
may finally take root where war or conflict has
wreaked so much devastation. However, this image is
flawed. More often than not, the best our peacekeepers
end up doing is maintaining the status quo, eventually
winding up their operation without making any
contribution to the long-term resolution of the conflict.
At worst, the fighting and the carnage resume as soon
as the peacekeepers depart.

The fault lies not with the peacekeepers, but here,
within this very Chamber. Too often, the Security
Council decides on quick fixes rather than developing
well-thought-out strategies to restore peace in conflict
areas. Too often, it prefers to address the symptoms of
conflict rather than its root causes. Too often, it fails to
implement its own resolutions. And too often, it tries to
appear to make and preserve peace without fulfilling or
even addressing that responsibility in reality.

The United Nations Charter charges this Council
with the responsibility of maintaining and preserving
international peace and security, and provides the
mechanisms for doing so. Unfortunately, these
mechanisms have been honoured either in their neglect
or in their selective application. History is full of
examples that when the Council resolved to act it did
so either by drawing up unrealistic plans of action -
for example, authorizing mandates that could not be
implemented - or by not implementing its own
resolutions and decisions.

Mr. President, we welcome this initiative of yours
and are in complete agreement with your
apprehensions about exiting without strategy. You have
in your letter to the Secretary-General correctly
identified certain recent instances of complex intra-
State peacekeeping operations that lacked long-term
peace strategies, which led to the worsening rather than
the improvement, of the situations. Similarly, in the
case of many "traditional" peacekeeping operations,
the presence of United Nations peacekeepers on the
ground is not matched by the political resolve of the
Security Council to bring about an end to long-term
disputes or conflicts. In either case, there can be no
credible exit strategy without a comprehensive plan
that includes a solution.

The Brahimi report - to which references were
made in the Council earlier today - briefly touches
upon this issue by describing traditional peacekeeping
operations as

"relatively low cost and politically easier to
maintain than to remove. However, they are also
difficult to justify unless accompanied by serious
and sustained peacemaking efforts to transform
a ceasefire accord into a durable and lasting
settlement." (S/2000/809, para. 17)

The solution to this problem is clearly not to
terminate these traditional peacekeeping operations or
impose arbitrary "sunset clauses" on them. Nor is it to
continue, indefinitely, with the status quo. The answer
lies in the United Nations continued engagement both
on the ground and with the concerned actors to actively
seek and find a political resolution of the dispute or
crisis. Once a peacekeeping operation is in place the
United Nations must ensure that the conflict has been
resolved before it disengages itself. You are correct,
Mr. President, in your assessment that ending a
mission, or significantly reducing its military
component, may well result in the situation's
deteriorating, leading to a resumption of conflict.
Exiting without achieving a durable peace or final
settlement is simply unacceptable and costly.

Peacekeeping must be linked to conflict
resolution and post-conflict peace-building. For the
United Nations, the objective - which, according to
its Charter, is to maintain international peace and
security - is clear enough. It should not be forgotten
that peacekeeping is only one component of the
overarching theme of peacemaking. Such an approach
is essential for resolving all kinds of conflicts, be they
intra-State or inter-State. Such an approach is as
relevant to Sierra Leone or Kosovo as it is to the
Middle East or Kashmir.

The Security Council cannot absolve itself of its
responsibilities simply by deploying a peacekeeping
mission in a conflict area. It is also required to come up
with a sound and workable peace strategy that seeks to
resolve the dispute by addressing its root causes and
that is backed up by political will to resolve the dispute
or conflict.

Postponing conflicts without resolving disputes
does not mean peace; perpetuating a status quo which
exacerbates suffering is not justice. And, ifI may put it
candidly, holding this thematic debate for the sake of
debate is no strategy; it only reduces this Council to a
debating club. Was this your intention, Mr. President,
in deciding to convene this meeting? Surely not! Words
must be turned into action.

The Security Council must reassert its lost
credibility and authority in fulfilment of its Charter
obligations for the maintenance of peace and security.
In implementing its decisions, it must not discriminate
between regions or situations. It must act fairly, not
selectively. It must always uphold principles of justice
and international law.

The close of the last millennium, unfortunately,
did not close all the chapters of the past century that
were written in the blood of innocent people. The
agenda of the Security Council, this very august body,
and its debates of the forties, sixties, seventies and
nineties bear witness to the lingering tragedy of
Kashmir, where the era of foreign occupation and
brutal repression has yet to end. The United Nations
must redeem its pledge to the people of Kashmir by
implementing the relevant Security Council
resolutions. Kashmir today is not only a lurking threat
to world peace and security but also a litmus test for
the credibility of the United Nations. It has become the
touchstone of the moral and legal underpinnings of the
very United Nations system.

Peacekeeping is an important task, but the
making and preservation of peace must not be left to
the peacekeepers. This is the domain of the Security
Council. The Council must find ways to address all
conflict situations, without exception or discrimination,
and try to resolve them.

Let us not have a recurrence of Sierra Leones in
future. There should be "no exit without strategy", but
the aim of this strategy must be to resolve disputes by
addressing their root causes.

