Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation wishes to thank the Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo,
and the Head of the Delegation of the European Union to
the United Nations, Mr. Joao Vale de Almeida, for their
briefings. We also thank the Permanent Representative
of the Netherlands, Mr. Karel van Oosterom, for the
detailed information he provided in relation to his work
as Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015). Finally, we welcome the participation of the
Permanent Representative of Germany in this session.

I begin by stressing that Bolivia is part of the first
densely populated region of the world that is completely
free of nuclear weapons and, as provided for in the
Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin
America and the Caribbean, we have assumed the
responsibility of contributing, to the best of our ability,
to ending the arms race - especially nuclear - and to
consolidating international peace and security. In that
regard, we attend this meeting convinced that we have
an obligation to the international community to join
forces so that the Middle East can join the five nuclear-
weapon-free zones of the world.

Bolivia firmly reaffirms its commitment to the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), in the
understanding that it represents an unmistakable
diplomatic achievement with respect to nuclear
non-proliferation and a manifestation of the capacity
of States when we are committed to multilateralism
and international law. In that context, we reiterate the
right of the peoples of the world, without exception, to
research, produce and use nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes, in accordance with articles I and II of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
and the principles laid down by the International
Atomic Energy Agency.

My delegation believes that the 12 years of intense
diplomatic activity that led to an agreement on the
Iranian nuclear issue and that resulted in the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action, which the Security
Council endorsed through the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2231 (2015), cannot be postponed by
the unilateral decision of one State that jeopardizes
the implementation of the Plan. In that order of
priorities, like many other representatives, we regret
the announcement on 8 May by the United States
Government of its withdrawal from the agreement and
its reimposition of the unilateral sanctions that had been
lifted or had been subject to exemptions, in accordance
with the JCPOA. Bolivia categorically condemns
unilateral sanctions, which are a flagrant violation of
multilateralism and a serious threat to the international
order, constituting as they do illegal measures that
impose one State's jurisdiction and internal legislation
on another's, violating the principles of equality,
sovereignty and the territorial integrity of States. We
are concerned about the possibility that that decision
could affect the Plan of Action, with consequences
that would have implications for the whole world, not
just the Middle East. In that regard, we believe that
we should be able to create a climate of mutual trust
among States given the denuclearization proposals that
are currently being negotiated, as is the case with the
Korean peninsula.

Despite all of this, we want to emphasize the
decision of the Government of the Islamic Republic
of Iran to continue to abide by its commitments under
the JCPOA. We also commend the support of the other
signatories to the JCPOA to the non-proliferation
of nuclear weapons in the region, as expressed on
25 May in Vienna, and to the continuing, full and
effective implementation of the Plan of Action. In that
regard, it is the responsibility of the Security Council
to uphold the agreement exactly as it was envisaged,
guaranteeing reciprocal commitments for its full good-
faith implementation in a constructive atmosphere
based on mutual respect. In that context, the Council
members are the main guarantors preventing any action
that could undermine the Plan of Action. We support
any initiative of the Secretary-General that ensures the
validity of the JCPOA.

As on other occasions, we are interested in seeing
more in-depth information in future reports regarding
annex A, since annexes A and B are both integral and
complementary to the effective implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015).

Finally, as a peaceful country, Bolivia reaffirms its
commitment to preventive diplomacy, multilateralism,
non-interference and respect for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of States, in
the understanding that those are universal principles
recognized by the international community.

