The Secretary-General: I would like to begin by
paying tribute to Secretary of State Albright and
Ambassador Holbrooke for their extraordinary efforts in
convening yet another in a series of important meetings
during the United States presidency of the Security Council.
They are making the world sit up and take greater notice of
Africa. That is an accomplishment we must applaud and of
which they can be proud.

It is remarkable to see so many African leaders
gathered in this Chamber. You have travelled long distances
in an effort to resolve a conflict that has brought so much
suffering to so many people and for so long. The political
distance still to be travelled is even greater. But that is your
responsibility as leaders, and this is your opportunity to
serve the African people and enlist international support for
peace and stability on the continent.

When war again erupted in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in August 1998, barely a year had elapsed
since the end of the country's previous conflict, which itself
had followed decades of dictatorship and misrule.

In succeeding months, violence intensified. Human
rights violations multiplied. Today, millions of people are
trying to eke out an existence amid chronic insecurity,
economic despair and widespread disregard for international
humanitarian law.

Massive numbers of refugees, internally displaced
persons and other vulnerable men and women are unsure of
shelter or their next meal. The recruitment of child
soldiers continues, with thousands serving as combatants.
Unaccompanied minors have been reported in large
numbers. The entire subregion has been engulfed in a
crisis of such complexity that it continues to defy our best
efforts to resolve it.

On a long list of needs, wisdom and statesmanship,
as well as an understanding of the limits of the use of
force, are at the top.
In July last year, a mediation effort led by President
Chiluba of Zambia on behalf of the Southern Africa
Development Community (SADC), and with the support
of the Organization of African Unity (OAU), resulted in
the signing of the Lusaka Peace Agreement. Since then,
however, there have been many ceasefire violations which
have caused fresh suffering. The deployment of United
Nations military liaison officers has been obstructed,
undermining confidence in the implementation process.
The belligerents must do better.

The Lusaka Agreement remains the most viable
blueprint for resolving grievances and for achieving a
comprehensive negotiated solution. But if peace is to take
hold, and if international engagement is to be sustained,
the warring parties face a paramount challenge: they need
to demonstrate the political will to apply the agreement
fully, without further delay. All else flows from that
essential requirement.

Ultimately, we will find a sustainable solution to this
crisis only if we address its root causes. That is why the
drafters of the Lusaka Agreement placed inter-Congolese
negotiations at the heart of the process. That dialogue is
indispensable. The Congolese signatories, with the
assistance of the OAU, have taken an encouraging first
step in designating Sir Ketumile Masire, former President
of Botswana, as the neutral facilitator for these
negotiations. His prestige, expertise and moral authority
can help reinvigorate the Lusaka process.

The United Nations, for its part, has been actively
involved in the search for a peaceful solution since the
start of the conflict. We have supported the efforts of
President Chiluba and the OAU. We have made
significant contributions through the missions carried out
by my former Special Envoy, Moustapha Niasse. And
now, my new Special Representative for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Kamel Morjane, will contribute
his utmost to the peace process. I also have in the region
my Special Representative for the Great Lakes region,

 

Berhanu Dinka, who will be exploring how the United
Nations can help unravel the regional problems that have
impeded progress. And the United Nations mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, if given the necessary
cooperation and allowed to do its job, can help foster
confidence among the parties and keep the peace process
on track.

If the United Nations is to make the right kind of
difference in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and is
to avoid the wrong turns that have led to tragic
consequences elsewhere, we must be ready not only to act,
but to act in a way that is commensurate with the gravity
of the situation. Whether that means intense political
engagement, a sustained commitment of resources or
decisive action in the face of unforeseen circumstances, we
must see this involvement through.

At the same time, we must guard against creating
inflated expectations of what can be realistically expected
from the United Nations. And we must never lose sight of
our central dependence on the compliance of the parties
involved. Whether we are speaking of the political process,
of military deployments or of protection for humanitarian
and other United Nations personnel, the parties themselves
bear primary responsibility for adhering to commitments
and creating the conditions conducive to progress.

Time is of the essence. By their presence here at
today' s meeting and at tomorrow' s mini-summit, the leaders
in this Chamber have a chance to reaffirm their
commitment to the Lusaka Agreement. The peace process
is fragile; leadership can strengthen it. Millions of civilians
are suffering grievously; leadership can inspire them and
give them hope.

The United Nations is here to help. But the United
Nations has also had bitter experiences of help gone wrong.
This has made Member States profoundly uneasy, and has
raised the threshold of persuasion for new involvements,
even when suffering claims our attention and when
solidarity demands that we act. If this is an illness of our
international system, leadership can provide an antidote.

The challenge facing these leaders is to reach
consensus with one another, and to transform that
consensus into action. That will lay the groundwork for
progress to be made on their own. Just as important, it will
offer a convincing argument in favour of the international
support that Africa merits and that can help bring about a
decisive change for the better.

