Mr. Vieira (Brazil): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, and the Swedish presidency of the
Security Council for having organized this debate
on conflict prevention and sustaining peace. I should
like also to welcome the Secretary-General, Antonio
Guterres, as this is the first time he is participating
in a Security Council debate in that capacity, and to
commend him for the leadership he has shown since
his first day in office and the drive to reform and adapt
the Organization to the demands of the twenty-first
century.

This open debate is timely and takes place at a
moment of transition in the United Nations. Brazil
would like to echo the new Secretary-General's appeal
for all of us to put peace first in this new year. To that
end, prevention must come first, and calls to prevent
conflict and sustain peace must be translated into
concrete deeds.

As conflicts multiply and become more complex,
the major weakness of the United Nations remains its
inability to prevent conflicts. The best way to protect
civilians, who are the main victims, is to focus primarily
on prevention. Secretary-General Guterres accurately
remarked that the United Nations was born from war
and that we must now focus on peace. Not long ago,
the United Nations went through a process of reviewing
its activity with a view to adapting the Organization
to the challenges faced regarding the maintenance of
international peace and security. The recommendations
contained in the three resulting reports hinged on one
common element: the primacy of politics.

These documents highlight the fact that United
Nations engagement needs to adopt a comprehensive
approach to sustaining peace that should also focus on
conflict prevention. I wish to underscore in particular
the findings of the Advisory Group of Experts on the
Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture, which paved
the way for the notion of sustaining peace. This concept,
enshrined in General Assembly resolution 70/262 and
Security Council resolution 2282 (2016), on the review
of the peacebuilding architecture, encompasses the
dimension of conflict prevention and marks an evolution
in relation to the original paradigm of peacebuilding,
which focused exclusively on countries emerging from
conflict.

It has long been the Brazilian view that the United
Nations engagement to promote peace and security
should go beyond addressing the immediate causes and
drivers of conflict, sending peacekeeping operations
and providing aid relief. Strategies to sustain peace must
also focus on the structural prevention of the outbreak
of, or relapse into, conflict, including by fighting
poverty, ensuring youth employment and gender
equality, promoting socioeconomic development,
building full-fledged institutions, and promoting
national reconciliation, improved governance and more

inclusive societies. These actions should be carried
out in close coordination with national authorities and
taking into account the priorities established and the
need for national ownership at all stages. Without falling
into the trap of securitizing development, enhanced
coordination between the United Nations development
system and the architecture to sustain peace should be
pursued.

As for the steps to be taken to ensure more effective,
complete prevention by the Security Council and across
the wider United Nations system, Brazil is of the view
that better coordination and cooperation between the
Security Council and the Peacebuilding commission is
needed. As we have stated on various occasions, Security
Council members must take full advantage of the role
of the Peacebuilding Commission and contribute to an
improved United Nations engagement. In this regard,
we welcome the adoption of the review of the working
methods of the Peacebuilding Commission, which calls
for enhanced cooperation between these two bodies. The
revised working methods foresee that in preparation for
briefings of the Security Council, the Commission may
consider visits to the fields, including, when invited by
the Council, joint visits with the Security Council. It
is our opinion that the Council would benefit from the
long-term perspective of the Commission in those joint
visits. Peacekeeping operations and special political
missions should also adopt the long-term perspective
required for sustaining peace.

On a more operational level, the Council could do
more to prioritize prevention in its activities. Regular
horizon-scanning exercises focused on potential
hotspots and cross-cutting thematic concerns should be
resumed. This can certainly be done in a way that helps
to stave off conflict rather than stoke tensions. As for
how to increase the focus on prevention, the incoming
Secretary-General has rightly outlined the measures
needed: address the root causes through a balanced
approach to the three pillars of the United Nations.
Such an endeavour will require enhanced coordination
between the Security Council, the Economic and Social
Council and the General Assembly.

The Secretary-General will also have an important
role in preparing the report to be presented to the
General Assembly at its seventy-second session on
options to increase, restructure and better prioritize
funding allocated to peacebuilding activities, including
through assessed contributions. That should also be
considered as we strive to strengthen special political
missions, which have been doing important work to
prevent and mediate conflict and to sustain peace, but
lack the predictable and sizable financial support of
peacekeeping operations.

In his New Year address, the Secretary-General
rightly underscored that trillions of dollars are spent on
waging war. Allow me to add that billions are also spent
in peacebuilding operations worldwide. Resources
should be more efficiently invested in strengthening
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture
and special political missions, which can play an
invaluable role in prevention. As Ambassador Gert
Rosenthal underscored in the report (see S/2015/490)
of the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of
the Peacebuilding Architecture, peacebuilding is an
inherently political process. The Security Council and
the General Assembly have already shown political
will by agreeing on a framework for peace. We need
a strategic plan for the implementation of General
Assembly resolution 70/262 and Security Council
resolution 2282 (2016). I hope that the high-level event
entitled "Building Sustainable Peace for All: Synergies
between the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and Sustaining Peace", to be held on 24 January, will
afford us an opportunity to demonstrate the renewed
commitment of Member States, the United Nations and
other stakeholders to building lasting peace.

