Mr. Cardi (Italy): Italy remains convinced that
a just and lasting peace between Israel and Palestine
needs to be based on a two-State solution, as the only
achievable objective resulting from direct negotiations
between the two parties. That is also consistent with
the position that the European Union has held for years.
In addition to the efforts by all relevant international
actors, including those of the Special Coordinator and
the Quartet, we have followed with optimism the latest
attempt by the United States to reach out to the parties,
which we trust can pave the way for concrete outcomes.
In that spirit, the positive involvement of regional
actors is of paramount importance, as well as that of
the rest of the international community. Against that
background, we are open to considering new diplomatic
schemes aimed at achieving a negotiated solution,
provided that they remain within the boundaries of the
Oslo framework.

However, constructive efforts could be derailed by
unhelpful steps on the ground. Unilateral actions are
to be avoided by all parties, if mutual confidence is to
be restored. In the meantime, we strongly support all
possible practical collaboration between the parties in
areas such as access to water and energy, sanitation and
security, in order to improve the living conditions of all
Palestinians. In that context, we commend initiatives
that are beneficial to all parties involved, such as the
Red Sea-Dead Sea project.

Turning to the recent developments in Lebanon,
Italy encourages the Lebanese authorities to keep
working towards the consolidation of institutions and
the economy. Following the election of President Aoun
and the establishment of the new Government under
Prime Minister Hariri, we encourage all Lebanese
political parties to spare no effort to reach an agreement
to hold parliamentary elections by the end of 2017. That
will be a crucial step toward the restoration of the full
functionality of State institutions. Let me recall the
importance that Italy attaches to the full implementation
ofresolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006) by all parties
in Lebanon, as a cornerstone for enduring national and
regional stability.

The gradual process of the consolidation of
Lebanese institutions still requires the full support
of the international community, especially the active
involvement of the United Nations. The United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) is an example of
how valuable the work of the United Nations in the
Middle East can be. In times of widespread conflict,
UNIFIL has managed to provide its area of operations
with stability and security. Also, by enhancing
interaction with the population through specific
activities, UNIFIL has brought substantial calm to
southern Lebanon, ensuring long-overdue tranquillity
for Israel on its northern border.

Furthermore, as the Syrian conflict increased,
UNIFIL and the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force have contributed to sheltering Israel
and Lebanon from the war, and have proved to be a
shield against the non-State actors active in the area,
whose actions continue to pose a serious risk of
escalation, particularly in the Syrian Golan. Averting
such escalation must continue to be a key priority for the
international community. That is especially supported
by countries such as Italy that contribute to the manning
of United Nations stabilization missions there.

Violence continues to plague Syria and cause
tremendous suffering to the Syrian people. It is our
collective responsibility to revitalize the chances
for peace. In that regard, the Group of Seven (G-7)
meetings last week, which was extended to some key
regional stakeholders, were timely. On both occasions,
which were convened by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Italy, Mr. Al Fano, all countries conveyed a
strong message of support for the political process and
for the efforts of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, calling for the swift
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015).

At the G-7 meetings, efforts aimed at establishing
a nationwide ceasefire were also welcomed, while
concern was expressed at the violations of the ceasefire.
An effective cessation of hostilities, as well as full
humanitarian access, must remain our objective and
our priority, as they feed into the Geneva process by
creating an environment conducive to the political talks.

Accountability for gross and systematic violations
committed in Syria is also crucial for preventing
additional brutality and continued flouting of
international norms. All those responsible for such
breaches of international law will be held accountable
in that framework. We fully support the investigation
by the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) Fact-Finding Mission in the Syrian
Arab Republic into the Khan Shaykhun attack, and
we call upon the Syrian Government and all parties to
cooperate fully with the OPCW so as to allow for the
prompt conclusion of its investigation.

I would like to conclude with the mention of two
issues that have a regional dimension: the fight against
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham or Da'esh, and
the plight of refugees and migrants.

Da'esh is on the defensive and is losing territory.
However, two main challenges are now looming:
stabilizing liberated areas, which is needed in order to
prevent the resurgence of Da'esh, and countering the
remaining threats of the transnational terrorist network,
including the network of foreign terrorist fighters.

Finally, I turn to the issue of people on the move
in the Middle East. Being at the forefront of the
migration emergency in the Mediterranean Sea and
deploying countless resources to provide migrants and
refugees with life-saving assistance, Italy appreciates
the immense efforts undertaken by countries in the
region, such as Lebanon and Jordan, which bear the
burden of hosting hundreds of thousands of refugees
and which, consequently, need the unwavering support
of the international community. Any solution intended
to bring about sustainable peace in the Middle East
will also need to address promptly and pragmatically
the plight of those people, based on the two pillars of
security and solidarity.

