Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset,
let me thank you, Madam President, for presiding over
this important meeting. We deeply appreciate the time
that you are personally devoting to this issue by
presiding over the Council's deliberations. I would also
like to place on record our appreciation for the
participation of Commissioner Lamamra and the
Ministers from Kenya, Uganda and Azerbaijan in
today's meeting, as well as for their valuable
statements. I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Lynn Pascoe for his briefing.
The situation in Somalia is at a crossroads. Two
decades of instability and insecurity have taken their
political, economic and social tolls and will require the
concerted long-term commitment of the international
community to assist the Somali people in their efforts
at restoring peace, security and economic development
in their country. The effective engagement of the
international community during 2011 helped tide over
the worst phase of the humanitarian crisis in Somalia.
However, approximately 250,000 people remain at
risk, and there is a need to persevere with our efforts to
deal with the many problems.

On the political front, the extended transition
period has seen the adoption of a comprehensive road
map by the Transitional Federal Institutions (TFIs), in
accordance with the June 2011 Kampala Accord. The
implementation of the road map is critical - in
particular the drafting and adoption of the constitution,
its endorsement by a constituent assembly, and
parliamentary reforms - with a view to ending the
transition in a timely manner by August 2012. In that
regard, we have noted that several concrete measures
have been taken by the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG). We welcome that the technical
committee comprised of representatives of the TFIs,
regions and the international community met twice and
agreed to track progress through four subcommittees.
On the other hand, the TFIs have missed a number of
deadlines in the implementation of the road map. The
recent developments concerning the speaker have the
potential to derail the implementation of the road map;
they are therefore of serious concern. We therefore
urge all stakeholders to resolve their differences and
expedite the implementation of the road map.

On security front, we commend the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and TFG forces
for the gains made against Al-Shabaab. We also
commend troop-contributing countries for the
sacrifices made by their soldiers in Somalia.
Nevertheless, Al-Shabaab has shown that it is capable
of carrying out almost daily attacks, including against
high-profile targets. In that connection, we welcome
the operations being undertaken by Kenyan and
Ethiopian forces in coordination with the AMISOM
and TFG forces.

There is also a need for the Security Council to
take further measures in support of the TFG to restrict
the resources that Al-Shabaab earns from use of ports
and the export of charcoal. We request that the
Secretary-General submit a report to the Council on the
requirements, in terms of naval and other assets, that
would be needed for the international community to be
able to interdict vessels that visit Kishmayo and other
ports and profit Al-Shabaab and pirates in Somalia.
Such a report would allow the Council to take an
informed decision on the request of the African Union
concerning use of ports by Al-Shabaab and pirates.

Since AMISOM. is the mainstay of the efforts of
the international community for dealing with the
security situation in Somalia, it is necessary that
AMISOM. be further strengthened. AMISOM. continues
to face serious resource gaps. The Council should
expeditiously and favourably consider the
recommendations of the African Union and troop-
contributing countries on the support extended to
AMISOM. by the United Nations and the international
community. Its funding must be made adequate, secure
and predictable. It is also necessary to provide
AMISOM. with enablers and force multipliers such as
helicopter units, transport and engineering capabilities.
We support their inclusion within the United Nations
support package.

There is also a need to expand TFG forces and to
strengthen their capacities for the long-term stability
and security of Somalia. New recruitments have to be
undertaken, as well as full training and the provision of
proper equipment. We call on the Member States to
make uncaveated contributions to the United Nations
and African Union trust funds for AMISOM. and to
enhance their support for TFG forces. For its part,
India contributed $2 million to the African Union and
United Nations Trust Funds, without any caveats, for
AMISOM. operations last year. We stand ready to
provide further support to AMISOM.

Piracy off the coast of Somalia remains a serious
problem facing the international community. As of
31 October 2011, Somali pirates held 19 ships and 331
hostages. Combating maritime piracy is therefore an
important issue that is intrinsically linked to the
security situation in Somalia. So far, the TFIs have
paid little attention to that problem. We think that the
benchmarks on piracy in the road map outlining
transition tasks should be expeditiously implemented
by the TFIs, including in such areas as the demarcation
of an exclusive economic zone, the establishment of an
operational coast guard and a navy and the adoption of
a legal framework to address piracy, hostage-taking
and payments of ransom, among other aspects. We also
stand ready to help in building the capacity of the TFIs
and States in the region to take effective measures
against piracy off the coast of Somalia.

Moreover, given the growing scope and
expanding coverage of the problem, the international
community has to think about adopting a
comprehensive counter-piracy strategy. In our view,
such a strategy should involve a United Nations-led
anti-piracy force to conduct naval operations, which
would help to improve coordination in anti-piracy
operations by various naval forces. The strategy should
also provide for the enactment of national laws on
giving priority to criminalizing piracy, as defined in the
United Nations Convention of the Law of the Sea. The
strategy should contain measures to effectively sanitize
the Somali coastline and identify safe corridors and
buffer zones.

India has already taken several steps, including
anti-piracy patrols in the Gulf of Aden since 2008, and
has also deployed its ships in the eastern and north-
eastern Arabian Sea. That has helped to neutralize
several attempts at piracy. While we will continue our
counter-piracy operations, there is also an urgent need
for the international community to address the serious
problem of hostage-taking by pirates and the
consequent humanitarian problems faced by hostages
and their families.

In conclusion, the situation in Somalia calls for
the enhanced engagement of the international
community with the Somali federal and regional
authorities to comprehensively address the multitude of
problems in the political, security, humanitarian and
counter-piracy fields. The Council should stand ready
to take the lead in all of those efforts.

