Mr. Fernandez-Arias Minuesa (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to congratulate the
Malaysian presidency on leadership this month. I would
also like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this wrap-up session, which we feel is very appropriate
because it also allows us to summarize the Council's
work during the first half of 2015. For the delegation
of Spain, these six months have been the first of our
two-year term in the Council 4 the fifth time we have
participated as a non-permanent member ofthe Security
Council. Spain highly appreciates the convening of
such meetings for various reasons, which we would like
to highlight.

First, as elected members of the Security Council,
we understand that we must faithfully comply with our
commitment to transparency and collaboration with all
States Members of the Organization - a commitment
we undertook during our campaign for election. Those
elected to the Council, like all members in general, have
a responsibility to exercise transparency. We reiterate
our readiness to work with the entire membership
and with civil society organizations with a view to
ensuring that the Security Council continues to grow in
efficiency and transparency.

Secondly, wrap-up sessions like today's can be very
useful in improving the Council's working methods.
Naturally, the effective work of the Council is not just
a prior condition for providing an agile response to
crises. Efficacy, efficiency and transparency are central
elements in reforming the Council's working methods,
which is of particular importance to my country. That
is why Spain has been working with Angola, Chair of
the Ad Hoc Group on Working Methods, to organize an
open debate on working methods during the Spanish
presidency of the Council in October.

I would like to relate my thoughts on our experience
in the first six months on the Council this year, which
also leads me to a few considerations on working
methods.

One concern is the way in which the penholder
system works. Undoubtedly, the quality of the work
of the penholders is excellent and allows the Security
Council's work to enjoy the necessary continuity
and follow-up. However, from the point of view
transparency, we believe that there could perhaps
be room for improvement. This is an especially
important point because unless the information we
receive is timely and specific, it is not always possible
to participate thoughtfully in the drafting of Council
documents, be they resolutions, press releases or
presidential statements. That being the case, it may
be paradoxical that elected members, serving just
two-year terms, have had less time in training than
permanent members to participate in negotiations on
various resolutions. That is why we feel it would be
worthwhile to introduce a system of co-penholders in
which one permanent member would always work with
one elected non-permanent member.

We also feel that at times there is a lack of proportion
between the time taken to explain positions and the
time spent actually taking decisions. I know that time
is at a premium, but I believe that we need to strike a
better balance in the way we manage our time, because
it may seem that the time given to debate a matter can
extend for hours at the expense of the time we need
to take operative decisions, which we often must take
within minutes. On more than one occasion, we have
experienced hours of discussion and just 10 minutes on
the content of a press release.

I also believe that the lack of interaction between
Council members and the rest of the membership of
the Organization in the open debates is of particular
concern. The open debates lose a lot of their meaning
in that way because their purpose to provide an
opportunity for genuine interaction between members
and non-members of the Council on issues that are
central to peace and security at any given point in time.

I would now like to mention two matters raised by
previous speakers. The selection of the next Secretary-
General is one of the most important aspects that we
will be dealing with in upcoming months. Transparency
must be a central principle, pursuant to Article 97 of the
Charter of the United Nations. I take this opportunity
to encourage greater transparency and inclusiveness in
the selection process for the next Secretary-General.
Among possible measures is the establishment of a list
of candidates and the presentation of candidacies in
sufficient time to allow for interaction with Member

States. We also feel that it is essential to bear in mind
the need for gender balance in the selection of the next
Secretary-General.

Among other matters, we will soon need to
consider a revision of resolution 1325 (2000) on women
and peace and security, an issue on which Spain plans
to organize a high-level open debate during its Council
presidency. The review of resolution 1325 (2000) will
be a major priority for us in our two-year term on the
Council. I take this opportunity to call for high-level
participation in that future debate, to be organized
and held in October. I hope that it will add value
commensurate with the important goals of that agenda,
as the Ambassador of the United Kingdom said just
now, while avoiding an excess of rhetoric and a lack of
practical implementation.
As noted at the Arria Formula meeting that Spain
organized at the end of May with the members of
the three panels preparing reports on the peace and
security reviews, the review of resolution 1325 (2000)
should overlap with the reviews of the peacebuilding
architecture and peacekeeping operations, and
complement both. We need to take a detailed look at the
report of the Independent Panel on Peace Operations.
My delegation welcomes the inclusion of a separate
section on women and peace and security in the report,
where some of the contributions that Spain made in our
national capacity would be included.

In conclusion, my delegation appreciates the close
and frank cooperation that we have enjoyed with all
the members of the Council throughout these months,
as well as with the Secretariat and the wonderful
interpretation team. We hope to further deepen that
cooperation and help to improve the efficiency and
transparency of the work of the Council in the year and
a half that remains. Finally, I would wish all the best
to New Zealand during their presidency of the Council
next month.

