Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania): The
United Republic of Tanzania addresses the Security
Council at a time when our country is still stricken by
shock and grief following a terrorist attack which resulted
in loss of life and damage to property.

The resolution adopted by the Security Council
today is a confirmation of the fact that the international
community is united in its unequivocal condemnation of
the scourge of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations.

Being the recent victims of these dastardly terrorist
attacks, Kenya and Tanzania have been painfully exposed
to the horrors of this heinous crime. President Benjamin
William Mkapa has committed all our national efforts to
confronting this evil and expressed our firm resolve to
apprehend those responsible and to bring them to justice.
In this regard, the Government has made an appeal to the
international community to come to its assistance for the
purposes of carrying out successful investigations and
prosecution. We are therefore gratified to note that the
resolution adopted underscores this aspect as well.

The United Republic of Tanzania continues to
condemn terrorist activities in all their forms and
manifestations, whether perpetrated by individual groups
or by States, irrespective of the motivation involved. The
recent barbaric attack has not weakened, but rather
strengthened, this resolve.

In conclusion, I wish first to reiterate the sympathies
of my Government to the injured and to the bereaved
families, both in Kenya and in the United States of
America. As we mourn for our people, we mourn also for
the people of Kenya and the United States. Secondly, I
wish to reassure the Council of the utmost concern of my
Government regarding the security of diplomatic missions
and their personnel in our country. Lastly, I should also
record the appreciation of my Government for the
messages of sympathy and condolence we have received
and continue to receive. Those expressions have been and
continue to be a source of considerable encouragement for
which we are immensely thankful.

