Mr. Fedotov: I thank the Security Council for the
opportunity to address this very important topic.

The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) is observing new, alarming trends in drug
trafficking in West and Central Africa, with disruptive
and destabilizing effects on governance, security,
economic growth and public health. Criminal networks
are no longer limiting their activities to moving cocaine
and heroin through Africa for destination markets in
Europe and elsewhere. According to UNODC's 2018
World Drug Report, West and Central Africa, together
with the countries ofNorth Africa, accounted for 87 per
cent of the pharmaceutical opioids seized globally,
which is largely due to rising use of Tramadol, an opioid
painkiller that is widely trafficked for non-medical use
in the region.

Along with Asia, Africa saw the largest rises
worldwide in cocaine seizures as well, suggesting
that cocaine trafficking and consumption have spread
to those markets. Through UNODC AIRCOP, which
works in several African airports, we know that heroin
seizures are on the rise across the region, with Lagos,
Accra and Cotonou airports high on the list, closely
followed by Bamako, Lome and Ouagadougou.

Methamphetamine seizures have now reached
almost the same level as cocaine seizures, with Lagos
and Cotonou the main airports concerned. Recently, an
increase in the number of seizures of such precursors
as ephedrine and phenacetin has been recorded at both
airports, which may indicate the existence of new
laboratories producing psychoactive substances.

At the same time, drug use in West and Central
Africa is rising, representing a serious threat to public
health. With the caveat that there is a lack of reliable
and recent data on the extent of drug use in the area,
UNODC estimates that in 2016 there were more than
34 million cannabis users in West and Central Africa,
as well as 1.8 million cocaine users. Globally, only
one in six people suffering from drug use disorders
receives treatment. However, in Africa that figure
is much lower, with only 1 in 18 problem drug users
having access to treatment.

At the same time, the region is grappling with many
other crime-related security threats, including arms
trafficking, money laundering, human trafficking,
cybercrime and maritime piracy, as well as threats
posed by terrorism. The linkages among terrorism,
illicit drugs and other forms of crime have been widely
acknowledged, including by the Security Council.

In August, the Security Council expressed serious
concerns about the continuing terrorist activities of
Boko Haram and other groups in the Lake Chad basin;
links between illicit trafficking in wildlife and natural
resources and the financing of armed groups; maritime
insecurity in the Gulf of Guinea; and mercenary
activities linked to transnational organized crime,
including trafficking in persons, arms and drugs, as
well as the smuggling ofmigrants (see S/PRST/2018/l7).

The Sahel region, which receives particular
attention through the United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel, is another area of focus for
UNODC. The upcoming phase of the strategy, which
is aimed at supporting the police component of the
Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel, will
focus on strengthening the capacity of the Joint Force
in tackling terrorism and organized crime, including
drug trafficking.

UNODC continues to reinforce regional and
interregional dialogue and responses to drug
trafficking. That includes efforts to disrupt the illicit
trafficking of drugs and precursors, as well as to
intercept financial flows, law enforcement capacity-
building and the scaling-up of drug use prevention
and treatment services. We seek to support national
intelligence and interdiction services, providing
capacity-building through training workshops and
e-learning courses, including on intelligence-led
policing, detection and investigation techniques, crime
scene management, electronic evidence collection and
analysis, anti-money laundering and maritime crime.

At the regional level, our work focuses on
establishing inter-agency cooperation platforms
and mechanisms through AIRCOP, the West Africa
Coast Initiative, the Container Control Programme
and the Network of West African Central Authorities
and Prosecutors against Organized Crime. Our
Office has partnered with the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) to support the
implementation of the ECOWAS regional action plan
on illicit drug trafficking, organized crime and drug
abuse in West Africa through technical assistance to
enhance drug use prevention and drug dependence
treatment, legislation, forensics and law enforcement.
That is just a limited overview of what we do to support
West and Central Africa. For more information about
UNODC's work, allow me to refer members to the
briefing note that I understand has been circulated in
the Security Council.

While strengthened technical assistance has
resulted in some positive developments, there remain
formidable challenges for countries in West and
Central Africa in building stability and in achieving
the Sustainable Development Goals. Post-conflict
States and States in transition, including Guinea-
Bissau, require greater attention, as recognized by the
Council, to address the challenges related to drugs and
organized crime alongside political reforms. UNODC
remains fully engaged in supporting West and Central
Africa, working closely with all its regional and
international partners.

I am grateful to the Council for drawing attention
to the need for urgent and determined international
action and support to address the threat of drugs and
for helping to pave the way for a safer, healthier and
more prosperous West and Central Africa.

