Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Security Council's agenda over the past
month has been extremely busy, Mr. President, and we
would like to thank your delegation for presiding so
capably over its functions.

I would like to focus on various important subjects.
The central event of the Malaysian presidency was
its convening of a meeting on the topic of children
and armed conflict (see S/PV.7466). We share the
concern of others about the terrible plight of millions
of children living amid armed conflict in various
parts of the world. The new trend of violence against
children perpetrated by terrorist organizations and
groups professing ideologies of violent extremism is
particularly worrying.

We also welcomed the meeting on 17 June on
peacekeeping issues (see S/PV.7464) in which the force
commanders ofa number of field missions participated.
Such dialogue is especially important in view of the
new challenges facing United Nations peacekeeping
operations today. One of the most dangerous current
trends is the growing number of non-traditional
security risks to peacekeepers created by non-State
actors. It is also essential that we establish constructive
cooperation between United Nations missions and
host Governments, which, by definition, are directly
responsible for the protection of their populations and
the overall situation in their countries.
The relevance of the questions that came up during
that meeting was confirmed in the Security Council's
discussion ofa number ofthe topics relating to countries
in Africa that have traditionally been a focus of the
Council's work. The unanimous adoption of resolution
2228 (2015) reaffirmed the role of the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur as a solid basis for a settlement
in the region. The Council again clearly expressed
its support for the head of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) to act
as a mediator between the Government of the Sudan and
the Darfur rebels on the basis of the Doha Document.
The parties that have influence on the Darfur rebels
must urge them to become involved in the Doha peace
process as soon as possible. The Council also affirmed
the key role of the Joint Working Group consisting of
representatives of the Sudan, the United Nations and
the African Union in developing an exit strategy for
UNAMID's withdrawal from Darfur. The Council and
the United Nations Secretariat should study the Group's
recommendations very carefully.

On 20 June in Bamako, the complex process of
producing a comprehensive settlement for Mali was
concluded with the completion of the signing of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. It has
opened the way for an end to the armed conflict and to
achieving a broad national consensus.

It is our hope that all of the political forces in Mali
will shoulder their responsibilities in implementing the
provisions of the agreement and continue the peace
process dialogue. The United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali should play an
important role in that regard, as enshrined in resolution
2227 (2015) adopted yesterday. The international
community should help to strengthen progress; in that
connection, we believe that the threat of sanctions
would be counter-productive.

The situation in Burundi has remained a focus of
the Council's attention, in which context presidential
statement S/PRST/2015/13 was adopted. Of utmost
importance is an appeal to conduct inclusive internal
Burundian dialogue on the organization of elections,
based on the country's Constitution. It is our view that
further postponement of the electoral timetable could
give rise to a constitutional vacuum and increased
chaos in Burundi.

We welcome the steps taken by the Government to
bring stability to the country by way of implementing
the decisions of the African Union and the East
African Community, including by providing security
guarantees to all political leaders in the electoral period
and measures for the disarming of the population.
Those who have influence on the opponents to the
Government, who have continued to exacerbate the
situation in the hope of sinking the elections, must act
to stop them from continuing and from spurring the
anti-Government forces towards new illegal actions.

In June the Council continued to actively address
the issue of the Middle East and North Africa. The
situation in the region was marked by high volatility
and stabilizing it will be impossible without achieving
a political and diplomatic solution to the regional crises.
Given the new crises and those that have been going on
for several decades, it is unfortunate that there appears
to be no reason for optimism regarding a settlement to
the crisis in the Middle East.

As a result of outside intervention in the conflict
in Syria and actions by the armed opposition, a new
threat has arisen, namely, the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL). It is taking hold in neighbouring Iraq
and planting roots in Lebanon and other countries of
the region, and beyond. United Nations peacekeepers
now find themselves under threat as a result. We
strongly condemn the incidents that have resulted in the
wounding of United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force peacekeepers. Today, ISIL is strengthening its
foothold in Afghanistan. It is also targeting Central
Asia. In Europe, terrorism has also appeared, as can
been seen from events directly tied to that armed group.

We are convinced that all countries in the region
must now set aside the disagreements that have always
existed and probably will remain on various matters.
Instead, they must focus all efforts on combating
the threat that is shared by all, namely, terrorism.
The Syrian Government has an indisputable right
to decisively combat terrorism in the country, while
upholding relevant international obligations. However,
given the scale of the activities of ISIL, Jabhat al-Nusra
and their enablers, Syrian efforts alone will not suffice.

It is also important not to lose sight of the terrorist
factor in Yemen. There is every reason to believe that
Al-Qaida is spreading its influence there, too. We must
prevent terrorists from filling the political vacuum
and using the possible agreement of the Yemeni sides
to their own ends. We must continue to work with the
Yemeni parties to urgently start a thoughtful dialogue
on ways to halt the conflict and establish effective
and representative bodies of power. We understand
the importance of an inclusive Yemeni dialogue and
of Yemenis, themselves, defining their own future
without outside intervention. Once again, we would
like to underscore the need for a speedy declaration
in Yemen of humanitarian truces, given the disastrous
situation there.

With regard to the situation in Ukraine we wish to
state that the meeting of the Contact Group in June, as
well as the of sub-working groups on various matters,
and the Normandy Four meeting on 23 June have
demonstrated that there is no alternative to the Minsk
process, and to a full implementation of the package
of measures. Likewise, there is no alternative to direct
dialogue between Kyiv and Donetsk and Luhansk. I
would like to recall that the Minsk II agreement was
signed by representatives of both Kyiv and Donbas.
Progress in the implementation of the Minsk agreements
is still insufficient. Only six months remain till the end
of 2015.

It is clear now, not only to us but also to the other
members of the Normandy Four, that implementation
of the provisions of the package of measures is being
hampered, first and foremost, by Kyiv. We stated
that, paragraph by paragraph, in the Council meeting
of 5 June (see S/PV.7457). I would like to give the
Council a blatant example. According to media outlets
and statements by the Kyiv Government, active work
is under way to amend the Constitution, in violation
of the package of measures; Donetsk and Luhansk
have been excluded from the process. Furthermore,
at the ministerial meeting in Paris, there was a clear
understanding of the danger of the activities of certain
forces attempting to push the situation towards a
military solution.

We call upon those members of the Council that
are using any opportunity, including today's meeting,
to repeat propaganda statements, to think about their
responsibility for the situation in Ukraine. It would be
much more productive, instead of blowing hot air, to
bring the necessary pressure to bear on Kyiv for swift
implementation of the Minsk II agreements.

Regarding the selection and appointment of the
Secretary-General, we do not clearly understand the link
between those matters and the June and July agendas of
the Council, as it would seem that the election of the
new Secretary-General is set for next year. As a matter
of principle, we wish to underscore that we would not
support any attempt to rewrite Article 97 of the Charter
of the United Nations. The existing procedure has been
working fine, thus far.
We would like to recall that last time, in 2006, when
the election of the Secretary-General was based on a
run-off, Mr. Ban Ki-moon was elected three months
before the end of Mr. Annan's term. Regarding the
proposal to optimize procedures with a View to greater
participation in the process on the part of all Member
States, all of those ideas require careful study. We
cannot forget that our primary task is to elect the most
qualified and fitting candidate as Secretary-General.

In conclusion, we would like to wish the New
Zealand delegation every success as it assumes the
presidency of the Council in July.

