The President: I shall now put to the vote the draft
resolution contained in document 8/1997/709.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Chile, China, Costa Rica, Egypt, France, Guinea-
Bissau, Japan, Kenya, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America

Against:
None

Abstainirtg:
Russian Federation

The President: There were 14 votes in favour, none
against and 1 abstention. The draft resolution has been
adopted as resolution 1129 (1997).

I shall now call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements following the voting,

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of the United States.

The Council today acted to reorganize the two
distinct periods of time specified in Security Council
resolution 1111 (1997) during which Iraq is permitted to
sell up to $2 billion worth of petroleum, while keeping
the 180-day time-frame of resolution 1111 (1997) intact.
This will permit Iraq to export the full $2 billion
permitted by resolution 1111 (1997) within the specified
time-frame in order to purchase the full amount of food,
medicine and other humanitarian goods.

What the Council has done today is a one-time
exception intended solely to prevent unnecessary suffering
among the people of Iraq. The time limits for the sale of
Iraqi petroleum under any successor resolutions to 986
(1995) and 1111 (1997) will be strictly adhered to. The
resolution is also specific on this point.

Our action is the right and responsible thing to do.
We acted out of overriding humanitarian concern for the
Welfare of the Iraqi people, who would have paid the
price for the inexcusable delays in delivery of
humanitarian goods that would have resulted from
Baghdad's refusal to sell oil until the first 90-day period
of resolution 1111 (1997) had almost expired.

Let me stress that the Baghdad regime's decision to
delay oil sales was not required by any of the relevant
Security Council resolutions or by the memorandum of
understanding with the United Nations, a point that was
Security Council 38l7|h meeling
Fiftyaseeond year l2 Septembfl 1997

made to the Permanent Representative of Iraq by the
President of the Council in July.

Instead - and not for the first time -- the
Government of Iraq has defied the clear conditions of a
United Nations resolution and made a callous decision to
put at risk the well~being of its people in order to seek to
score propaganda points.

We regret that one delegation cannot support this
resolution. We and our co-sponsors have worked tirelessly
to achieve a consensus text, but we simply cannot accept
the notion of introducing language into this resolution that
seeks to blame the United Nations for actions solely the
fault of the Government of Iraq.

It was the Government of Iraq that submitted hundreds
of flawed, incomplete and inaccurate contract applications
to the sanctions secretariat and the Committee, thus bogging
it down in a deluge of dubious documents Many contract
requests were for items that were not even on Iraq's own
distribution list.

And it was the sanctions secretariat and the Committee
that diligently worked to approve these applications, and
that have just as diligently continued to streamline its
procedures, so that today almost 99 percent of the money
set aside for humanitarian purchases has been allocated to
approved contracts. Contrast this spirit of cooperation here
in New York with the arrogant attitude of denial in
Baghdad and you should understand better my
Government's determination to keep ambiguous language
on the sanctions Committee out of this resolution.

The Government of Iraq bears sole responsibility for
the situation that necessitated this resolution today. and the
Council has recognized this. The Iraqi Government, by
refusing to sell oil, is using the Iraqi people as a pawn to
pursue political ends at odds with those of the
international community. This resolution tells the Iraqi
Government that such behaviour is unacceptable, and it
tells the Iraqi people that we care about them and support
them.

The resolution specifically emphasizes its support for
the Iraqi people when it endorses the responsibility of the
Secretary-General to monitor the actions of the
Government of Iraq with respect to the needs of
vulnerable groups. It lays the groundwork for a more
efficient procurement of emergency humanitarian supplies
by stressing that contracts for the purchase of goods under
resolution 1111 (1997) must be for items that appear on
the approved distribution plan. The Government of Iraq
should know that, in implementing resolution 1111
(1997), the Security Council intends to remain vigilant in
safeguarding the humanitarian needs of the Iraqi people.
We will act on their behalf even if, unfortunately, their
own Government deliberately will not.
This is why we cosponsored this resolution and why
we voted in favour of it: to let the people of Iraq know
that we stand behind them, and that we will protect them
as best we can from the cynical and callous actions of
their own Government and leaders.

I resume my functions as President of the Council.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 3.50 p.m.

