Mr. Cardi (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statements to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union and by the spokesperson for the Group
of Friends of the Protection of Civilians in Armed
Conflict, and wishes to add the following remarks in its
national capacity on this timely initiative, for which we
praise your presidency.

The deliberate targeting of civilians and civilian
infrastructure, such as schools and hospitals, is on the
rise. Italy has endorsed the Safe School Declaration on
the use of schools by armed forces and non-State armed
groups in contravention of applicable international
law. Sustained humanitarian access remains a key
challenge. The number of refugees and internally
displaced persons has reached record levels. Impunity
for violations remains, unfortunately, very high. Those
are the challenges that we are up against.

Against that background, Italy welcomes the
recent report on the topic by the Secretary-General
(S/2015/453) and the adoption, under the United
Kingdom presidency of the Security Council, of
presidential statement S/PRST/2015/23, reaffirming
the Council's commitment to that cause, and looks
forward to the upcoming World Humanitarian Summit
in Istanbul as a platform to reinforce our collective
engagement, which Italy demonstrates every day in
the rescue operations involving migrants and refugees
coming from across the Mediterranean. Allow me to
highlight a few points.

First, there are the issues of accountability
and compliance. It is important that the Council
systematically remind parties to a conflict of their
obligations under international humanitarian law and
human rights and refugee law, and systematically
condemn violations of the existing norms. In that
respect, Italy supports proposals to strengthen
compliance with international humanitarian law,
including through a forum in which States could engage
in a more systematic, non-politicized and voluntary
dialogue. Moreover, I wish to stress the importance
of the International Criminal Court as an essential
institution in strengthening the message that there can
be no impunity. We believe that the Council should have
a forum in which issues ofinternational criminaljustice
and accountability could be regularly and more broadly
discussed, bearing in mind the differing sensitivities
at hand, but also the need to assist domestic efforts to
strengthen local judicial institutions.

Secondly, there is the issue of humanitarian
access and needs. In coordination with the Emergency
Relief Coordinator, it is important for the Council
to systematically remind parties to a conflict of
their obligations to guarantee rapid and unimpeded
humanitarian access, and to condemn the denial of such
access without fail. It is also important to empower local
communities and civil society, which play a primary
role in delivering aid and advocating for humanitarian
values. We must also remember that women, children
and people with disabilities most often bear the brunt of
armed conflict, and we must therefore never lose sight
of their specific needs. Allow me, in that context, to
recall Italy's most recent contribution to the World Food
Programme, last week, in the delivery of essential food
items to the besieged population of Syria, including the
town of Madaya.

Thirdly, with regard to peacekeeping operations,
Italy welcomes the recommendations contained in
the report of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations (S/2015/446) and recognizes that the
protection ofcivilians is a mission-wide task. To fulfil it,
many non-military tools are available, including strong
political advocacy, credible reporting, and liaison with
local communities. Training prior to deployment is also
essential, including on issues of sexual exploitation and
abuse. Italy is fully supportive of the United Nations
zero-tolerance policy in that regard.

Prevention is not only the right choice, it is the
better choice. Negotiated political solutions to conflicts,
the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (resolution 70/1) to tackle root causes,
the preventive power of justice, the renewed focus on
prevention and mediation by strengthening United
Nations capacities, including in terms of financial
resources, are the best ways to guarantee effective
protection of civilians. I therefore stress the importance
of early-warning mechanisms, such as the Framework
of Analysis for Atrocity Crimes of the Office of the
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the
Prevention of Genocide and the Special Adviser on
the Responsibility to Protect. I welcome continued
reporting to the Council on those issues.

In conclusion, I wish to recall the adoption, upon
the initiative of the Government of Rwanda, of the
Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians. Italy is
among the inaugural subscribers to that voluntary set of
principles, which establish that the effective protection
of civilians in peacekeeping requires properly trained
troops, adequate equipment and strong political
commitment. We are confident that a greater number of
troop- and police-contributing countries will subscribe
to and implement the Principles.

