Mr. Moriko (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation welcomes the holding of this meeting
and congratulates Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, and
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Horn of Africa, for their
detailed briefings on the developments in the situation
in Abyei.

Cote d'Ivoire notes with satisfaction the
rapprochement between the Sudan and South Sudan
and the willingness shown by both countries to
strengthen their cooperation. We welcome the fact that
the first foreign visit of the Sudanese Prime Minister,
Mr. Abdalla Hamdok, was to Juba.

Apart from its symbolic nature, the visit paved
the way for a lasting peace through discussions on
strengthening relations between the two countries
and promoting peaceful coexistence between their
populations along the border. My delegation sincerely
hopes that the visit will be followed by further initiatives
to strengthen mutual trust.

My country welcomes the significant role of the
President of South Sudan in the talks between the
Government of the Sudan and armed groups, which is
fully in line with the normalization of relations between
the Sudan and South Sudan.

However, despite that positive development and
the leaders' stated determination to commit to the path
of peace, my delegation remains concerned about the
lack of progress in implementing the 2011 and 2012
agreements on interim administrative and security
arrangements in the Abyei Area as well as cooperation
between the two countries.

My country believes that, given the stalemate in
the political process, it is essential to actively engage
both Governments in further discussions, under the
auspices of the African Union's High-level Panel and
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, to resolve
outstanding important issues, including those related
to border demarcation and the establishment of a joint
administration in Abyei.

While the stabilizing role of the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA), whose
activities on the ground contribute to promoting
reconciliation and peace in the Abyei Area and along
the border, is unanimously welcomed by the members
of the Council, it must be recognized that immense
challenges remain in the region.

In that regard, the resurgence of criminal activities,
the presence of armed groups and the continuing
intercommunal tensions remain a source of concern
for my delegation. These impediments call for urgent
action by the authorities of both countries, which have
the primary responsibility for protecting civilians and
ensuring the safety of populations along the border,
in conjunction with UNISFA. In that regard, it urges
them, inter alia, to proceed expeditiously with the
establishment of the Abyei joint police force and to
facilitate the implementation of the provisions of the
relevant Security Council resolutions, including those
dealing with the deployment of police officers and
formed police units, in order to prevent a security
vacuum in the area.

My delegation recalls the correlation between
peace and development in order to emphasize the
need to implement development and capacity-building
projects. It is also necessary to ensure the provision of
basic social services for the population, which cannot
be achieved without the establishment of functional
joint institutions in Abyei.

In that context, my country welcomes the
establishment by the United Nations country teams in
the Sudan and South Sudan of a joint United Nations-
Abyei capacity-building programme in the areas of the
rule of law and peacebuilding, improving access to
basic social services, gender equality and combating
sexual and gender-based violence. The initiative
warrants the highest attention and therefore requires
the international community's ongoing mobilization in
order to ensure adequate funding.

My delegation is of the opinion that, in View of the
renewal of UNISFA's mandate, it is important to make
adjustments, taking into account trends observed on
the ground in order to optimize the efficiency of the
Force and preserve the gains of its eight-year presence
in Abyei. In that regard, my delegation takes note of the
recommendations made by the Secretary-General in his
report (S/2019/817) and reaffirms its commitment to
pursuing constructive discussions with all stakeholders
in the upcoming negotiations for the renewal of
UNISFA's mandate, as well as its support to the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire urges all actors in
the conflict to capitalize on the positive momentum
of recent months between the Sudan and South Sudan
with a view to finding a lasting solution to the status
of Abyei.

