Mr. Djani (Indonesia): First of all, I thank Under-
Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for updating the
Council on the current humanitarian situation in
Syria. We also thank the representatives of the Russian
Reconciliation Centre in Syria and the Syrian American
Medical Society.

There is no denying that the continuing escalation
of violence in north-west Syria has brought about
serious humanitarian consequences. My delegation is
deeply troubled by reports of an increase in the number
of civilian deaths and displaced persons, as well as the
damage to civilian infrastructure. Exactly one week
ago, the Council specifically discussed the situation
in north-western Syria. I recall that Under-Secretary-
General Lowcock stated at that same meeting that
"we are facing a humanitarian disaster unfolding
before our eyes" (S/PV8553, p.3). The report of the
Secretary-General also specifies that "We are faced
with a horrendous disaster in the making" (S/2019/508, para.42). That is indeed frightening. Do we really think
that we can afford another humanitarian catastrophe?
In addition, the situation in Rukban and Al-Hol camps,
where humanitarian conditions remain dire, also
demand the Council's special attention.

My delegation wishes to highlight three
pertinent points.

First and foremost, it is urgent for all parties to
cease hostilities and prioritize the safety and security
of civilians. We once again urge all sides to respect
and implement the September 2018 memorandum
between Russia and Turkey. We share the view of
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock, who spoke earlier,
on the deconfliction mechanism. There is a need for
all parties concerned to strengthen the system so as to
avoid further incidents, which would lead to further
casualties. Any mechanism is only as good as the people
who are supposed to implement it. Medical facilities
should never be the object of any attack.

Moreover, I would like to stress that peace is not an
alternative; peace is the objective. Saving people's lives
is not an option; it should be and is the main goal. A
permanent ceasefire in north-west Syria is not a backup
plan; it must be the purpose.

Secondly, my delegation urges all parties to allow
safe, unimpeded and sustained access for United
Nations humanitarian operations to all requested
areas and populations, in all parts of Syria. With more
than 350,000 people being displaced and many forced
to live in the open, it is critical to ensure immediate
humanitarian assistance. Many of them have also
experienced displacement multiple times. In Al-Hol
camp, where more than 73,000 people are living in
difficult situations, tensions remain high. In Rukban,
the United Nations still requires access to deliver a
critical needs-based humanitarian response.

Third is the importance of a safe, voluntary and
dignified return of refugees to their home areas in
Syria, in accordance with international law. In addition,
we believe that the United Nations should be able to
monitor their overall movement until they are able to
return to their areas of origin.

The conflict and the humanitarian suffering in
Syria are undeniably the result of the absence of political
solutions. Humanitarian assistance is like a bandage
over an open wound. We need to heal the wound; a
bandage alone is insufficient to do so, especially if the
wound is larger than a Band-Aid.

We share the Secretary-General's concern that the
escalation in north-west Syria is undermining Special
Envoy Pedersen's efforts to revive the political process.
We cannot let that continue. I still believe that there
is a window of opportunity with regard to the Syrian
political process. And there is a glimmer of hope. Hope
and opportunity are important for us to move forward.
However, the current escalation in north-western Syria
is indeed threatening the ongoing political process.

In conclusion, in my very humble view, the biggest
tragedy would be to become immune to the suffering of
civilians or to fail to cope with it and take action. But
I sincerely believe that the Council can still be united
in alleviating the adversity of the Syrian people. I still
have faith in the Council.

