Mr. Reuben (Israel): Direct negotiations between
Israel and the Palestinians have been, and still remain,
the only way forward to resolve the long-standing
conflict in our region. Therefore, the draft resolution
that was before the Council should never have been
submitted. Instead, the international community and
the Security Council should have called upon the
Palestinian leadership, in a clear and resolute voice, to
immediately return to the negotiating table without
preconditions and to renew direct negotiations in order
to resolve all outstanding issues. This is the way to
achieve peace. Indeed, this is the path through which
we have reached peace agreements in the past.

Today's debate will not assist efforts to bring
both sides back to the negotiating table. In fact, this
process, in its adversarial nature, is likely to harm
ongoing attempts to resume negotiations. It sends the
wrong message to the Palestinians, signalling that they
can avoid the negotiating table.

Time and time again, Israel has demonstrated its
willingness to take significant steps - indeed, painful
steps - to rebuild confidence between the two sides.
However, these efforts were not met with similar steps
by the other side. Furthermore, Israel's withdrawal
from the Gaza Strip in 2005, including the painful
dismantling of all settlements, has led to an increase in
terror and violence from the areas that we left.
11-23845

However, Israel continues to demonstrate its
willingness to renew talks, with the express goal of
resolving all outstanding issues. Prime Minister
Netanyahu has called upon the Palestinian leadership
to return to the negotiating table and engage in peace
talks in good faith. This goal is within reach, but will
require painful compromises. The road to peace lies
between Jerusalem and Ramallah, which are only 10
minutes apart.

In the Declaration of Principles and the Israeli-
Palestinian Interim Agreement on the West Bank and
the Gaza Strip, settlements are but one of the
outstanding issues that both sides have explicitly
agreed to address as part of final status negotiations.
Any effort to predetermine a central, permanent State
issue in effect prejudges what was agreed to be directly
negotiated between the two sides.

Furthermore, it is not fitting or constructive to
isolate this single issue from all other core matters,
such as the security arrangements, refugees and
incitement, as well as the need to address the relentless
rocket fire on Israel by Hamas, which controls the
Gaza Strip.

As the Middle East continues to undergo dramatic
and historic changes, one wonders whether the issue
before us is really the most relevant for discussion in
this Chamber.

In conclusion, we would like to thank the United
States for its long-standing and responsible leadership
in this process. Its vote today reflects the
understanding that the only way forward is through
direct negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians.
We reiterate our call to the Palestinian leadership to
return to the negotiating table without preconditions, so
that negotiations can resume without further delay.

