Mr. Ould Deddach (Mauritania) (spoke in Arabic): I wish at the outset to congratulate you, Mr.
President, on your presidency of the Council for this
month. I extend my thanks to your predecessor, Mr.
Said Ben Mustapha, the Permanent Representative of
Tunisia, for his wise steering of the Council last month.

We meet today, six months after the onset of the
Palestinian popular uprising, which has led to hundreds
of fallen martyrs and thousands injured. The Council
discussed the situation in the occupied Arab Palestinian
territories in meetings last October and December and
has not reached an agreement to end the violence
carried out against the Palestinian people. Many other
initiatives have been taken and have not led to positive
results.

The suffocating blockade that affects the
Palestinian citizens in the occupied territories exposes
the lives of innocent women, children and the elderly
to tragedy and has an adverse impact on the Palestinian
economic situation. We call for this blockade to be
lifted and for a halt to violent acts against the
Palestinian people, in accordance with Security
Council resolution 1322 (2000), adopted on 7 October
2000.

The Mauritanian people and Government express
their full solidarity with the Palestinian people and
strongly condemn the repressive measures taken
against them without justification, contravening the
Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949, which must be
applied to the occupied Palestinian territories.

The Security Council is called upon today to
assume its responsibility as guarantor of international
peace and security by providing the necessary
international protection to the Palestinian people
through sending an international military observer
force to the occupied territories, under the auspices of
the United Nations. The Mauritanian delegation thus
supports the draft resolution submitted to the Council
by the Non-Aligned Movement. We hope it will be
unanimously adopted as a first step to guaranteeing
protection for the Palestinian people and to opening the
possibility of returning the peace process to its proper
track.

Mr. President, you undoubtedly know that these
serious measures represent an impediment to achieving
peace in the region, which needs it so desperately. On
behalf of my delegation, I would like once again to
reaffirm our support for the peace process. We believe
that no just, comprehensive and durable peace can be
achieved in the region except through the Madrid terms
of reference, the principle of land for peace, the full
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions that guarantee a full Israeli withdrawal
from Palestinian territories and all Arab occupied
territories, and the restoration of all of the inalienable
and legitimate rights of the Palestinian people,
foremost of which is its right to self-determination and
to the establishment of an independent State, with Al-
Quds al-Sharif as its capital.

