Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): In life
people behave in ways that best suit them. The results
of their behaviour are sometimes beneficial, and
sometimes negative - which can lead to destruction.
The same thing can be said of natural phenomena.
When circumstances oblige people to live in a volcanic
area, where some volcanoes are actually erupting,
some are active and might erupt at any moment, and
some are dormant but might suddenly become active,
uncertainty prevails because people do not know when
such phenomena might occur. In difficult
circumstances, therefore, one must act in a manner that
takes fully into account the behaviour of human beings.

For more than two decades, our region has been
surrounded by fires. No sooner does one die down than
another breaks out. Troubles and sectarianism fan the
flames of such fires.

Ever since the question of Iran's nuclear
programme was brought before the Council, we have
repeatedly underscored the importance of finding a
political solution to this problem and of giving
diplomacy enough time to bring about a peaceful
solution. Such a solution can be reached only if all
parties concerned show flexibility, wisdom and a sense
of responsibility.

We are grateful for the efforts made by the six
States in order to reach a peaceful solution through
offering Iran a comprehensive package. We deem this a
bold and commendable step. However, we believe that
06-44964

Iran is also called upon seriously to address the
concerns of the international community about the very
nature of its nuclear programme, to ensure that it is
used exclusively for peaceful purposes.

There is no doubt that this is a legitimate demand
that we all are making. However, we do not agree with
the submission of this draft resolution at a time when
our region is inflamed. We would have seen no harm in
waiting a few days so as to exhaust all possible ways
and means in order to determine Iran's real intentions
and the degree of its willingness to cooperate,
particularly since Iran has not rejected the package that
was offered to it; it has simply asked for a period of
time in which to consider it. This prompts us to ask
members of the Council to accede to this request. We
have been patient, and, indeed, our Council has waited
longer to act on much more burning issues.

The State of Qatar is fully committed to the unity
of the Council, particularly when it comes to very
sensitive issues. We have reiterated our intention to
join in this unity. However, the fact that this draft
resolution was submitted at this critical time serves to
achieve neither the stability of the region nor the unity
of the Council. On the contrary, whether we like it or
not, it will only intensify the conflagration in our
region. Do we really want to see another volcano
erupting in this region?

My country, which is not very far away from this
area - no more than 200 kilometres from the nuclear
reactors - is fully committed to ensuring that the
Middle East becomes a nuclear-weapon-free zone. But
given the special circumstances surrounding our
region, the failure to take on board our concerns and to
take account of the issues to which I have just referred
will not help us to achieve the unity of the Council to
which we all aspire.

