Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Exactly one year ago, for reasons known to all, the
United Nations arms inspection in Iraq had to be
suspended. Since then the Security Council has been
deadlocked on the Iraqi issue, and nothing much has been
done over the past 12 months. With a view to breaking
this impasse, the Council set up three panels that put
forward new recommendations on how to reinstate the
arms inspection in Iraq, improve the humanitarian
situation there and speed up the settlement of the issue of
Kuwaiti missing persons. After that Council members

 

held prolonged discussions and consultations, hoping to
bring together the vastly different positions of the various
sides and to reach consensus on a comprehensive and
balanced resolution so as to restart United Nations arms
inspection activities in Iraq.

How to solve the rather complicated Iraqi issue in a
meaningful, effective and smooth manner is a serious topic
that should be carefully considered by each and every
member of the Council. China believes that in the
formulation of new comprehensive Council policies on Iraq,
at least the following three core issues will have to be
addressed.

First, a new inspection commission should be
established, which should be objective, impartial,
transparent and accountable to replace the infamous United
Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM). UNSCOM,
established in line with resolution 687 (1991), scored
considerable achievements in monitoring, verifying and
destroying Iraqi weapons of mass destruction, achievements
which should be acknowledged. However, under the
leadership of its previous Executive Chairman, UNSCOM
continuously concealed information from the Council,
deceived and misled the Council and even went so far as to
act presumptuously without authorization by the Council,
thus playing a dishonourable role in triggering the crisis
that was unfolding then.

I am sure that it is still fresh in the memory of every
Council member that more than once UNSCOM. delivered
VX and other chemical agents to Baghdad without asking
for permission beforehand or submitting reports afterwards.
The Council may also recall that although hundreds of
inspections went pretty well, and only a few caused minor
problems, UNSCOM. still came up with the conclusion that
there was a lack of full cooperation from the Iraqi side. The
Council may further recall that on such a crucially
important issue as its withdrawal from Iraq UNSCOM
bypassed the Council and made the decision all on its own.
It is our demand, as well as our firm belief, that the new
inspection commission must not repeat the path of
UNSCOM. Its activities must be objective and accountable,
and the Security Council must exercise absolute control
over and supervision of its work.

Secondly, the remaining Iraqi disarmament issues
should be defined clearly and precisely and resolved
gradually and effectively. It is only fair to say that there has
indeed been tremendous progress in the disarmament of
Iraq, especially regarding the nuclear and missile files. It is
also true, however, that some problems still remain. We
have always held that the key remaining tasks should
neither be dismissed lightly as non-existent nor wantonly
exaggerated. The right thing to do is to send the new
inspection commission to Iraq on a true fact-finding
mission, and then the list of key remaining tasks should
be reviewed and approved by the Council. The Iraqi
Government will then undertake to address these tasks in
accordance with the approved list and to accomplish its
disarmament obligations as soon as possible so that the
Council will accordingly lift all sanctions in a timely
manner.

Last, but not least, there is an urgent need to relieve
the Iraqi people of their tremendous, inhumane suffering,
which has lasted for nine years. The nine-year-old
sanctions have inflicted untold physical and psychological
sufferings on Iraqi civilians, especially women and
children. The United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF),
the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the many humanitarian non-
governmental organizations' aid groups in Iraq, after
conducting separate field studies of their own, have all
documented the cruel reality of severe humanitarian
suffering in that country. They have made the same
appeals repeatedly to the Council to put an early end to
the inhumane sanctions against Iraq. No one in the
Council has ever believed and agreed that the original
intention of the Security Council in imposing sanctions
against Iraq was to hurt those innocent civilians.
Therefore, the Council has no justification whatsoever to
prolong the humanitarian suffering of the Iraqi people.

Thanks to the efforts by all sides during the process
of the consultations, the draft resolution before us
incorporates many proposals and recommendations put
forward by the panels on how to improve the
humanitarian situation in Iraq. This is a positive outcome
that most Member States, including China, have desired.
In the draft resolution, there are also new measures for
solving such problems as Kuwaiti missing persons and
property. We have also noted that a final adjustment has
been made by the sponsor. Thus, although we are not
satisfied with the draft resolution as a whole, we feel that
it does represent some improvement over the text initially
proposed by some members.

The three core issues mentioned earlier can be
resolved only through the adoption of a new and
comprehensive resolution that can be implemented; only
then can we begin to move out of the year-long impasse.
However, I have to point out with regret that the
implementation of the draft resolution before us is highly

 

questionable. As I am sure everyone understands, without
Iraqi cooperation it will hardly be possible to implement
any resolution. If implementing a resolution does not enable
Iraq to see the light at the end of the tunnel, as is the case
with this draft, how could it be ready and willing to offer
the cooperation we hope for?

We have always believed that Iraq is under the
obligation to implement faithfully the relevant Council
resolutions, but the Council is also under the obligation to
implement its own resolutions honourably, give an objective
assessment of Iraq's implementation, and gradually lift, or
at least suspend, the sanctions accordingly. Therefore, we
are of the View that in the draft resolution, the reinstatement
of disarmament inspections and the suspension of sanctions
against Iraq should be linked.

As long as Iraq honours its disarmament commitments
and gradually achieves progress, the Council should move,
in a timely manner, to suspend the sanctions. As long as
the new Commission submits positive reports to the Council
on Iraq's continued cooperation in addressing the key
remaining tasks, the suspension of sanctions can, and
should, be extended automatically. We have repeatedly
suggested that the draft resolution should contain specific
and feasible provisions which would not only make it easier
to carry out the implementation, but would also help avoid
possible misunderstandings and disputes among Council
members. Regrettably, the reasonable position of the
Chinese side on these key issues has not been reflected in
the draft resolution.

China has also reiterated on many occasions that,
because of the vastly divergent positions of the various
sides on how to break the impasse and move the process
forward, and because consensus can be reached only after
painstaking consultations, to impose an artificial deadline
for the consultation process simply will not help.
Unfortunately, some members have declined to accept our
argument and request, and have rushed the Council into
action. We cannot but express our utmost regret in this
respect.

In a situation where no consensus has been reached,
to put a draft resolution to the vote, even if it is adopted,
will not help to resolve the longstanding issue of Iraq. Nor
can such an approach really help preserve the authority and
role of the Council. The Chinese side does not favour such
an approach, nor can it support such a draft resolution.
Therefore, we have no choice but to abstain in the voting.

It is especially significant that the deliberations and
vote on the draft resolution on Iraq are taking place in the
Council at this particular time. Yesterday marked the first
anniversary of the launching of the unilateral military
strikes against Iraq by some members, in circumvention
of the Security Council. Indeed, a worrying trend has
emerged in international relations over the past year. The
Iraqi and Kosovo crises have clearly demonstrated that
the wilful use of force, especially unilateral actions taken
without the Council's authorization, cannot only severely
damage the status and authority of the Council, but also
further complicate the situation. The Kosovo crisis had to
be addressed by the Council eventually, and now the Iraqi
issue also has to be resubmitted to the Council.

These facts have once again made it very clear that
the use of force or any other means cannot substitute for
the role of the Security Council in the maintenance of
international peace and security. It should also be pointed
out here that the so-called no-fly zone in Iraq has never
been authorized or approved by the Council. The
members concerned should immediately cease such
actions, which fly in the face of international law and the
authority of the Council. Those members should
demonstrate real sincerity if they wish to address the issue
of Iraq.

