Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): We thank the delegation of
Togo for organizing this meeting on an issue of key
importance to the States of West and Central Africa.
Our thanks also go to Mr. Lynn Pascoe for his briefing
on the situation of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea. We are
also grateful to Mr. Abdel Fatau Musah and
Mrs. Florentina Adenike Ukonga, representing the
Economic Community of West African States and the
Gulf of Guinea Commission, respectively.

We appreciate the initiative of the Secretary-
General in deploying the assessment mission to study
the threat arising from acts of piracy and armed
robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea. We have carefully
read its report (see S/2012/45) and believe that it
contains useful recommendations for dealing with that
threat.

Pakistan staunchly supports a comprehensive
approach against maritime piracy. We have been
playing an active role in the fight against piracy by
contributing our warships to anti-piracy patrolling off
the coast of Somalia since 2009. Increasing piracy in
the Gulf of Guinea threatens the economic well-being
of several countries of that region. According to the
International Maritime Organization (IMO), there were
58 attacks in the region during the first 10 months of
2011, of which 21 occurred off the coast of Benin - a
nation whose economy relies overwhelmingly on port
activities. According to the report of the assessment
mission, piracy is causing an estimated annual loss of
$2 billion to the West African subregion's economy.

Also worrisome are indications of links between
piracy and other forms of organized crime, such as oil
bunkering and drug trafficking. If left unchecked, such
organized crime can further undermine governance and
economic development in the affected countries. The
climate of insecurity would discourage investments
particularly, in the offshore oil sector. We therefore
fully sympathize with and understand the concern of
the affected countries for taking urgent action to
address the situation.

Acting within their existing resources, the States
of the region have taken several initiatives to counter
piracy, but progress has been hampered by lack of
capacity. For example Operation Prosperity between
Nigeria and Benin is costing Benin $466,000 per
month, which, although it is only 5 per cent of the
entire cost of the operation, is unsustainable. Other
countries of the region simply lack the capacity and the
financial wherewithal to undertake this fight
effectively.

The eradication of piracy in a region the size of
the Gulf of Guinea cannot be accomplished without a
cooperative and collaborative approach involving the
countries of the region and international partners. In
our view, such an approach may consist of the
following elements.

First, there is a need to develop a comprehensive
regional strategy to counter piracy specific to the
circumstances of the Gulf of Guinea. In this regard, the
early convening of the summit of Gulf of Guinea
Heads of State would be critical. The strategy needs to
take into account strengthening the legal framework at
the national and regional levels for criminalizing acts
of piracy and prosecuting and punishing persons
engaged in such acts; developing mechanisms for
cooperation among the respective law enforcement
agencies; establishing collective systems for
surveillance, information-sharing and joint patrolling
in the Gulf of Guinea; addressing links between piracy
and other forms of organized crime; and addressing the
underlying causes of piracy.

Secondly, pending the formulation of a
comprehensive strategy, States of the region must
consider interim measures to enhance cooperative
action in countering piracy. Thirdly, fighting piracy at
sea is a high-cost proposition for which countries of

the region need the capacity-building support of
international partners. Fourthly, the United Nations and
the IMO should assist the countries of the region in
synergizing their efforts through the development of a
comprehensive regional strategy and making it
operational by mobilizing resources and providing
technical assistance. Fifthly, in implementing counter-
piracy measures, the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the States of the region must be respected.

Finally, in View of the experience of fighting
piracy off the coast of Somalia, we would like to
underline the importance of taking effective measures
urgently to counter piracy in the Gulf of Guinea in
order to prevent the situation from getting out of hand.
We therefore support the draft resolution under
consideration by the Council.

