Ms. Rodriguez Pineda (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome Ambassador Sandra Honore and
thank her for presenting the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2014/ 162). We would also like to thank the
Permanent Representative of Haiti for his valuable
comments.

I have five brief points. First, the current situation
in Haiti continues to be characterized by enormous
challenges, and being able to overcome them will
depend largely on the holding of the long-awaited local,
municipal and legislative elections and the success with
which they are carried out. We welcome the recent
political agreement reached in Haiti to hold elections in
October this year. We recognize the Haitian leadership
for forging that consensus, which marks a step forward
in the political culture of the country. Its implementation
will now be important. We also commend the technical

and legislative preparations to make the elections
viable, including the required budget, which is under
way.

Secondly, I want to refer to the reform of the Haitian
National Police, which is the main criterion for assessing
the performance of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). We have indicated
on several occasions that the professionalization of
the police is not enough on its own. We are concerned
about the slow progress in other areas, which, as the
Secretary-General's report warns, could jeopardize
some of the significant progress made so far. Progress
in the judiciary and penal areas is also necessary for
the consolidation of the rule of law, as well as being a
key indicator in strengthening the quality of the police
force.

Thirdly, we believe that the socioeconomic
dimension cannot be ignored. The axis of the problems
of instability in Haiti does not exclusively have
military solutions. We must seek the root causes of
the instability - poverty, unemployment and social
inequality.

In the humanitarian context, we must recognize
that, after long delays, today almost 90 per cent of the
population displaced by the earthquake have returned
to their neighbourhoods or have been relocated. There
continues to be a pressing need to normalize the
situation of people displaced by the disaster four years
ago.

Fourthly, experience has shown that the United
Nations must maintain an adequate presence in the
country, through both MINUSTAH and the United
Nations country team. We therefore reiterate that our
withdrawal from the country must be responsible and
gradual to ensure that, when that time comes, the
Mission will never have to return.

We note the five post-2016 configuration options
outlined by the Secretary General. We believe that, at
this time, current levels must be maintained and actions
that could jeopardize the proper holding of elections
must be avoided. Both the report of the Secretary-
General and the recent meeting with the troop-
contributing countries show the need for the continued
operational support of MINUSTAH forces.

In that regard, we believe that this is just the

beginning of the discussion and it would be premature
to discuss the appropriateness, merits or suitability of
the options presented. We are in the consolidation phase
ofthe Mission, and it is only when that process comes to
an end that we can begin the reconfiguration progress.
We must act in a calculated manner and on the basis of
the strategic assessment to be presented by Secretary-
General at a later date and in close consultation with
the Government of Haiti and the troop-contributing
countries.

Finally, we congratulate the Special Representative
Sandra Honore for her tireless efforts leading the
Mission. She has our full support and admiration.
Haiti has a special place on the agenda of the United
Nations. Now more than ever, the Organization's role is
of unparalleled importance to ensure the continuity of
an irreversible process of stabilization.

