Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina thanks the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for
introducing the sixth report of the Office of the
Prosecutor pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011).

The constructive dialogue between the Libyan
authorities and the Office of the Prosecutor is a work
in progress. In May, we recognized that the constraints
in contact with the Government of Libya had been
overcome, and that the Office of the Prosecutor had
re-established contact with the new Administration
following the 2012 elections. At that time, we
commended the fact that Office of the Prosecutor and
the Prosecutor-General of Libya had recently signed
a memorandum of understanding concerning the
distribution of work in future investigations and trials.
With regard to the cases of SaifAl-Islam Al-Qadhafi
and Abdullah Al-Senussi, which had been suspended
by the Office of the Prosecutor when Libya questioned
their admissibility, Argentina has always stressed
that, in accordance with sub-paragraphs (a) and (c) of
article 17 (1) of the Rome Statute, this was a judicial
matter under the exclusive purview of the Chambers of
the Court. The Court also ruled on the admissibility
challenge in the case against SaifAl-Islam Al-Qadhafi.
The Appeals Chamber rejected the Libyan request to
suspend the decision of the Pre-Trial Chamber, which
had found that the case was admissible before the ICC.
Argentina notes that the Pre-Trial Chamber decided on
11 October that the case against Abdullah Al-Senussi
was inadmissible before the ICC, a decision that
Mr. Al-Senussi has appealed. Argentina reminds Libya,
as the Prosecutor does in her report, that it is obligated
to hand over Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafito the Court.

Argentina commends the Prosecutor for pursuing
her investigations into other possible suspects,
including those outside Libyan territory. My country
also recognizes the Prosecutor's concern regarding
the report "Torture and deaths in detention in
Libya," released in October by the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya and the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, covering detention
centres held by armed brigades, in which torture is
routinely employed. It is imperative for such detention
centres to be placed under State control. In that regard,
we urge Libya to make every effort to comply with
the timeline established by the new law of transitional
justice, which establishes that the cases of detainees
associated with the previous regime and accused of
crimes should be transferred prior to 21 December 2013
to the competent prosecutor to be handled according to
due process. We join the Prosecutors call for Libya to
effectively apply the law it adopted in April, penalizing
torture, discrimination and forced disappearance.

The members ofthe Council once again have before
them a report that emphasizes Libya's willingness
to cooperate with the Court. Argentina, like the
Prosecutor, fully understands the multiple challenges
facing the Libyan authorities and commends the Office
of the Prosecutor for its willingness to continue to
support the Government in its efforts to address the
greatest possible number of cases under its jurisdiction.

Above and beyond the matter of the competency
of the Court, whose focus is naturally on the worst
offenders, it is important and auspicious that the Libyan
Government should continue to solidify its fight against
impunity and render justice for the heinous crimes that
have been committed, because only accountability
before justice will consolidate peace and bring relief to
the victims.

As is the case each time the Prosecutor presents
a report to the Council, there are several additional
points that my delegation would like to highlight.
First of all, referrals by the Council - including the
situation in Libya - entail an obligation for follow-
up. In Argentina's view, the Council must do more
than take note of these reports. We are pleased that
in its presidential statement S/PRST/2013/2, on the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts, the Council
expressed its commitment to providing follow-up to
its decisions with respect to ad hoc tribunals and the
ICC. Given that a follow-up mechanism for ad hoc
tribunals already exists, it is now urgent to implement
that commitment by establishing a specific mechanism
for the International Criminal Court.

Secondly, Argentina is concerned by the provision,
contained in the two referrals made so far, exempting
nationals of non-party States to the Rome Statute
from the Court's jurisdiction for acts or omissions
derived from operations established or authorized by
the Council or related to such operations. Argentina
believes that the Court's jurisdiction is universal and
should remain so.

Another matter that could seriously affect the Court
is that, in both referrals, the Council has determined
that the expenses involved should be borne not by the
United Nations but rather by the States parties to the
Rome Statute. That deviates from the provisions of
article 115 (b) of the Roma Statue and article 13 of
the Relationship Agreement between the International
Criminal Court and the United Nations. The legitimate
concerns of many members with respect to seeing a
more efficient Court and one able to deliver justice with
greater speed - concerns such as those raised by the
representative of the Russian Federation- cannot be
satisfied if the Court faces serious financial problems
in the execution of justice.

To conclude, my delegation would like to stress
that the International Criminal Court is one of the most
notable contributions to the struggle against impunity
and the prevention of atrocities. Just this morning in my
country, the Senate approved a law for full reparations
to political prisoners, union members and students
detained under the last military dictatorship. This
morning in my country, the Federal Appeals Chamber
finally returned a verdict in the case of two priests,
Carlos de Dios Murias and Gabriel Longueville, who
were illegally deprived of liberty and murdered under
the military dictatorship. Today in my country, at
8 a.m., we heard the testimony of Eduardo Pinchersky,
a victim of the civil-military dictatorship. Speaking not
only as a political activist but also as a Jew, he said,
"The gods decided who would die and who would live.
They thought they were gods."

We need the International Criminal Court.

