The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the observer of the Observer State of the Holy
See.

Brother Carroll (Holy See): My delegation
wishes to thank the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
for having convened this open debate on "Post-
conflict peacebuilding: review of the peacebuilding
architecture".

Eleven years ago, drawing on the experience of
the first 50 years of the United Nations, the High-level
Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change identified a
key institutional gap: there was no place in the United
Nations system explicitly designed to avoid State
collapse and the slide to war or to assist countries in
their transition from war to peace. Consequently,
following the 2005 World Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1), the General Assembly
and the Security Council created the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) as a subsidiary body of both United
Nations organs. Afterwards, the Peacebuilding Fund
(PBF) was put in place, and a Peacebuilding Support
Office (PBSO) was also created.

The PBC and the PBSO should be praised for the
work accomplished in many countries, while the PBF
deserves generous and constant financial support from
the Member States. However, the conclusions of the
Secretary-General's Advisory Group of Experts on the
Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture (S/2015/490)
show the complexity and difficulty of peacebuilding
efforts. The ability of the PBC to engage with the
host Government as well as civil society and the most
important stakeholders on the ground in the conduct
and implementation of coordinated actions remains
crucial and difficult. In addition, there are several
factors that are largely dependent on the substantive
and coordinated engagement of the Security Council
and other United Nations bodies in each situation.
Furthermore, the ultimate success of peacebuilding
relies on the attention given to the PBC by the whole
international community.

Appropriately, the Addis Ababa Action Agenda
(General Assembly resolution 69/313, annex) and the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/ 1) address the special needs for
financial, trade and development assistance of countries
in post-conflict situations. Goal 16 of that Agenda is
devoted to the promotion of peaceful and inclusive
societies, and all its targets are relevant for situations of
post-conflict. However, in his address to the seventieth
session of the General Assembly, Pope Francis noted:
"Solemn commitments...are not enough, even though
they are a necessary step towards solutions...Our
world demands of all Government leaders a will that
is effective, practical and constant, with concrete steps
and immediate measures", not forgetting that "above
and beyond our plans and programmes, we are dealing
with real men and women...who live, struggle and
suffer, and are often forced to live in great poverty,
deprived of all rights" (A/70/PV.3, p. 4).

The Addis Ababa Action Agenda recognizes the
importance to achieving sustainable development
of delivering quality education to all girls and boys,
including migrant and refugee children and those in
conflict and post-conflict situations, and providing
safe, non-violent, inclusive and effective learning
environments for all. The same Agenda stresses that
capacity development will be integral to achieving
the post-2015 development agenda. It calls for
enhanced international support and the establishment
of multi-stakeholder partnerships for implementing
effective and targeted capacity-building, especially in
countries in conflict and post-conflict situations. In his
speech to the General Assembly, Pope Francis noted
that integral human development

"presupposes and requires the right to
education - also for girls, who are excluded
in certain places - which is ensured first and
foremost by respecting and reinforcing the primary
right of the family to educate its children, as well as
the right of churches and social groups to support
and assist families in the education of their boys
and girls. Education conceived in this way is the
basis for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda"
(A/70/PV3, p. 4).

The Holy See, as a subject ofinternational law, has
always been a promoter of peace between countries,
actively participating in the work of the United Nations,
while the local churches have always been a factor of
reconciliation at the national level. Churches, as well
as many faith-based organizations and development
non-governmental organizations, have always been at
the vanguard of pacification and the reconstruction of
regions and countries struck by wars and conflicts.

Moreover, the nearly 100,000 elementary
schools and secondary schools as well as colleges
and universities throughout the world that are run by
Catholic organizations are an essential contribution to
the building and maintenance of peace. The Catholic
health-care network encompasses more than 25,000
hospitals; dispensaries; clinics; homes for the elderly,
the chronically ill or disabled; orphanages; and child-
care centres. A11 are a part of maintaining local,
stable and secure environments, which are essential
for the comprehensive approach to peacebuilding
recommended in the 2015 review. The actions of the
Holy See and of Catholic institutions worldwide are
fully consistent with the pleas of the Council and other
United Nations forums to limit the use of arms and
implement strategies of dialogue and negotiation, to
bridge the way to peaceful coexistence in diversity and
to use the world's industrial might and technological
prowess to bring about the peacebuilding aspirations
of all.

In his recent visit to Mexico, Pope Francis
addressed the civil authorities and the diplomatic corps
and discussed the building blocks of peace. He stated,

"[l]eaders of social, cultural and political life
have the particular duty to offer all citizens the
opportunity to be worthy contributors to their
own future, within their families and in all areas
where human social interaction takes place. In that
way, they help citizens to have real access to the
material and spiritual goods that are indispensable:
adequate housing, dignified employment, food,
true justice, effective security and a healthy and
peaceful environment."

It seems to my delegation that those words of Pope
Francis speak to the very essence of the peacebuilding
architecture, which we are discussing here today.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Switzerland.


