Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, allow me to thank the delegation of
Rwanda for having organized this informative meeting.
We would also like to express our appreciation to
Ambassadors Abulkalam Abdul Momen and Ranko
Vilovic' for their briefings on the recent evolution of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). We also appreciate
the 29 January report of the Commission (S/2013/63).

For Guatemala, the Peacebuilding Commission,
despite its complex architecture and its growing pains,
which have had their ups and downs, is an important
institutional link between the Security Council, the
Economic and Social Council, the General Assembly
and the Bretton Woods institutions. We therefore
believe that its creation marked an important milestone
in the institutional development of the United Nations.

It became clear during the debates organized
under the Colombian presidency of the Council in July
(see S/PV.6805) and that of Morocco in December
2012 (S/PV.6897) that there is a consensus that the
Peacebuilding Commission has not yet reached its full
potential. At the same time, there also appears to be
a consensus on the enormous potential of that forum
to draw on the efforts of the Security Council in
peacekeeping in order to cover the reconstruction and
transformation stages leading to the normalization of a
country emerging from conflict.

In that regard, the United Nations has the experience
of more than six decades in addressing the needs of
societies in conflict with respect to peacemaking,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and peace consolidation
and in trying to prevent countries that have emerged
from conflict from relapsing. The stages of those
different categories are not necessarily sequential;
they overlap and support one other in a reciprocal
manner. The link between the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission, which is the matter before
us today, is therefore especially relevant.

Ambassador Vilovie noted that the main purpose
of the Commission is to provide advice to the Council,
particularly when it relates to countries on the agenda
of the Council that form part of a specific country
configuration. With all due respect, we believe
that of equal or even greater importance is the role
contemplated in paragraph 2 of General Assembly
resolution 60/180, which refers to the need of all
interested actors in a country-specific situation - and
these certainly include the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission - to act in a coordinated
manner and, as the English expression has it, "be on
the same page". Those coordinated efforts are also
reflected in the 2012-2013 strategy prepared by the
Peacebuilding Support Office.

Under either of those functions - advisory or
coordination - it should be recognized that there is
still a long way to go, as I said earlier, to meet the
expectations placed on the PBC when it was created.
To fulfil those expectations, there are undoubtedly
concrete actions that could be taken by the Commission,
and others that we can and should take in the Security
Council. I will mention five points.

First, although resolution 60/ 180 grants the Security
Council the opportunity to appoint seven members
of the Commission, including the five permanent
members, nothing prevents other Council members
from being elected as part of the representation of the
General Assembly or the Economic and Social Council.
In fact, that has happened. Last year, 11 members of
the Council were also members of the Commission, and
we have seen cases in the past - we have one such
case at the present time - whereby Council members
have presided over country-specific configurations.
Presumably, those representatives who are members
of both forums ought to bear in mind the potential for
seeking closer cooperation and mutual support.

Secondly, the Council should continue and broaden
the past practice of inviting the Chairs of the country-
specific configurations to take part in our discussions
when the country concerned is on the Council agenda.
That practice could also be expanded to other contexts,
such as informal consultations among Council members
and the country-specific configuration, when countries
that are in the process of peacebuilding slip back into
a recurrence of conflict. The current situations in the
Central African Republic and Guinea-Bissau are such
examples.

Thirdly, when drafting mandate renewals for
peacekeeping operations, it would be worthwhile to
include, when appropriate, some linkages to the agenda
of the Peacebuilding Commission. Our experts should
at least bear that possibility in mind.

Fourthly, and here I am borrowing an idea
from Ambassador Vilovie, we should consider the
participation of the PBC in the technical assessment
missions that are carried out prior to the gradual
drawdown of a peacekeeping operation.

Fifthly, when a Security Council mission travels to a
PBC country-specific configuration, that configuration
should be involved. Similarly, when a PBC mission
travels to a country that is on the agenda ofthe Security
Council, consultations between both bodies should take
place.

Before concluding, I would like to refer very
briefly to Ambassador Momen's statement, which
is organized around the main functions and work of
the Commission, placing particular emphasis on the
results achieved and the challenges and opportunities
related to the impact of the Commission in the field
and its relations at United Nations Headquarters. We
particularly appreciate the comments from Ambassador
Momen and would like to thank him for the fact that
during his presidency he launched, in September of
last year, the initiative of organizing a high-level event,
entitled "Peacebuilding: the way towards sustainable
peace and security", which was presided over by the
Prime Minister of Bangladesh. The consensus political
declaration that emanated from that event reaffirmed
and reinvigorated the political commitment to the key
principles, objectives and priorities of the Commission.

In summary, we have the impression that both
bodies - the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission - tend to function too much like two
distinct and separate compartments, with minimum
communication sufficient only to fulfil formalities
and apparently with little enthusiasm, as was pointed
out in the recent publication by the non-governmental
organization Security Council Report dated 18 April
2013, which focused precisely on that subject. IfI may
be allowed to make a personal comment, as a member
both of the Security Council and the PBC, I believe
that it is within our reach to change that situation and
overcome it.

