Mr. Soborun (Mauritius): Mauritius, like many
other countries, views climate change as a very serious
global problem that warrants a long-term global
commitment and substantive actions. The Rio
Conference on Environment and Development
awakened us, in time, to the stark, or rather the dark,
reality that awaits us if no concrete actions are taken to
tackle the problem of global warming. Indeed, the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change clearly states that the current high level of
global emissions of greenhouse gases and the global
nature of climate change call for urgent cooperation
among countries in an effective way and an
international response in accordance with the principle
of common but differentiated responsibilities. It is
deplorable that the actions taken so far have not been
commensurate with the magnitude of the problem; the
end result is that we are gradually gliding towards the
danger zone - if we are not there already.

The 2006 Human Development Report, published
by the United Nations Development Programme,
unequivocally states that climate change now poses
what may be an unparalleled threat to human
development. Sadly, the most severe consequences will
be experienced by countries and people who bear little
responsibility for the problem. Parts of sub-Saharan
Africa are facing crop losses of up to 25 per cent from
climate-change-induced weather patterns. Meanwhile,
accelerated glacial melt and reduced rainfall threaten
major food systems in South Asia.

Following the conclusions of the fourth report of
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change,
released recently, and the Stern review on the
economics of climate change, it is no longer possible
today to doubt that global warming is accelerating and
that human activity is contributing substantially to that
acceleration. Consequences of that acceleration, as
predicted in the reports, will have devastating effects.
Small island developing States (SIDS), though
contributing insignificantly to global greenhouse gas
emissions, will be among those countries facing the
full adverse impacts of climate change.

SIDS and low-lying coastal countries are highly
vulnerable to climate change as they face the risks of
sea-level rise and severe coastal erosion. The unique
features of island ecosystems, including fisheries, coral
reefs and mangroves, also face increasing threats from
climate change and natural disasters. These have huge
implications for our economic sectors, such as tourism
and agriculture, as well as for food security and
nutrition. Saline intrusion and change in rainfall

patterns are seriously affecting our freshwater resources
and agriculture. Adaptation to environmental vulnerability
and climate change is Vital for our countries in order to
achieve the targets of the Millennium Development
Goals and the Plan of Implementation of the World
Summit on Sustainable Development.

That will necessitate increased assistance at both
the technical and the financial levels. In that regard, we
call upon the international community to set up a
special SIDS fund to enable the development and
implementation of adaptation measures, along the lines
of the special Least Developed Countries Fund under
the Global Environment Facility (GEF) umbrella.
Furthermore, in order to enable better monitoring of
climate variations associated with global warming and
sea-level rise, there is also a need to set up regional
climate observation systems to assist SIDS.

Mauritius wishes to underscore the importance of
the engagement of the international community in
building partnerships in the development of
technologies to address the environmental
predicaments of our fragile ecosystems in an integrated
manner, and in the transfer of clean technologies and
the building of management capacities for vulnerability
reduction and disaster management.

Small island developing States depend almost
entirely on imported fossil fuels for their energy
requirements and economic development. The
assistance of developed countries is again solicited in
exploring and expanding the use of renewable energy,
including biofuels, and in facilitating the transfer of
clean and energy-efficient technology with a View to
reducing greenhouse gas emissions, harnessing the
potential of natural resources for energy production,
reducing the high cost of importing fuel, ensuring
energy security and developing a coherent sustainable
energy policy.

Small island developing States rely on global
actions to combat the problems of climate change and
sea-level rise. Developed countries, because of their
capacity to act first, must take the lead in the fight
against climate change. However, it is imperative that
there be broad participation among developed and
developing countries emitting massive quantities of
greenhouse gases, to push for innovation in the
development and employment of low-carbon
technologies, the continued and expanded use of
market-based instruments and adaptation measures.

While acknowledging the tremendous work done by
the various international environmental organizations, we
support the View that there is the need for a more coherent
approach if we want to be effective in combating
problems related to climate change. In that context, we
welcome the outcome of the Paris Conference for
Global Ecological Governance, which called for the
creation of a United Nations environment organization.
I should also like to add that the 23rd meeting of the
Council of Ministers of the Indian Ocean Commission,
which was held in Port Louis on 3 April 2007 under the
chairmanship of Mauritius, also discussed the proposed
United Nations environment organization.

To conclude, I should like to add that we all have
to do our fair share in the creation of a safer and
cleaner environment for generations yet unborn.

