The President: Once again, the Secretary-
General has reinforced our conviction that Africa
matters, both as a continent of concern and as a land of
promise. It matters to the Security Council. In the past
six months, the Council has sent missions to Central
Africa, Ethiopia/Eritrea and West Africa, attesting to
its newfound readiness to reach out to Africa, its
people and its leaders.

Africa matters to the Netherlands. A stable,
prosperous Africa is good, first of all, for its own
people, but it is also good for us. That is why stability,
development and economic growth in Africa are a
priority of our foreign policy.

That is why the Dutch Prime Minister chaired last
year's debate on Africa; that is why my colleague, our
Minister for Development Cooperation, will chair an
open meeting on post-conflict peace-building in
Guinea-Bissau at the end of this month; that is why a
significant proportion of our development budget goes
to Africa; that is why Ambassador van Walsum has
travelled to Africa several times; that is why I visited
Africa last week; and that is why I am here.

In Nigeria, I discussed with President Obasanjo
the promotion of peace and security in West Africa. As
we Europeans have learned in recent history, regional
cooperation initiatives are crucial as a means of
transforming old feuds into new prosperity. The
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the
subregional organizations therefore deserve our full
support.

The Netherlands has offered to support regional
peacekeeping initiatives out of a peace fund which we
established recently, just as we already support regional
conflict prevention.

Let me turn now to the question of Ethiopia and
Eritrea. The Dutch-Canadian battalion of the United
Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE) will
arrive in the region by mid-December. With that in
mind, I visited Ethiopia and Eritrea last week, and I
would now like to share with the Council some of my
observations, which might also be of interest to other
troop-contributing countries present here today.

In Ethiopia, I saw the Prime Minister, Mr. Meles
Zenawi, and the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr.
Seyoum Mesfin. In Eritrea, I held talks with the
President, Mr. Isaias Afewerki, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Ali Said Abdella, and the Minister
of Defence, Mr. Sebhat Ephrem. Furthermore, my
delegation and I had extensive talks with
representatives of the OAU, representatives of UNMEE
and Mr. Anthony Lake, and with various humanitarian
organizations in Ethiopia and in Eritrea.

I came away from my talks in Ethiopia and in
Eritrea with the impression that both parties have a
genuine desire for peace and are eager to start
reconstruction and development. In the peace process
ably led by Algeria and the OAU, some progress seems
to have been made on issues such as compensation and
the investigation into the origins of the conflict. And I
hope a breakthrough will be possible in the not-too-
distant future on the question of demarcation of the
border.

Yet, at the same time, the mutual distrust between
Ethiopia and Eritrea remains as deep as ever, causing
the peace process to move very slowly indeed. I
impressed upon the representatives of both States that
UNMEE can only provide a breathing space to
facilitate the resolution of their differences. It cannot
and should not be considered as the solution to the
conflict itself. I stressed that their differences should be
resolved by the conclusion without delay of a
comprehensive and final peace settlement.

Nevertheless, I fear that there is a possibility that
both parties may get used to the presence of UNMEE
and become dependent on it in the way that the United
Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus now seems
indispensable to Cyprus.

In order to give further impetus to the peace
process, I propose the establishment of a group of
friends of the peace process. Furthermore, to help start
to remedy the deep distrust between the two States, I
proposed to the parties an initial five confidence-
building measures.

Agreement to such confidence-building measures
would give the international community more
confidence that the peace process is taken seriously.
Those measures would also have a positive effect on
the renewal of the mandate of UNMEE, which is
dependent on progress in the negotiations and which
would have a beneficial effect on the relations between
the two States by beginning to dispel their mutual
distrust.

Both States reacted positively to our proposal and
said they were willing to engage in such a
reinforcement of the OAU-led peace process. The
package of five initial confidence-building measures I
proposed consists of the following.

The first is the reciprocal and, if possible,
immediate release and return of interned civilians
under the auspices of the International Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC). The Fourth Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War requires that internment should cease as soon as
possible after the close of hostilities and that parties
should endeavour to ensure the return of all internees
to their last place of residence or to facilitate
repatriation. As Ethiopia and Eritrea have signed a
cessation-of-hostilities agreement, civilian internees
must under international law be released immediately.

The second is the opening of a land and air
corridor for UNMEE. It is important that the opening
of road access for the benefit of UNMEE take place
soon, as the Secretary-General has said. But an air
corridor is just as essential for the immediate
deployment of UNMEE and should be established
forthwith. In the future, these corridors should also be
made available for civilian traffic.

The third confidence-building measure is an
exchange of maps showing mined areas. The presence
of mines is proving to be a major obstacle for the
population in the affected areas, and prevents the return
of internally displaced persons. I therefore proposed
that both countries should provide UNMEE with maps
showing the exact location of mined areas.

The fourth is the simultaneous release of an
initial 250 prisoners of war by both parties. Under the
Third Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Prisoners of War, all prisoners of war should be
released and repatriated without delay after the
cessation of hostilities. As such a situation has existed
since 18 June, there is no legal basis on which to detain
prisoners of war. However, I realize that the release of
prisoners of war is a sensitive issue. Therefore, I
suggested a phased approach. An mutual release of an
initial 250 prisoners should ideally take place by the
end of this year.

The fifth confidence-building measure is a mutual
moratorium on arbitrary expulsions until such time as
the nationality laws of Ethiopia and Eritrea have been
adapted. Ethiopia has expelled many thousands of
"Eritreans" and Eritrea has expelled many thousands of
"Ethiopians". That was done mostly in an arbitrary
manner, in disregard of the rule of law. The persons
expelled do not always automatically qualify as
citizens of the other State, with the result that expelled
persons may become stateless. I therefore proposed
that both parties agree immediately to a moratorium on
expulsions. That moratorium could end a year after
advice by the ICRC has been received on how to tackle
the problems of the different nationality laws.

I have asked my delegation to consult with all
members of the Council on the text of a presidential
statement that would reflect our discussion today; I
trust that we can agree on such a statement and adopt it
next week.

