Mr. Leao Monteiro (Cape Verde) (spoke in French):
On behalf of the African Group, I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for the initiative you have taken in
convening this meeting of the Security Council and for
having convened it in an open format, thus making it
possible for interested Member States to benefit from the
meeting and to be heard on a subject of extreme concern to
our African continent. The participation by the Vice-
President of the United States of America in this meeting
and the important communication that he made before this
Council convince us that your country intends to make its
own valuable contribution and also to use its capacity to
influence others to bring about urgent mobilization on
everyone's part, with the objective of stopping and reversing
the present course of the AIDS scourge in Africa and
worldwide.

The eloquent points made by Vice-President Gore,
emphasizing the potential of AIDS to increasingly
jeopardize peace and security in Africa if the dynamics of
the epidemic are not vigorously countered on the continent,
really come as no surprise to us. We have known for a long
time that the different elements that combine to form the
fabric of society are interdependent and therefore affect
each other. From the historical perspective, experience
reveals that deadly epidemics can become factors of acute
social destabilization when they assume catastrophic
dimensions. Moreover, Africa is living under the threat of
another epidemic - poverty - which is acquiring vast
proportions and which, in the context of underdevelopment
that fuels the spread of AIDS, increases its impact. The
struggle against AIDS in Africa will be waged in conditions
that are all the more difficult if the environment of poverty
and underdevelopment prevailing in Africa is not dealt with
at the same time.

Member States, and Africans in particular, are very
grateful to the Secretary-General for having applied his own
leadership to increase awareness world-wide regarding
AIDS, and also for having persisted successfully in
promoting the establishment, made formal a month ago, of
an International Partnership against AIDS in Africa. He
thus gave major impetus to the response requested by the
African heads of State and Government when they appealed
in 1998 in Ouagadougou for mobilization of the
international community to gather global resources against
this scourge. The combined efforts of African
Governments and friendly countries and the commendable
efforts of the United Nations system - by the World
Health Organization (WHO), from the very outset to the
launching of the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) in 1996, which represented a major
innovation - certainly slowed the spread of AIDS on the
African continent. Nonetheless, efforts have fallen far
short of the results that the magnitude and complexity of
the phenomenon would require.
The excellent briefings presented this morning by the
President of the World Bank, the Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the
Executive Director of UNAIDS described to us the
terrifying magnitude of AIDS in Africa and how the
effort of economic and social development of African
countries, already hindered by many important constraints,
is now even more complicated. I have statistics, but I will
not refer to all of them. I do want to recall, however, that
it is estimated that since the outbreak of the epidemic,
some 80 per cent of deaths resulting from AIDS have
been in Africa.

Human suffering is thus immense, and the human
losses also affect the socio-economic lives of the most
affected countries. The delayed effect of the current AIDS
carriers also casts its shadow on the future, and this is
true even if by some miracle the cycle of infection were
to be suddenly broken. It is therefore obvious that only a
real global coalition of efforts and resources, working
concertedly and synergistically, can offer a chance of
ultimate success over this contemporary scourge. In this
respect, the International Partnership fortunately seems to
have conceptual and organizational means that will give
it real effectiveness, if the will to make all the needed
ingredients available is not lacking.

We have been reminded here that the spread of
AIDS in the world has benefitted from a wall of silence
and an attitude of denial, which arise from shame and
stigma. Africa can be no exception to this. Like
everywhere, it is the initiative of individuals and of
responsible and prestigious organizations that leads to
decisive action to break the wall of silence and to help
release energies.

In Africa, this type of action has grown in scope and
strength, in particular in the past year, and at the highest
level. We must do everything within our power so that

 

this continent can turn, as soon as possible, from being
fertile ground for the spread of AIDS to being an
environment capable of channelling and being a catalyst for
a movement of prevention, containment and reversal of the
epidemic's impact.

The International Partnership against AIDS in Africa
agreed on a deadline - next May - to establish a frame
of reference for work and a plan of action for the first
years. Let us recall that the objective is to considerably
reduce the impact of AIDS on human suffering and on
human, social and economic development in Africa, and to
be guided in assessing the progress accomplished by
indicators to be defined for the different specific areas of
activity.

In keeping with the problem to be confronted, the
response must be unprecedented, as described by the
Secretary-General. The political weight of the Security
Council, as well as the political dimension and the
resources of many of its members, will certainly provide
credibility and invaluable encouragement for the
implementation of exactly such a collective response. This
undoubtedly will be an endeavour with a strong human
component in its spirit, in the resolve inspiring it and in the
innovation and intelligence that will be required for the
concerted work of Governments, civil society, the United
Nations, non-governmental organizations and the private
sector.

In addition to the human resources that need to be
mobilized, the Partnership's plan of action will also involve
an increase and a significant rehabilitation of the African
health systems that are overwhelmed and under-equipped to
confront new and fast-increasing demands. Some of the
activities to combat the very spread of AIDS, such as the
effort to prevent the spread of AIDS from pregnant women
to their children, will require the generous use of
medication, the current commercial cost of which is well
beyond the means of Africans, as is the case with anti-
retro-viruses. Thus, the reduction of human suffering,
cruelly widespread on our continent, will involve making
other types of medication available, certainly at less cost
but possibly in larger quantities. It is estimated at this stage
that the overall costs would range from $1 billion to $2.5
billion annually. This is a relatively modest sum in light of
the task involved, but it would represent a very important
difference in the capacity to act, as compared with today's
level, which is extremely insufficient.

The other face of the human emergency in which
AIDS is now plunging Africa is that it offers us the
continuing opportunity for a collective behaviour that can
give meaning to the concept of an international
community to which we all aspire.

I wish once again to express our gratitude to you,
Mr. President, for your timely initiative in convening this
important briefing, and we wish to express the hope that
the struggle against the scourge of AIDS in Africa will
yield excellent results.

