Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Let me first congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your initiative on small arms. I
will abbreviate my statement in the light of your
prescriptions this morning.

The easy availability of small arms and light
weapons continues to stoke conflicts, increase their
intensity and cause a high number of casualties, apart
from making peacekeeping much more complicated
and risky.

The Secretary-General's report highlights the
significance of effective governmental control over the
export and transit of small arms, meaningful
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programmes in post-conflict situations, and greater
attention to end-user certificate systems and illicit
brokering activities.

We are also encouraged by the fact that the
Programme of Action on the illicit trade in small arms
is in the process of implementation. The Biennial
review Meeting has noted forward movement and
identified areas where more efforts will be needed. The
establishment of an open-ended working group this
year to negotiate an international instrument on
marking and tracing is another step forward. We
support these efforts.

However, there have been mixed results on the
Secretary-General's recommendations. First, we
believe that there has been slow response in breaking
the vicious cycle of illicit trade in small arms and the
exploitation of natural resources. It is important to
trace the financial transactions involved in the illicit
trade of small arms on the one hand, and the illegal
trade of natural resources on the other.

Secondly, DDR has not gathered momentum,
primarily because of resource constraints. The
Secretary-General has rightly expressed concern that
this risks jeopardizing not only the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration operations
themselves, but also the entire peace process.

ThirdIy, Member States' lack of capacity in the
legal and technical areas, especially on the question of
marking and tracing, has put further constraints on
combating the problem of small arms.

For effective implementation, a host of actions
are required at the national, regional and international
levels.

First, the developed countries should make
available the necessary financial resources to
developing countries for capacity-building, including
legal and technical expertise and transfer of
technology.

Secondly, there should be a stigmatization of all
financial transactions involved in the illicit trade of
small arms, including those relating to the illegal
exploitation of natural resources.

Thirdly, a political commitment and action are
necessary to resolve the underlying causes of disputes.

Pakistan has had to grapple with the millions of
small arms and light weapons that found their way into
our country during the course of the 20-year war in
Afghanistan. The Government of Pakistan is
vigorously implementing a programme of action on
small arms and light weapons. The following measures
are noteworthy.

First, the production and manufacturing of small
arms and light weapons is undertaken only by the
public sector.

Secondly, a record is kept of all types of arms
manufactured by the public-sector ordnance factories
or imported into Pakistan.

Thirdly, all small arms and light weapons
produced are uniquely marked to maintain a distinction
for civilian, law enforcement and armed forces uses.

Fourthly, Pakistan observes strict export-control
measures for small arms and light weapons, including
no-objection certificates, end-user certificates and a
consultative governmental process, inter alia to ensure
compliance with United Nations embargoes.

Fifthly, reforms have been instituted in the police
forces' organizational structure and in the area of their
responsibilities and equipment in order to insure
against the proliferation of small arms.

And sixthly, a public-awareness campaign was
launched in August 2001.

Those measures have yielded encouraging results.
As of April 2003, around 250,000 illicit small arms and
light weapons of different categories and types were
recovered, confiscated and destroyed. A total of 85,000
people were prosecuted in the process of the collection
of illegal small arms in circulation. That effort is
continuing.

As a front-line State in the global fight against
terrorism, Pakistan has established a number of joint
counter-terrorism working groups at the regional level,
including with China and the Russian Federation.
Pakistan has also proposed similar arrangements with
other countries in the region, and we remain hopeful
that we will reach bilateral arrangements for this
purpose.

A tripartite commission between Pakistan,
Afghanistan and the United States was established last
year to resolve, among other issues, the problem of the
illicit flow of small arms and light weapons across
borders.

Pakistan will continue to support comprehensive
efforts at the national, regional and international levels
to address these other weapons of mass destruction.

