Mrs. Craft (United States of America): As the
Council is aware, this is my first time participating in
this monthly briefing. With this in mind, I would like
to step back for a moment and speak broadly on how I
intend to approach issues related to the State of Israel.

First, I believe it is important to be clear on serious
matters. So allow me to be clear on the relationship
between the State of Israel and the United States of
America. In the past, the United States has always
supported Israel, the United States supports Israel
today, and the United States will always support Israel
going forward. Israel will have no better friend than
Kelly Craft.

Unfortunately, on matters related to Israel at the
United Nations, many Member States do not play fair.
I could speak endlessly about the excessive attention
Member States give to the affairs of Israel, including
complaints, unwarranted criticism and the incessant
number of resolutions condemning this great nation.

However, I do not wish to dwell on those well-worn
points. As a person who finds value in emphasizing the
positive, I wish to, instead, highlight Israel's astonishing
record of achievements. Since its creation, Israel has
served as a refuge and sanctuary for those fleeing
persecution and repression. A vibrant and accomplished
democracy, Israel has stood tall and steadfast despite
constant threats to its peace and security. All the more
impressive is that, in this threatening environment,
Israel strongly supports press freedom, defends gender
equality and houses a robust and innovative free-market
economy. And in opposition to what has been stated
here, Israel is a nation that deeply respects the rule of
law. Indeed, we have much to learn from her.

Further, as a hub for innovation, Israel has
cultivated and earned its reputation as a start-up nation.
It is a global leader in research and development and
has a vast network of international collaboration in this
space. In fact, it is a leading investor in research and
development as a percentage of gross domestic product
and has been home to 5,000 new start-ups in the past 10
years alone.

Much like the way they built their great nation,
Israelis have used their spirit of courage, faith in
education and dogged determination to help their
brothers and sisters around the globe. Many nations
that are eager to condemn Israel should instead study its
resolve, its constant efforts toward making the country
stand as first among equals to any of the modern world
and its benevolent pursuits in arts and sciences. In so
doing, I believe a different picture will emerge - one
that showcases all that Israel is and all that the world
can gain from this great nation.

Please do not mistake my remarks here. My
statement is not meant to indicate that other issues
discussed here today, including the continued violence
and terror from Hamas in Gaza, as described by
Mr. Mladenov in his briefing, are not important.
However, as we sit in this building that was created as
a hall of peace, I believe it critically important that we
acknowledge that no country should face the ceaseless
barrage ofunwarranted criticism, one-sided antagonism
or repeated negative spotlight.

The United States remains tirelessly committed
to supporting Israel's fair treatment here in this organ
as well as in the United Nations system in general.
Further, it should come as no surprise that this is one of
my chief priorities. The United States stands with our
close friend and partner and will continue to oppose
actions and statements that unfairly single it out. And
as the representative of the United States to the United
Nations, I will work relentlessly to fight every effort
that seeks to delegitimize Israel or undermine its
security. It is inexcusable that persuasive anti-Israel
bias still exists in the United Nations and that we
continue to witness attempts by some States Members
of the United Nations to undermine Israel's standing as
a full member of the community of nations. The United
States vigorously opposes all such efforts.

As I said when opening my remarks, I believe it
is very important that I be clear on serious matters, so
allow me, once again, to be clear on the relationship
between the State of Israel and the United States - in
the past, the United States has always supported Israel,
the United States supports Israel today and the United
States will support Israel going forward. Israel will
have no better friend than Kelly Craft.

