Mr. Kobler: First of all, let me congratulate Angola
on taking up the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of March.

The members of the Council have before them the
latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2016/182) on
the activities of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL), which details the work ofthe Mission
over the past six months.

The process towards a democratic transition has
continued to achieve a number of milestones, but at the
same time remains very precarious. Two weeks ago, on
17 February, Libya marked the fifth anniversary of the
2011 revolution. However, five years on, the current
political and military vacuum is allowing terrorist
groups and criminal networks to establish deep roots.
It must be said in all clarity that Libya today has no
effective State institutions.

It is with a very heavy heart that I begin my
briefing noting that the humanitarian situation in
Libya has deteriorated further, against the background
of poor funding for the humanitarian response plan.
Libya is a country of 6 million people, with significant
resources, but across the country 2.4 million people are
in need of some form of humanitarian assistance. More
than 40 per cent of the health-care facilities in Libya
are not functioning. Over 1 million children under the
age of five are at risk of being affected by a vaccine
shortage. Some 1.3 million people are food insecure.
It is now imperative that Libyan political actors take
responsibility, in the higher interest of the Libyan
people, to stop the human suffering.

The overwhelming majority of the Libyan people
are in favour of the Libyan Political Agreement. The
overwhelming majority support the formation of a
Government of National Accord that would effectively
address the existing threats. The overwhelming
majority want and deserve peace now. Some of those
who are politically responsible on both sides, however,
still refuse to listen to the voices of the Libyan people
and pursue their own narrow political interests.

In my most recent briefing to the Security Council
(see S/PV.7577), I promised to broaden the basis
of support for the Libyan Political Agreement. My
colleagues, myself and the international community
have persistently reached out to those who are opposing
the Libyan Political Agreement. However, until now we
have been unable to convince them to go the way of
peace and unity.

On 15 January, the Presidency Council presented a
Cabinet for approval by the House of Representatives.
The House voted to endorse the Libyan Political
Agreement in principle, which was good news, but it
requested the Presidency Council to nominate a new
and smaller Cabinet. After days oftireless deliberations,
on 14 February the Presidency Council finalized a new
list of candidates for a streamlined Cabinet. A few days
ago, on 22 February, the House of Representatives met
to consider the Presidency Council's second Cabinet.
However, its session was interrupted by a minority of
parliamentarians who opposed the vote and resorted to
threats and intimidation, preventing the majority from
freely expressing its vote. Nonetheless, this majority
gathered 100 signatures in support of the endorsement
of the new Cabinet and its programme.

I am convinced that a positive vote could have
taken place on 22 February had the leadership of
the House of Representatives shown the resolve and
determination to put the Government of National
Accord to a vote. I have therefore written to the Speaker
of the House of Representatives to register the will of
the democratic majority and formalize its endorsement
of the Government of National Accord. Failing such
recognition and a positive endorsement by the House of
Representatives by early next week, Libyans have to go
on. I intend to reconvene the Libyan Political Dialogue
to explore the way forward in line with the Libyan
Political Agreement.

Libya cannot be held hostage by minorities in the
House of Representatives and the General National
Congress. In both those forums, there are clear
majorities who are in favour of moving ahead quickly
with the establishment of a Government of National
Accord. The country needs to move ahead now or risk
division and collapse. I therefore intend to proceed
along the following lines.

First, together with the Libyans and the international
community, we will continue to advocate for the
implementation of the Libyan Political Agreement. This
is the plan; there are no alternatives. The Government
of National Accord, as proposed by the Presidency
Council, must be allowed to take up its duties in Tripoli
as soon as possible. Those who are threatening the
Presidency Council and actively preventing it from
assuming power in Tripoli should be held accountable
on the basis of Security Council resolutions. Branches
of the Government, however, should be established
in eastern Libya, where Benghazi requires particular
attention, and in the South.

I thank Prime Minister Fayez Serraj for his
perseverance and steadfastness in recent weeks. I
encourage all members of the Presidency Council to
stand together in unity. I call on the country's political
leadership to support and stay the course outlined in
the Libyan Political Agreement, and I welcome the
preparatory meetings of the State Council. I look
forward to the convening of the first official meeting of
the State Council in Tripoli as soon as possible.

Secondly, given the security situation and the
expansion of Da'esh, it is imperative to unify and
reform Libyan security forces. I urge the Presidency
Council and the Government of National Accord to
immediately establish a mechanism to achieve that
goal. The international community and UNSMIL stand
ready to assist.

Thirdly, support for the Libyan Political Agreement
has to be broadened. This will require a parallel,
complementary and bottom-up approach. The support
of civil society, youth, and women organizations
has to be further deepened. Tribal dignitaries and
municipalities have a crucial role to play. I intend to
work with the relevant authorities responsible for
national reconciliation in the new Government of
National Accord to arrange for regional forums of
tribal leaders and mayors to accompany the process of
nation-building. This may later result in a nation-wide
Grand Shura.

Fourthly, in parallel, the Constitution Drafting
Assembly should present the draft constitution on time
for a referendum. To this end, I am grateful that the
Government of Oman has offered to host a retreat. I urge
all members of the Constitution Drafting Assembly,
including the boycotters, to seize this opportunity and
resolve the outstanding problems.

Both in eastern and western Libya, there are those
who are committed to doing everything in their power
to undermine the political process, as well as the
formation of a Government of National Accord and its
instalment in the capital. These actors must be told in no
uncertain terms that enough is enough. It is high time
that they stand by the interests of the Libyan people and
not against them.

With respect to security questions, while the
political process is extremely slow, Da'esh takes
advantage of the political and security vacuum and
is expanding to the West, East and the South. While
Libya's financial resources are dwindling, the criminal
networks, including human smuggling, are booming.
The conflict in Benghazi has escalated in recent days
when forces under the banner of the Libyan national
army commenced new offensive operations against the
Benghazi Revolutionaries Shura Council and Da'esh.
These forces have since gained control of several areas
previously held by the Shura Council and succeeded in
dislodging Da'esh from a number ofkey neighbourhoods
it previously controlled. Many displaced as a result
of the conflict in Benghazi have returned to their old
neighbourhoods and reclaimed their homes. However, I
am deeply concerned at unconfirmed reports of human
rights violations in some areas overtaken by the Libyan
national army.

Let us not forget that as a result of the violent
conflict, significant parts of Benghazi today lie in
ruins. The establishment of a humanitarian ceasefire,
the delivery of humanitarian aid and a reconstruction
fund for Benghazi must be priorities of the new
Government. In southern Libya, the national-level
conflict and absence ofa functioning security apparatus
continues to exacerbate local intercommunal tensions.
Intermittent clashes continue in Sabha and Kufra.

The fragmentation of security actors and their
preoccupation with consolidating their influence in
areas under their control have allowed Da'esh to operate
unchecked in many places. The airstrike against Da'esh
in Sabrathah on 19 February has been followed by
escalating clashes as local security forces and armed
groups sought to evict Da'esh from the town. During an
assault last week, Da'esh killed 17 people, beheading
several of them. Da'esh has also continued to carry out
multiple beheadings and atrocities in its stronghold of
Sirte. Da'esh in Libya constitutes an urgent and growing
threat to Libya, the region and beyond. However, the
fight against violent extremism can be sustainable only
if it is led by a national unity Government that puts in
place and prioritizes a national agenda to address the
country's most immediate challenges and works to meet
the aspirations and expectations of the Libyan people.

On 13 January, the Presidency Council established
a Temporary Security Committee to facilitate the
implementation of the security arrangements outlined
in the Libyan Political Agreement. UNSMIL is
supporting the Committee in its efforts to formulate a
viable security plan that will enable the Government of
National Accord to establish itselfin Tripoli. In western
Libya, however, our efforts have been severely impeded
by the consistent denials of United Nations overflight
and landing permission by the Tripoli-based authorities.
Since the beginning of December 2015, practically all
our requests to travel to Tripoli and surrounding areas
have, with few exceptions, been refused.

With respect to human rights, the Mission continues
to document numerous cases in which armed groups
across the country have abducted civilians on account
of their identity, political affiliations or simply for
ransom. Those seized are often at risk of torture and
other ill-treatment. I welcome the recent establishment
of a committee by the General Prosecution to review
the cases of all those detained at the Mitiga airport
in Tripoli.

I have continued to strongly advocate increased
women's participation in Libyan political life, in
particular by calling for a 30-per cent share ofministerial
posts in the Government of National Accord. Sadly, my
calls have not been heeded.

Libya's neighbours are suffering the direct
consequences of the country's instability. I am
committed to fully engaging with them in reaching a
political solution to the crisis. I would like to thank
Tunisia for continuing to host UNSMIL temporarily
in its capital, and other countries of the region for
playing an important role in building consensus. I am
deeply appreciative of the efforts of the African Union,
the European Union and the League of Arab States. I
congratulate President Kikwete on his appointment as
High Representative of the African Union for Libya.
I met him a few days ago, on 26 February, and I look
forward to our close cooperation. I would like to thank
in particular the Council for its close engagement and
unanimous support for a political resolution of the
problems in Libya.

Finally, I would like to thank the staff of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya for their
tireless efforts and dedication in supporting the Libyan
political process. Despite the many hurdles, difficulties
and frustrations in their daily work, they are highly
professional and committed colleagues, and I am very
grateful to them.

