Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): Let me begin by
thanking you, Madam President, for scheduling this
very important open debate on the situation in the
Middle East. I would also like to convey our
appreciation to Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe
for his insightful and comprehensive briefing this
morning. I further thank Mr. Paul Badji, Chairman of
the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, for his statement.

I also wish to state that the Bangladesh delegation
aligns itself with the statements delivered by the
representatives of Egypt and Tajikistan on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement and the Organization of the
Islamic Conference, respectively. In addition, I wish to
briefly make certain points that Bangladesh believes to
be of importance.

The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question, has always been a major concern
for the international community and for the United
Nations. A durable and sustainable resolution of the
Arab-Israeli conflict, including the issue of Palestine,
which is the core of that long-lasting crisis, must
therefore be our collective strategic objective. All
Member States should pledge complete commitment to
that objective and throw their full moral, diplomatic,
political and economic support behind its early
realization. Bangladesh is ready to play a constructive
role in this collective endeavour to achieve a just,
lasting and a comprehensive peace in the Middle East
based on the two-State principle. Bangladesh unites
with the international community in reaffirming its full
support for the Palestinian people in their just and
legitimate struggle for self-determination and freedom
from continued occupation, and it reiterates its long-
standing position that the continued occupation of
Palestine is the root cause of violence, unrest and
destabilization in the region.

The people of Palestine are being denied their
fundamental right to self-determination and to live
freely in their own land, and displaced Palestinians
have been denied their right to return home and live
with dignity and safety. Unfortunately, it appears to be
a collective failure on the part of the international
community that their fundamental rights to self-
determination and to a sovereign State have remained
unrealized. It is also unfortunate that Israel, whose
people had the experience of suffering and deprivation
in the past, instead of avoiding those ugly practices,
has continued to violate international humanitarian law
by committing systematic human rights violations and
imposing deprivation against the Palestinian people.

For example, less than two months back the
Freedom Flotilla, a convoy of ships transporting
humanitarian aid to alleviate the suffering of the
Palestinian people under Israeli blockade in Gaza, was
intercepted. Our thanks go to Israel, as it partially
lifted some sanctions. However, a full and
unconditional lifting of the sanctions on Gaza is a
legitimate expectation of the global community and
would be a step towards creating an environment of
goodwill and trust among the neighbouring peoples of
15
Palestine and Israel. That is essential for a lasting
peace in the region.

General Assembly and the Security Council, in
their resolutions adopted over the years, have
reconfirmed the occupying Power's obligation to
ensure the basic human rights of the Palestinian people.
My delegation believes that only full and sincere
implementation of the relevant General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions can resolve the
Palestinian crisis.

In conclusion, in order to achieve a lasting
solution in the Middle East, it is very important to
address the key issue, which is the prolonged and
illegal occupation of Arab territories by Israel. The
people of Palestine have been under illegal occupation
over the past six decades. This occupation is extremely
costly for the taxpayers of Israel and also for Israel's
friends and neighbours in terms of resources, human
lives and peace and stability. The solution, therefore,
requires Israel's complete and unconditional
withdrawal from the occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem, and all other occupied Arab
lands.

Let me reiterate Bangladesh's full support for a
lasting peace for all inhabitants of the region, both
Arabs and Israelis, and our strong commitment to the
realization of an independent, sovereign and viable
State of Palestine, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its
capital, living side by side and in peace with all its
neighbours.

Finally, my delegation believes that the Road
Map, the Arab Peace Initiative and the relevant
resolutions are the best guides for achieving a two-
State solution.

