Mr. Manzi (Rwanda): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, and the Argentine delegation for
convening this important open debate. I would like to
express my thanks to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his informative briefing. His presence here this
morning is an affirmation of the importance of the
topic we are addressing. I also would like to thank the
Director for International Law and Cooperation of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Philip
Spoerri; the High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Ms. Navanathem Pillay; and the Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Ms. Valerie Amos, for their
respective briefings.

Our holding a debate on the topic of the protection
of civilians in situations of armed conflict for the third
time this year suggests its importance in the minds of
Council members. The Security Council has shown
interest in demonstrating that it takes violence against
civilians seriously. It is indeed true that through a broad
Security Council agenda, including human security,
the Council's legitimacy and credibility hinges on its
ability to act as a guarantor of civilian protection. We
also note that considerable progress has been made
since the first landmark resolution 1265 (1999) and
resolution 1296 (2000) and through the increasing
number of peacekeeping missions expressly mandated
to protect civilians. In addition, over the past 10 years,
the Secretary-General has put forward more than 100
recommendations in successive reports to the Security
Council on the protection of civilians.

Although it may sometimes seem like we are
repeating ourselves, the cumulative effect is dramatic.
We believe that with each repetition, the consensus
on the issue of the protection of civilians grows
stronger, and our language becomes clear and loud
to the perpetrators of violations and abuses against
civilian populations that they will be held accountable.
With such optimism, the disparity between our well-
intentioned discussions in the Council and the effects
of armed conflicts on civilian populations calls for
more action by the Security Council. There is certainly
a clear need to translate formative commitments into
concrete improvements in the protection of civilians on
the ground.

In the Great Lakes region, for example, we
unfortunately still have armed conflicts and roaming
predators against the civilian population. The negative
forces and other military groups, such as the Rwanda
Defence Force, a genocidal force that consists of
perpetrators of the 1994 genocide of Tutsi in Rwanda,
continues to spread its genocidal ideological poison,
not just in our neighbourhood but also through a
worldwide network. Other groups, such as the Lord's
Resistance Army and uncontrolled Se'leka Coalition
elements, continue to traumatize the population in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Central
African Republic.

Those forces use civilians as human shields, abduct
and maim, forcefully recruit children and continue to
carry out sexual and gender-based violence against
women and girls. Such genocidal ideologies and
inhuman acts should not be accommodated anywhere
in the world. The fighting between the Sudan and
the Sudan People's Liberation Movement-North also
continue to cause human terror and catastrophe in
Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile states of the Sudan.
The conflicts have caused displacement ofpersons with
limited humanitarian access.

The crisis in Syria and the death toll there show
the persistent failure of all sides to protect civilians
and safeguard human life. Violations of international
humanitarian law are causing civilian deaths, injuries
and displacement.

What is evident from those few cases is that the
Council is faced with implementation challenges to
its existing normative framework on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. As Rwanda has stated, the
Security Council's failure to exercise its responsibility
to protect civilians is a stark reminder of its failure to
protect the more than 1 million Tutsi massacred during
the 1994 genocide in Rwanda.

Rwanda is of the View that the prevention of armed
conflict is the surest way to prevent violations and
abuses against civilians. Rwanda is playing its part
through engagement at the international, regional
and subregional levels in finding lasting solutions to
conflicts and their root causes. We are fully engaged
under the Pact on Security, Stability and Development
in the Great Lakes Region. We are also party to the
important instruments that came into force in 2012,
namely, the African Charter on Democracy, Elections
and Governance and the African Union Convention for
the Protection and Assistance of Internally Displaced
Persons in Africa, which are aimed at solving the
root causes of conflict and protecting and assisting
internally displaced persons (IDPs) in Africa.

We believe that the Council should take a more
consistent and comprehensive approach to addressing
the root causes of conflicts, including the establishment
and operation of a comprehensive early-warning system
for conflicts. In situations of armed conflict, while the
primary responsibility of the protection of civilians
rests with the State, we equally remind non-State actors
and the United Nations, including peacekeepers and
other humanitarian actors, to prioritize the protection
of civilians. Rwanda therefore calls upon the parties to
fully observe strict compliance with international law,
to avoid targeting civilian objects, to stop militarizing
camps and to allow access to humanitarian assistance.

As I learned from my experience in the 1994
genocide, Rwandan peacekeepers are contributing to
the civilian protection requirements and are translating
protection of civilian normative frameworks set by the
Security Council to practise in the missions in which
they are deployed. The Rwandan Defence Forces
doctrine in peacekeeping is guided by the protection
of civilian and extends to the determination to uphold
the protection of civilians even in situations that may
result in the loss of the lives of our men and women.
In the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Mission
in Darfur, for example, in some instances, Rwandan
contingents patrolling IDP camps were attacked, which
in some cases resulted in death and injuries. Despite the
losses incurred, the patrols were undeterred. Instead,
the attacks increased the peacekeepers resolve and
determination to protect IDPs, who remained under
threat from armed elements. Together with other
peacekeepers, Rwanda continues to help improve
stability in areas of operation through creating a
safe and secure environment for the distribution of
humanitarian aid to IDPs. Through proactive patrols
and community outreach, they have created confidence
among the population and contributed to the peace
process. In their efforts to reduce attacks on civilians,
Rwandan peacekeepers have introduced new ways
of protecting them that include limiting the need for
civilians, particularly women and girls, to leave their
communities in search of firewood, which increases the
risk of attack in Darfur. Lastly, the Rwandan formed
police unit deployed to the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti is sharing Rwanda's home-grown
initiatives in community policing and community
service, all of which contributes to the protection of
civilians.

With regarad to accountability for Violations and
abuse against civilians in armed conflicts, I wish to
restate the four important peace proposals emphasized
by our Minister for Foreign Affairs in her statement
during the open debate on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict held in February (see S/PV.6917). First,
justice must be timely. Secondly, rendering justice to
Victims should be the only objective of accountability
mechanisms. Political considerations should have no
place. Thirdly, more careful attention should be paid
to the principle of subsidiarity when choosing the most
appropriate venue for judicial proceedings. Fourthly,
the international community should increase the
investment in strengthening national judicial capacities.

In conclusion, let me reiterate that overcoming
the challenges facing the Council with regard to the
protection of civilians requires enhanced cooperation
and better coordination among the Security Council,
other United Nations bodies and agencies, and regional
and subregional organizations involved in peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and humanitarian activities. We urge
parties to armed conflict to exercise restraint in
undertaking disproportionate attacks against civilian
areas and to allow unrestricted humanitarian access,
especially to the most vulnerable. All stakeholders,
including United Nations agencies, peacekeepers and
humanitarian agencies, should protect civilians and
avoid politicizing humanitarian assistance.

Rwanda supports the fight against impunity and
is ready to back Government actions that will lead to
accountability for the perpetrators of Violations and
abuses against civilians populations.

