Mr. Ramdin: On behalf of the Organization of
American States (OAS), I would like to join previous
speakers in expressing our pleasure to be addressing
the Security Council today. We thank the Council for
inviting us to do so. We also congratulate you,
Mr. President, for taking the initiative to organize this
meeting. We believe that it is timely and appropriate,
given the high level of interest and discussion that have
taken place on this topic within the General Assembly,
the world summit, and other forums within the
international community during the past year. We
would also like to express our appreciation for the
leadership, the interest and the commitment of
Secretary-General Annan in this effort.

As both the OAS Secretary General, Jose Miguel
Insulza, and I stated at the sixth high-level meeting
between United Nations and regional organizations,
held last July in New York, the OAS welcomes a much
more structured approach to strengthening
collaboration between United Nations and regional
organizations in the areas of democracy, development
and security, including conflict prevention and
peacebuilding. We are pleased and ready to contribute
in a substantial manner to the recently established
Standing Committee. We believe that a first critical
step in establishing a division of labour - defining the
roles and responsibilities of the regional organizations,
the United Nations and other key actors in the
region-is to adopt a shared agenda within the
framework of the United Nations on issues of early
conflict prevention, security and development.

The OAS Views closer cooperation with other
multilateral organizations as a critical component of its
new action plan for strengthening regional and
democratic governability in the Americas. As is well
known, the OAS has been actively engaged in several
conflict prevention, facilitation, and mediation efforts
over the past years. Currently, the OAS is actively
involved in facilitating a political settlement of crises
in Haiti, Nicaragua, Ecuador, Bolivia and Colombia,
through several mechanisms. OAS engagement is not
limited to immediate resolution of conflicts, but also
provides technical assistance and capacity-building for
the longer term. The OAS uses several options for
engagement: missions of the Secretary General,
delegations of the Permanent Council in Washington,
DC, special envoys, long-term missions - such as
those we have in Haiti and in Colombia - and
technical support, as mentioned earlier.

Aside from what the OAS can offer in the way of
political mediation, shuttle diplomacy and technical
cooperation, the OAS has the advantage of both being
able to convene member States to address issues and
the ability to work with all levels of Government in
forging consensus on important policies, both
nationally and subregionally. That capacity for
dialogue and decision-making by consensus is the
preventive capacity the OAS brings to United Nations
regional cooperation.

We recognized the valuable work of the Security
Council and acknowledge the important leadership role
of the United Nations in the maintenance of peace and
security. However, there is much more that can be done
to strengthen our respective institutions through closer
collaboration, joint analyses, joint implementation of
technical cooperation, focused attention on structural
prevention and improved, streamlined funding for
preventive multilateral actions. Specifically in response
to a few of the questions outlined in the concept paper
circulated by the President of the Security Council, I
would like to highlight a few views that we share and
consider important.
First and foremost, I think it is important to
understand that the OAS strives to work subregionally,
within the Americas, wherever possible. In that
respect, we must acknowledge and work with the
subregional organizations, such as the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM), the South American
Common Market (MERCOSUR), the Central American
Integration System and others, which play a critical
role in the development of regional stability. Those
subregional organizations should strive to work in
tandem with the lead multilateral institutions,
searching for ways to complement the work of the
OAS and the United Nations. As the Secretary-General
mentioned, Haiti is a good example both of effective
OAS-United Nations cooperation and collaboration and
of collaboration among subregional organizations -
such as the Association of Caribbean States and
CARICOM. - in support of Haiti.

We must take into account the many political and
institutional lessons learned in our respective areas of
expertise and share them with other interested actors.
Perhaps the Security Council would consider inviting
regional organizations on an annual basis to present
key findings from their respective peacebuilding and
post-conflict missions. The Standing Committee, now
that it has been established, could play a leading role in
organizing that type of presentation. The Peacebuilding
Commission could allow for representation from every
region through participation of a high-level official
from regional or subregional organizations. We believe
that regional organizations could contribute to the
Peacebuilding Commission by assisting in the
definition of political objectives and priority areas of
peacebuilding in a given country.

We recognize that in particular instances a
regional organization may be better suited to take a
lead in pre-conflict or post-conflict situations. Political
clout, experience in a country and established trust
with political actors may allow a regional organization
to facilitate a better solution. In the cases of Bolivia
and Ecuador in the Western Hemisphere, our role as
the Organization of American States has been critical
in that regard.

Both the United Nations and regional
organizations should, when relevant, place priority on
capacity-building after peacekeeping, peacebuilding or
crisis support operations. Regional organizations and
agencies that continue democratic consolidation efforts
through peacebuilding activities should be identified
early and supported by the United Nations through
mobilized funding and cooperation. In the case of
Haiti, that has worked very well between the United
Nations and the Organization of American States.

The challenge for the new OAS leadership -
both Secretary General Insulza and I were elected just
a couple of months ago - is to transform the
Organization of American States institutionally and
organizationally in such a way that it can deal much
more effectively with the new intra-State challenges in
the Western Hemisphere. The OAS is working to
address those challenges as I speak, striving to develop
a far more proactive role in conflict prevention through
quiet diplomacy, greater cooperation with other
subregional organizations - some of which I
mentioned earlier - the sharing of information and
experiences, improved analysis and review of
normative and legal frameworks. All of those
strategies, in our View, will enhance the capacity and
capability of the OAS in early conflict prevention and
will help to strengthen the multilateral efforts of
regional organizations in the Americas.

Finally, we look forward to working with the
United Nations and with other regional organizations
to strengthen our capacity to effectively address the
many conflicts throughout the world and, in our case,
specifically in the Americas.

