Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): I thank Ambassador
Gary Quinlan for presenting the 90-day report. We
have taken note of the recent report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) on the implementation
in Iran of the safeguards agreement under the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).

Pakistan welcomes the interim agreement between
Iran and the P5+1 with respect to the Iranian nuclear
issue. Pakistan had always maintained that Iran, as
a party to the NPT and a member of the IAEA, was
entitled to certain rights that should be recognized, in
line with the provisions of those instruments. At the
same time, Iran should fulfil its legal obligations under
those instruments. We are glad that the joint action plan
strikes the balance between those rights and obligations.
It represents a practical manifestation of the strategic
use of political will and flexibility in the cause ofpeace
and security. The plan contains the necessary menu of
reciprocal confidence-building measures and marks
the beginning of a diplomatic engagement. Pakistan
hopes that both sides will implement their respective
commitments in good faith.

As an immediate neighbour of Iran, Pakistan
has always underscored the importance of finding a
peaceful solution to the Iranian nuclear issue. We look
forward to a long-term comprehensive solution, which
should augur well for peace and security in the region
and the world at large. The overall positive tone of
the last IAEA report is indicative of the progress on
technical issues between Iran and the Agency. We urge
Iran to stay engaged with the IAEA and extend full
cooperation to it with a view to addressing remaining
issues, including those in line with the joint action plan.

The timing and the context of today's meeting are
very significant. The interim agreement concluded
last month carries important implications for the work
of the Council, the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006) and the Panel of Experts.
The Council has an important responsibility - to
make its contribution to the resolution of the Iranian
nuclear issue. The Council and the 1737 Committee
may re-evaluate at an appropriate time - and we hope
that it will be soon - the objectives and strategy as set
out in the relevant resolutions of the Security Council
vis-a-vis the Iranian nuclear issue. Such an effort
will help clarify the extent and scope of obligations
for Member States with regard to the implementation
of sanctions. In the meantime, the Committee and its
Panel must adhere to high standards of neutrality and
professionalism and align their work with the direction
that may be set by the Council with regard to resolution
of the Iranian nuclear issue.

