Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation welcomes your presence, Sir, here in New
York to preside over this important meeting. My
delegation also thanks the Secretary-General for his
statement and welcomes the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of the United States, the Russian Federation
and the United Kingdom, as well as the Vice Minister
for Foreign Affairs of China and the Deputy Secretary-
General.

Costa Rica welcomes any initiative to promote
peace in the Middle East. However, we are equally
convinced that the proliferation of efforts to that end
does not absolve the Security Council of its
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. While we value the work of the
Quartet, it is also certain that most Members of the
Organization have received little information on its
work. Along with other delegations, in particular that
of South Africa, we have repeatedly asked the Quartet
to inform the Council of its actions with the aim of
complementing efforts, as we have supported more

robust action on the part of the Security Council
instead of the marginal role it has played in recent
years.

A draft resolution has been submitted to us for
adoption at the outcome of this meeting. We shall
support the draft resolution, in spite of the fact that we
would have preferred it to include, in particular, a
reference to the tragic humanitarian situation in Gaza
caused by a response that, in our opinion, has been
disproportionate to the terrorist attacks carried out
against Israeli territory. We would also have preferred
to have held a thorough discussion of the text and
regret that it was not possible. However, we believe
that the Council's action on the Middle East, which we
have urged throughout the year, is highly positive.

My delegation is convinced that there is a close
relationship between the political prospects for peace
and the socio-economic and humanitarian situation on
the ground. The Council cannot ignore that
relationship. The many actions contravening the
Council's resolutions and the Road Map hinder
progress, as do calls for the elimination of the State of
Israel. My delegation considers it absolutely
unacceptable that Members of this Organization should
refer to others by denying their existence as a State and
threatening their right to exist.

Costa Rica is concerned by what we hear almost
every day from such entities of the United Nations
system as the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the Office of
the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, the International Committee of the Red Cross
and the World Bank.

Since April 2008, the number of obstacles
impeding the movement of Palestinians in the West
Bank has grown. The number of illegal settlements has
also increased significantly since the Annapolis
conference. The efforts of Prime Minister Salam
Fayyad and of the Special Envoy of the Quartet to
promote economic prosperity in the Palestinian
territory and to improve the standard of living of the
population will not succeed unless the downward trend
is reversed.
For all of those reasons, Costa Rica would have
preferred a draft resolution that identified the core
issues of the conflict by name. We hope that, at some
point in the future, the Council will analyse and
pronounce itself on the parties' compliance with their
obligations under the Road Map, Security Council
resolutions and international law, in particular
international humanitarian and human rights law.

My delegation supports today's initiative in the
hope that it will provide a new impetus to the peace
process in order to achieve the definitive, specific,
verifiable and sustainable agreements by 2009 that
eluded us in 2008 and which will lead to the peace that
has eluded the Palestinians and Israelis for six decades.

For my delegation, the comments made by the
President of the Council of 5 December represents a
step forward in the Council's actions with regard to the
specific issues of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict that
undermine the credibility of the parties in the peace
process. However, we believe it necessary for the
Council to take further action in the form of a decision,
which is more than an oral statement, to lend new
momentum to the peace process and to address the
hurdles that have prevented the bilateral negotiating
processes from bearing fruit.

Finally, we welcome the two initiatives taken this
month and we foster the hope that they herald a change
in the prevailing practice that will enable the Council
to pronounce itself in a timely manner with respect to
events on the ground, as is the case for the other
situations of which the Council is seized.

