Ms. Ibrahim (spoke in French): I am honoured to
speak to the Security Council today. I come from the
Mbororo community, a nomadic and semi-nomadic
people who live around Lake Chad, where I grew
up. Climate change and desertification have become
everyday issues for us, affecting stability and insecurity
in the Sahel, because their impact is socioeconomic as
well as environmental. Climate change has a direct
effect on the natural resources that our countries'
economies depend on, and that includes our economy.
As we know, more than 70 per cent of the population
of the Sahel is rural, depending directly for a living on
agriculture and herding, which occupy large tracts of
land and sustain millions of people. Even while many
people in rural areas are leaving them to live in cities,
the rural population is growing. In Chad, where I come
from, agriculture constitutes more than 50 per cent of
the country's wealth.

The effects of climate change on agriculture are
numerous. Natural disasters, particularly drought and
a lack of water, have a catastrophic impact on our
agricultural resources. Our soil is impoverished, partly
because periods of drought and flooding come in rapid
succession, which leads to soil erosion and destruction
and the loss of biodiversity. When I was young - of
course, I am still young - we had a number ofresources,
in the form of grasses and animal and vegetable species,
that have now disappeared forever. Climate change piles
poverty on top of poverty every day. That has a direct
impact on security because the depletion of resources
reinforces conflicts among communities. I know what
I am talking about.

With regard to conflicts over water resources, which
have been greatly depleted around Lake Chad - as
other briefers have already mentioned - land has been
appropriated. For the small amount of fertile land that
remains, the law of the most powerful applies. Small-
scale farmers and ranchers do not have access. Access
to sources of water is becoming very difficult because
one must cross fields and fight to survive. Concerning
conflicts between nomadic herders and farmers
resulting from access to land, instead of working
together as they once did, using the herds to fertilize
the fields for their cultivation, everything has changed.
With the shifting of the rainy seasons, the fields are
occupied by the strident conflicts over nothing other
than basic resources. And as we all know in the Sahel,
that is a major problem for our States.

With regard to conflicts tied to migration, of
which we have already spoken, poverty, intensified
by climate change, is driving men and women to leave
rural areas for large cities, sometimes temporarily or
seasonally, during the dry season, to send money back
home. Consequently, they leave millions of women and
children at home, who must fight all alone to find food
and survive. Others leave for longer periods of time and
try to cross the seas in order to reach Europe. For them,
it is not a matter of choice. They are forced to do it.

With regard to conflicts related to extremism - as we
heard from the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Director - in the Lake Chad Basin, which has long

liver under the threat of Boko Haram, we know how
that works. Men have no choice, even though there
are soldiers who are fighting against the members of
that group. But we see their numbers growing every
day, along with the recruitment of young people.
Yet we wonder why it is easy to recruit them when
they are being killed every day. They offer sums of
money - $50, for example - that the potential recruit
has not seen for the entire year. He is offered $500 to
join, and it becomes very easy for him to make up his
mind, because for a man in Africa, and especially in
the Sahel, his dignity is defined by providing for his
family. If he cannot provide for his family's basic needs,
his dignity is left to the highest bidder, while he must
assume that responsibility. He is ready to do anything
amd everything. He has no choice but to sign up. We
all are familiar with those threats, the Security Council
must play a significant role in countering them. We
know already the role that it is playing in attenuating
existing conflicts, but the prevention of those acute
conflicts is very important and urgent.

We also very well know that today climate change
and desertification are playing key roles in the Sahel.
Indeed, we must accelerate the implementation of the
Paris Climate Change Agreement. That, however, is
a specific mechanism that is charged with carrying
it out. We also know that those rural populations are
becoming increasingly vulnerable and need to adapt.
They therefore need the most urgent solutions possible
and must not depend on agreements that will take
years to implement, for it is a matter of survival for
those populations.

As we very well know, women are at forefront of
the impact of all those consequences. And as for the
children who will grow up without an education or
future, their destiny is to follow the roads that have
been paved for them in bad faith. We must avoid that
and come up with the necessary measures and solutions
for those people. In the simplest terms, the question is
not only how to eradicate poverty, but also how to carve
out a better life for them. They all want to be farmers
or herders and continue to survive, but that is no no
easy thing.

Today, the international community must find
solutions to those crises, which are the only means to
offer a future and hope to rural communities. In my
community, the people do not wish to emigrate or change
their way of life, but their environment is changing
despite themselves and they have no control over it.
We must therefore strengthen actions allowing them
to preserve their way of life and culture by supporting
pastoralism and family farming. We welcome the major
projects in urban areas, but the small-scales projects
designed to allow small communities to stay where they
are even better. It is also by providing young people
with prospects for the future in their communities that
we will prevent them from succumbing to the pressures
of terrorist groups or leaving their land for another.

