Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Feltman and Under-
Secretary-General O'Brien for their comprehensive
briefings, as well as the United Kingdom delegation for
requesting this meeting.

The humanitarian situation in the Lake Chad Basin
continues to destabilize the entire West Africa region.
The food security and nutritional situation in the area
is next to disastrous. Extreme poverty, interethnic and
intercommunal tensions, climate change - all these
factors contribute to the sad state ofaffairs. People living
in insecure areas continue to face the deterioration of
their livelihoods, including farming and fishing. In
addition, during the past decade, the rise of violent
extremism complicated an already dire situation in
the region.

In that regard, Ukraine fully supports all
international initiatives aimed at the stabilization
of the region. The regional efforts to address all key
conflict drivers must also be strongly encouraged.
Humanitarian aid has to be delivered wherever it is
needed most, especially for those most vulnerable,
including displaced persons and refugees, in host areas
and areas inaccessible to humanitarian programmes.
Borno state in Nigeria, which hosts more than 1 million
internally displaced persons, is one of the vivid cases in
point here. This endeavour requires substantial funding
from the international donor community. Unfortunately,
as we have just heard, only 28 per cent of the United
Nations humanitarian response plan for the Lake Chad
Basin has been financed so far. We therefore encourage
donors to support United Nations efforts in this respect.

International assistance will not be effective if we do
not provide a proper response to the major threat to the
region, that is, Boko Haram. As was rightly mentioned
by today's briefers, Boko Haram's activities undermine
the international community's and regional efforts to
take forward the recovery of the countries affected.

Confronting the Boko Haram threat in the
countries of the Lake Chad Basin requires the adoption
and subsequent implementation of coherent national
programmes aimed at combating violent extremism.
In that light, we commend the results of the second
Regional Security Summit, held on 14 May in Abuja,
which helped to better evaluate and prepare the regional
response to the threat posed by this terrorist group.

We call on the United Nations Secretariat to
support these regional efforts as much as possible, in
particular through the relevant United Nations Offices
in Africa, including the enhancement of cooperation
with the Multinational Joint Task Force in developing
and strengthening strategic communications among the
intelligence and counter-terrorism authorities of the
States affected.

We are also looking forward to the planned visit to
the Lake Chad Basin States by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee in October this year. In our view, it should
be aimed first and foremost at elaborating the further
steps required for strengthening and promoting
cooperation between the international community and
the region so as to assist it in countering terrorism,
including through the development of a relevant
regional comprehensive strategy.

