Mr. Mayr-Hartig (spoke in French): It is my
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union and
its member States.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2015/157), and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for her briefing. I also wish to
thank my colleague the Permanent Representative of
Haiti for his statement.

The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; and the Republic of Moldova and
Armenia align themselves with this statement.

In spite of the significant efforts made after
the earthquake of 2010 and the undeniable progress
accomplished since then, Haiti continues to face
formidable socioeconomic and development challenges.
The country has committed itself to seeking stability
and building on democratic achievements, which
will be crucial to its future in the short and long
terms. Ongoing serious socioeconomic inequalities
are a genuine threat to the stability and security of
the country. The European Union, which was a loyal
partner of Haiti even before the disaster of 2010 and
has been even more so since, is determined to act in
harmony with the country's other partners to support it
in this very sensitive phase.

The European Union welcomes the continuing
decrease in the number of displaced people living
in camps more than five years after the earthquake.
However, nearly 80,000 people are still dealing with
deplorable living conditions and are more vulnerable
than ever. It is therefore essential that the Government
of Haiti continue its efforts to ensure that they have
acceptable living conditions and that their basic human
rights are respected. Considering those persistent
needs, the European Union and its member States are
firmly committed to continuing their humanitarian
assistance to Haiti. To give one example, this year the
European Union decided to continue its humanitarian
response in Haiti with an €11.6 million programme
designed to respond to the needs of the displaced,
contain the cholera epidemic and provide sustainable
assistance to rural populations suffering from food
insecurity. In addition, we will contribute to improving
natural-disaster preparedness.

It is also important to strengthen people's resilience.
In that regard, the European Union is providing full
support to the Haiti Transitional Appeal for 2015-2016,
recently launched by the Haitian authorities and the
United Nations, a strategy with resilience at its centre.
The European Union has also begun developing a
strategy for resilience in Haiti designed to support the
Government's efforts.

With regard to development aid and cooperation,
the European Union and the Government of Haiti have
signed a planning agreement for the period 2014 to
2020 with a budget of €420 million, since the funds
made available during the previous planning period
have been fully allocated. This attests to the European
Union's continuing commitment to supporting the
Government's development and socioeconomic
recovery strategy for the country. In 2014, the
European Union and the Government of Haiti signed
an agreement on a €120 million project in support
of State reform, designed to increase the State's
budgetary capacity in promoting tax reform, as well as
to improve the management of public finances, support
the implementation of a national policy for primary
education and strengthen governance. That contributes
fundamentally to the healthy functioning of the Haitian
State, and thus to the country's stability.

Beyond that, several areas in need of intervention
that are covered by the European Union's programme
for 2014 to 2020, such as urban planning, education
and support for State administrative reform, can help
to contribute to the United Nations plan for eradicating
cholera. The European Commission is in the process
of ensuring that resilience is integrated into all of its
programmes in order to maintain the links between
humanitarian aid and development. A joint humanitarian
development framework is currently being developed.
In that context, the European Union remains open
to maintaining a dialogue with the relevant United
Nations agencies so as to study specific possibilities for
cooperation.

Haiti cannot afford another major political and
security crisis and must ensure that the progress
it has made cannot be reversed. In that regard, in
coordination with the other members of the core
group, in the past few months the European Union
has kept up its contacts with various institutional
stakeholders in order to encourage dialogue and reach
the necessary commitments to ensure the holding of
presidential, legislative and local elections, which must
be transparent, credible and inclusive. Despite the fact
that the new electoral law could not be enacted by
12 January, and that as a result the Senate and hence
the entire legislature were rendered dysfunctional, an
agreement was reached with part of the opposition on
creating a new Government and establishing a new
provisional Electoral Council. The Electoral Council
has outlined an electoral calendar and we have hopes
that the electoral process will begin soon.

The European Union commends President Martelly
for agreeing to considerable sacrifices in order to
promote a consensus on emerging from the crisis, and
calls on all political actors to commit to a peaceful and
responsible electoral process. The European Union will
give that process substantial support. To that end, in
addition to a €5 million contribution to the electoral
fund managed by the United Nations Development
Programme, we may consider sending an election
observation mission, or at the very least a group of
electoral experts, as for the 2011 elections. Furthermore,
besides the regular high-level political dialogue with the
Haitian Government, the European Union is continuing
discussions and advisory work with the Club of Madrid
aimed at a huge number ofinstitutional and civil-society
stakeholders. The programme's purpose is to go beyond
the study of electoral issues and to tackle more global
topics relating to governance, strengthening the rule of
law and reforming the constitutional framework.

We also note, within the general improvement in
the security situation, a significant increase in protests
motivated by socioeconomic factors and a resort to
violence. In the context ofa very significant and complex
election year, the European Union believes that a more
stable and inclusive political climate that transcends
political divisions and short-term interests is all the
more essential. The contribution of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) therefore
remains crucial to the country's democracy, peace and
stability. In the European Union's view, the presence
of a MINUSTAH military contingent can still make a
major contribution to ensuring peace and stability in
Haiti during the election period, in accordance with
resolution 2180 (2014).

In conclusion, I would like to express the European
Union's appreciation for MINUSTAH's important
contribution, during its 10 years of existence, to
stabilizing security and consolidating democracy and
the rule of law in Haiti. The European Union remains
committed to supporting the efforts of the Haitian
authorities, the United Nations and the international
community in order to ensure a better future for all the
people of Haiti.

