Mr. Konfourou (Mali) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel)
in New York, I would first like to congratulate you,
Sir, on the accession of your country, Egypt, to the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
would also commend the outstanding manner in which
you have been conducting the Council's work. And I
thank you for organizing this Council briefing on the
operationalization process of the G-5 Sahel joint force,
pursuant to resolution 2359 (2017), a force which has
been endorsed by the African Union.

I wish to begin by paying tribute to the victims
of the cowardly and barbaric attack on the Cafe-
Restaurant Aziz-Istanbul in Ouagadougou on 13 August
2017, which left 18 people dead and injured others. I
also wish to pay tribute to the victims of yesterday's
terrorist attacks in Douentza and Timbuktu in Mali,
which unfortunately also killed and injured people
in the ranks of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
and the civilian and military forces of Mali. These
criminal acts underscore the importance and urgency
of operationalizing the G-5 Sahel joint force with the
support of the international community. They also
serve to strengthen the shared determination of our
States to continue to work together to eradicate the
terrorist threat in our shared area.

I would now like to express our gratitude to the
Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio Guterres, for his
unwavering support and for the excellent quality of
the briefing just made to the Council by Assistant
Secretary-General Wane.

Before going further, I would like to convey to the
Council once again the thanks of the President of the
Republic of Mali, His Excellency Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar
Keita, President-in-Office of G-5 Sahel, on behalf
of his counterparts from Burkina Faso, Mauritania,
the Niger and Chad, for the special attention that the
Council continues to pay to the security situation in the
countries of the Sahel, in particular the five countries
dealt with in today's meeting.

Since the adoption of resolution 2359 (2017), on
21 June 2017, our Heads of State have been working
tirelessly and with the support of friendly countries
and partner organizations to operationalize swiftly
and effectively the G-5 Sahel joint force. Considerable
progress has been made in that regard. Following
the appointment of Major General Didier Dacko as
Force Commander, the rehabilitation of the joint
force's headquarters in Sevare, in the Mopti region,
was undertaken and will soon be completed. Its
official inauguration should take place shortly. The
headquarters for the central zone, which consists of
Burkina Faso, the Niger and Mali, located in Niamey,
has already been rehabilitated, and the force support
team is being set up at the staff level, again with the
support of our partners. The first units will be deployed
in October 2017, and all battalions should be in place
by March 2018. The short-term operational priorities
mainly involve cross-border military operations, the
first of which is also scheduled for October 2017.

With regard to the force's budget, while the budget
for initially establishing the force and maintaining
it for a year has been set at €423 million, it is still
being fine-tuned. To date, financial and material
contributions pledged come to a total of €108 million,
of which €50 million will be borne by the G-5 Sahel
countries, €50 million by the European Union, and
€8 million by France, by the end of 2017, as has just
been explained. Furthermore, Mali and the Niger
are making contributions to develop command-post
infrastructure, namely, the initial command post in
Bamako, the central command post in Sevare and
the central zone command post based in Niamey, the
Niger. I welcome the commitment of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, and that of its member States
and its institutions, including the Islamic Development
Bank, which have expressed their willingness to
contribute to the financing of the joint force.

I would also like to assure the Council that the
resources allocated to the force will be managed with
full transparency and accountability. We are open to all
kinds of support from our partners to help us to better
manage the joint force's resources. The G-5 Sahel
is already working with the European Union along
those lines.

The progress that I have just explained to the
Council in no way hides the challenges facing the
operationalization process and the sustainable, viable
and effective functioning of the joint force. Among
those challenges, we would highlight the mobilization
of the full funding of the force. This is therefore an
opportunity for me to renew our appeal to all friendly
countries and international partner organizations to
help us secure the budget so as to ensure the rapid
and effective deployment of the force. In that regard,
I welcome the prospect of holding an international
planning conference in December of next year in
Brussels, pursuant to resolution 2359 (2017).

I also welcome the establishment of the alliance for
the Sahel, the first high-level meeting of which is to
be held in Washington, DC, in October. The alliance
for the Sahel aims to help development actors to find
innovative mechanisms to enhance the effectiveness of
actions carried out with their partners throughout the
Sahel. It will address the most important aspect, one
that will give hope to our youth, our women and our
children - development.
We also have immediate needs in the areas of
battalion equipment, support for the tactical mobility
of the deployed units and the reinforcement of their
logistical and protection capacities in the areas of
operation. We also require the setting up of a suitable
communication network to link the units operating in
one area and the joint force headquarters to the three
command posts I have mentioned. Finally, we need
assistance in the areas of emergency medical evacuation
and improvised explosive devices.

On the question of coordinating the work of the
joint force with that of the other forces already present
in our space, I stress that the deployment of the joint
force will not adversely affect the action of the national
forces of the member States nor the presence of partner
forces - MINUSMA and the French Operation
Barkhane - or that of any other friendly organization
operating in the G-5 Sahel space. Instead, thejoint force
provides a framework for coordinating and enhancing
joint efforts to increase its impact.

The cooperation and liaison mechanism of the
joint force, Operation Barkhane and MINUSMA will
be based on a mechanism already in place among
MINUSMA, the Malian armed forces and Operation
Barkhane. That mechanism, which will be enlarged
to include the joint force, is a coordinating body for
mutual operational and logistical support, intelligence
sharing and the coordination of operations.

Accordingly, it is expected that the G-5 Sahel joint
force headquarters in Sevare, Mopti, will include liaison
officers from bilateral and multilateral partners as
needed. Other relevant additional arrangements relating
to the proper coordination of cooperation among the
joint force, MINUSMA and the French forces, within
their respective mandates, remain a possibility.

In the context of cooperation with other States, the
strategic concept of operations of the G-5 Sahel joint
force reaffirms the force's adherence to the African
Union Peace and Security Architecture. It also takes
into account the previous decisions of the Nouakchott
process, the African Union Strategy for the Sahel
Region, and the Joint Military Staff Committee of the
Sahel Region, which includes Algeria, Mali, Mauritania
and the Niger.

Finally, I can assure the Council that the operations
of the joint force will be respectful of gender, human
rights and international humanitarian law. A civilian
component will be deployed within the force to ensure
strict compliance with those standards. I renew the
commitment of the G-5 Sahel Heads of State to the
effective operationalization and effective functioning
of the joint force. In that regard, we greatly appreciate
the equally decisive support of our bilateral and
multilateral partners and we sincerely hope that this
critical support, both material and logistical, will
enable the joint force to be fully operational.

The meeting rose at 11.45 am.
