Mr. Al-Bader (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank Mr. John Holmes, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, for his presence here today and for
his comprehensive briefing to the Council this
morning.

We agree with the Under-Secretary-General that
the situation in both Uganda and Somalia - the
subject of our debate today - is deteriorating and
needs to be urgently addressed. We note that the
humanitarian situation in the two regions under
discussion is among the worst in the world and that
their peoples have been suffering greatly for more than
a decade.

We believe that the root causes of the situation
are twofold: the deteriorating economic situation, and
the continuing strife and political upheaval. The two
aspects are interlinked to some extent, and we therefore
believe that the Security Council must take the
humanitarian situation into consideration when
analysing issues relating to those two regions.

In addition to this morning's briefing to the
Security Council, we received reports earlier this
month from the Secretary-General on the human rights
situation in Somalia and in Uganda, specifically

relating to the human rights situation of children in
both countries. There are many indications that there
has been a regrettable deterioration in the human rights
and humanitarian situation of children in those two
countries.

We welcome the agreement between the
Government of Uganda and the Lord's Resistance
Army concerning humanitarian assistance and helping
internally displaced persons to return to their homes.
We join other members of the Security Council in
underlining the importance of cooperation among
United Nations bodies in dealing with the humanitarian
situation of civilians, particularly the most vulnerable
among them. We also call on all parties to the conflicts
in those regions to commit themselves to protecting
civilians and to not taking any measures that would
endanger civilians or prevent humanitarian assistance
from reaching them. We also call for an end to all acts
that fall beyond the scope of international legitimacy.
We look forward to receiving further briefings in the
future on serious humanitarian situations pertaining to
conflict situations that are on the agenda of the
Security Council.

