The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Germany, Italy, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sahovic'
(Yugoslavia) took a seat the Council table;
Mr. Grau (Germany), Mr. Vento (Italy) and
Mr. Kerim O'ormer Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia) took the seats reserved for them at
the side ofthe Council Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council reaffirms its previous
relevant resolutions and statements regarding
Kosovo, Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, in
particular the statements of its President of
7 March 2001 (S/PRST/2001/7) and 9 November
2001 (S/PRST/200l/34).

"The Security Council deplores the adoption
by the Assembly of Kosovo, in its session of 23
May 2002, of a 'resolution on the protection of
the territorial integrity of Kosovo'. It concurs
with the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General that such resolutions and decisions by the
Assembly on matters which do not fall within its
field of competence are null and void.
the

"The Security Council calls on Kosovo's
elected leaders to focus their attention on the
urgent matters for which they have responsibility,
in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999) of 10
June 1999 and the Constitutional Framework.
Concrete progress in those areas is of paramount
importance to improve the life of the people.

"The Security Council reiterates its full
support for the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. It urges Kosovo's leaders to
work in close cooperation with the United
Nations Interim Administration in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and the international security presence
(KFOR) with a View to promote a better future
for Kosovo and stability in the region. All steps
undermining those efforts are detrimental to this
common objective."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2002/l6.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.45 pm.

