Mr. Elaraby (Egypt)(interpretation from Arabic):
Today, for the second time in two weeks, the Security
Council has convened to vote on a draft resolution calling
for an end to activities begun by Israel to build a new
settlement in the Jabal Abu Ghneim area to the south of
East Jerusalem in particular, and for an end to Israeli
settlement activities in the occupied territories in general.
The issue at hand today is the destructive consequences
of Israel's settlement policy, particularly in Jerusalem and
the surrounding areas, for the future of peace in the
Middle East.

Thus, the draft resolution before the Security Council
today, prepared by all the Arab States and sponsored by
Egypt and Qatar, as this month's Chairman of the Arab
Group, calls on Israel to cease using settlements as an
instrument for imposing a fait accompli that is rejected in
both form and substance and that prejudges issues that
were to be negotiated in the final phase. All parties were
requested not to prejudice these issues in any way, and
they agreed not to do so until the final status talks begin
and final agreement is reached.

 

The message addressed to Israel through the draft
resolution is that the decision to begin settlement-building
activities in Jabal Abu Ghneim is an erroneous one that
must be overturned because it runs counter to the norms of
international law and to Israel's obligations as an occupying
Power, in accordance with the Fourth Geneva Convention
of 1949, as well as to relevant United Nations resolutions.
The Arab Group wanted the draft resolution before the
Council to be brief and merely to call on Israel immediately
to cease settlement activities. The draft resolution takes up
no other issue.

The Arab Group hopes that the Security Council will
take the necessary measures as soon as possible because
Israel's settlement policies have a grave effect on the
situation in the region. Our desire now is the same one we
started out with: to give all members of the Security
Council the fullest opportunity, through intensive
consultations held over two days, to reach a formula that
would enable the Council to send a unanimous message to
Israel. The Egyptian delegation would like to point out that
those consultations began with some measure of hope and
were conducted in good faith by all parties concerned. The
Egyptian delegation was and is prepared to continue
consultations towards achieving the desired positive result.

Egypt has warned, through the statements of President
Mubarak and Foreign Minister Amre Moussa, of the
dangerous turn taken in the Middle East peace process
because of the Israeli Government's provocative policies
and because that Government is contemptuous of the
international community's response to its settlement
activities. Those policies have raised the level of tension
and violence in the region. They have fed the forces of
confrontation and extremism, while weakening the forces of
dialogue and moderation in support of the peace process.

We were saddened to hear the news of the regrettable
terrorist attack in Israel this morning. Egypt wishes to state
clearly that it condemns terrorism in all its forms. This is
a categorical condemnation. At the same time, however,
Israel must realize that its settlement policies, which stir up
international and Arab feeling, always lead to destructive
results for all the peoples of the Middle East.

The way to a durable, just and comprehensive peace
in the Middle East must be based on full respect for the
norms of international law and on a full commitment to
agreements made so far. The only way to achieve peace in
the Middle East is through Israel's respect for its
commitments to relevant international conventions, to
Security Council resolutions and to the bilateral agreements
it has signed, particularly the Interim Agreement signed
in Washington, DC, in September 1995, prohibiting both
Israel and Palestine from taking any measure in the West
Bank and Gaza that might prejudge or prejudice the
results of the final status negotiations. To say that the
Security Council's fulfilment of its mandate and duties
under the Charter would have negative repercussions for
peace in the Middle East is unjustified. In fact, the
opposite is true. The silence of the Security Council and
its failure to take up its duties would send an erroneous
message, a dangerous message likely to encourage the
current Israeli Government to continue to violate
international law. It would also encourage it to disdain
and not respect its contractual obligations. This could
abort the peace process, which is truly at a very sensitive
and dangerous juncture.

Israel's situation does not set it apart from any other
State wishing to respect international law. It cannot
simply impose a fait accompli that satisfies its interests
and disdains the interests of the Arab countries and the
international community. Therefore, the Security Council
must intervene. It must fulfil its mandate to defend
international peace and security. It must clearly demand
that Israel cease settlement activities in Jabal Abu
Ghneim, and all other settlement activities, because they
have a destructive effect on the future of peace and
stability in the Middle East.

The question on everyone's mind today, which the
voting will answer, is whether the Security Council will
be able to play its role.

