Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank Special Representative James Swan and the
various briefers invited to today's meeting for their
valuable contributions. We join others in expressing
our condolences at the passing of Almaas Elman, a
prominent human rights defender in Somalia, which we
hope will be duly investigated so as to shed light on the
circumstances of this tragic death.
Peru welcomes the recent developments in Somalia
in the run-up to the forthcoming elections, including
the renewed commitments made by the Federal
Government of Somalia at the Somalia Partnership
Forum in October, which clearly set out the next steps
in that direction. We underscore in particular the
commitments made to hold elections in the year 2020
or 2021, to adopt the electoral law in December and to
complete the constitutional review by the middle of
next year. Implementing this agenda and other political
reforms, and their development under the principles
of inclusion and transparency, are critical factors in
ensuring that the electoral process is a success and in
building a Federated State with broad-based support.

However, we regret the absence of the leaders of
Jubaland and Puntland from the Somalia Partnership
Forum just mentioned. We are also concerned by the
incidents that occurred during the regional elections
in Galmudug. We call on the Federal Government of
Somalia and its federated member states to resolve the
outstanding issues through dialogue and cooperation
with a View to contributing to the necessary process
of reconciliation.
We underscore the importance of promoting the
active participation of women and young people in the
country's political life. Incorporating their contributions
into decision-making and reconciliation processes is
the only way to establish an inclusive democratic State.
We hope that the reforms approved by the Government
lead to the fulfilment of the 30 per cent quota for the
participation of women established in 2016.

At the same time, we regret that, despite the
increasing offensive capacity of the Somali forces,
Al-Shabaab continues its senseless destruction,
especially against civilian targets. We are worried by
the large-scale attacks using improvised explosive
devices and we underscore the importance need for
international partners to continue providing support
to the Somali Government in order to tackle this
terrorist threat.

Similarly, we note with concern the grave
humanitarian situation affecting millions of Somalis.
The growing number of internally displaced persons as
a result of the droughts and armed conflict represents
an immense challenge. We call on the international
community to address this situation, which has been
exacerbated by the adverse climatic conditions of
recent months.

In conclusion, I commend the work carried out
by the African Union Mission in Somalia, the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia and the United
Nations Support Office in Somalia in supporting the
efforts of the authorities and the people of Somalia. We
also stress the important need for the African Union,
the United Nations and other international partners to
continue providing sustained support to joint efforts
aimed at bringing about the conditions needed to build
a safe and stable Federal Somali State.

