Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): Let
me congratulate you belatedly, on the last day of your
presidency, Sir, on your outstanding stewardship of the
Security Council during the month of August, a month
beset by many difficult and challenging issues on the
Council's agenda.

The United Republic of Tanzania welcomes and
supports resolution 1706 (2006) for three main reasons.
First, Tanzania has always believed and maintained
that the political, security and humanitarian crisis in
the Darfur region of the Sudan is the concern and
responsibility not only of the Sudan and of Africa but
also of the international community as a whole,
because of its profound ramifications with respect to
international peace and security in the region of Africa.
The Security Council should thus be actively seized of
the search for a peaceful solution. At this stage of the
crisis, that means involvement in the implementation
and facilitation of both the N'Djamena Ceasefire
Agreement of April 2004 and the Darfur Peace
Agreement of May 2006.

Secondly, we believe that the African Union has
taken more than its fair share of the obligation and
responsibility in the search for a peaceful political
solution, through the Abuja peace process and through
the deployment of the African Union Mission in the
Sudan (AMIS) to oversee the implementation of both
the N'Djamena and Abuja Agreements. The African
Union has discharged its obligations superbly in terms
of the ownership and the handling of the crisis. But, by
its own admission, it is overwhelmed and overstretched
by the magnitude and complexity of the task of
restoring peace to Darfur. Without the African Union
abdicating its responsibility, it is right and proper that
the rest of the international community, through the
United Nations, should assume joint responsibility to
help the Sudan resolve this long-running crisis, which
is getting worse. Today's resolution heeds that appeal
by Africa, through the African Union.

Thirdly, as an African member of the Security
Council, we want to send a message of assurance and
of solidarity with the brother State of the Sudan. We
assure the Sudan that the sole purpose of today's
resolution is to facilitate a peaceful resolution of the
Darfur crisis and to strengthen the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Sudan. The solution can
come only with full cooperation and partnership with
the Sudan. The resolution defines, in a very transparent
manner, the mandate and objectives of the United
Nations involvement in Darfur. The Council is open to
continuous consultation with the Sudan on the
implementation of the resolution. Through this
resolution, we encourage and invite the Sudan to be
part of the tripartite partnership with the African Union
and the United Nations, of which the Sudan is a
leading member in this honest search for an enduring
peace in Darfur - which the people of Darfur deserve.

