Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We associate ourselves
with your words of condolences, Mr. President, and we
would like to reiterate our deep dismay over the killing
of Ambassador Andrey Karlov. We would also like to
express all of our solidarity and support to the Russian
Federation, its people, its Mission and Government. I
would like to draw attention the danger of instigating
campaigns of hatred against countries, as was the case
with the campaign promoted for political reasons against
the Russian Federation. It is a warning to understand
that everything that is said and done in relation to a
situation so fraught with extremist thinking, such as
the situation in Syria, has unfortunate consequences.
Therefore, we express our solidarity and will take
part in the Security Council initiative to condemn that
horrendous assassination.

I thank you, Mr. President, for giving us the floor
at the end of our term as a Council members and of our
responsibilities in the sanctions committees.

On behalf of our team, I would like to begin
my briefing by thanking Mr. Kelvin Ong, Chief of
the Security Council Subsidiary Organs Branch;
Ms. Snjezana Gillingham, Secretary of the Security
Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992)
and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea; and
Ms. Sana Khan, Secretary of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591
(2005) concerning the Sudan. We also thank their
respective teams for their support over these two
years and for their extraordinary work in facilitating
our work.

During the period 1991 to 1998, between 500,000
and 2 million people in Iraq were affected by the
sanctions regime imposed under the guardianship of
a few permanent members of the Security Council.
Fortunately, much has changed after the devastating
consequences of that sanctions regime. In many
respects, the Security Council has learned its lesson, and
today the impact of coercive measures on populations is
undoubtedly lesser. However, the Council still does not
seem to have grasped the notion that the sole objective
of sanctions regimes is to contribute to the political
solution of a conflict and achieve lasting peace, not to
punish a country, whether for revenge or for the specific
geostrategic reasons of one of its permanent members.

Our experience as Chair of two sanctions
committees has shown us that, despite repeated calls
and questions about the real nature of this instrument,
sanctions are still seen as an end in themselves and not
a tool to solve political problems and achieve lasting
peace. In many cases, the notion prevails that for some
permanent members, sanctions are a mere extension of
their foreign policy and national interests.

In the final report I presented as Chair of the
Sanctions Committee on Somalia and Eritrea, it was
clear that the Committee's Monitoring Group had
concluded, for the third consecutive year, that there
was no indication that Eritrea was collaborating
with or supporting Al-Shabaab. On the other hand, it
acknowledged, as set out in the Group's final report
(S/2016/920), that the cooperation of the State of
Qatar in mediating between Djibouti and Eritrea with
a View to both resolving the border issue - which
is in a signed agreement between the parties - and
obtaining the release of a number of prisoners of war.
We welcome these advances, which were recognized as
a positive element in the operation of the Committee. I
understand that Qatar will continue its effective, direct
and steady mediation until the resolution of the matter
between the two countries.

In any normal situation, those elements would
have been enough - perhaps not to lift the sanctions
immediately, as that would require more time, but to at
least establish a road map for their future lifting. Yet
even that could not be achieved. Why? Because the
establishment of a road map was obviously inconvenient
to the national interests of certain permanent members
of the Security Council. Little does it seem to matter in
the decisions of the Security Council what Eritrea does,
the positive steps it takes or what is contained in the
report of the Monitoring Group. I ask, therefore, what
is the point of all the meetings and deliberations held by
the Committee, if the decision ultimately depends on
one or two permanent members? That is an issue that
needs to be reviewed.

Regarding the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan ,
the Chair of that subsidiary body sought to maintain
smooth communication with the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Mission in Darfur throughout the two
years of our mandate. Special Representative and
joint Chief Mediator Martin lhoeghian Uhomoibhi
kept the Committee up to date on the situation on the
ground, particularly as it concerned the mandate of that
subsidiary body. including with regard to the evolution
of the political process in Darfur.

On the other hand, it is worth emphasizing that
a fundamental aspect for our delegation has been the
improvement of the working methods and transparency
of that body. Therefore, at the end of our Sanctions
Committee meetings we chose either to issue a press
release or to distribute a note verbale to all States
Members of the Organization with a brief summary
of the meeting. That practice is in accordance with
the provisions of the Note by the President S/2016/170,
issued on 22 February 2016 under our country's
presidency of the Security Council.

Despite these advances, much remains to be done
to strengthen the role of the 1591 Sanctions Committee,
a subsidiary body which, due to its own dynamics,
is often handcuffed and ineffective owing to its
politicization, inter alia, by abuse in the use of the rule
of consensus. Such abuses during the past 24 months
led to the Committee being prevented from submitting
its quarterly report in an open format, in this very
Chamber, to the entire membership of the Organization.
Similarly, the Committee was unfortunately affected
by relative inactivity for approximately six months due
to an inability to reach consensus on the membership of
the Panel of Experts. The same occurred in the delay in
the issuance of the final report of the Panel of Experts,
available since December 2015 but only published in
September this year.

During this period, the Committee did not have the
opportunity to receive information on the situation on
the ground. While the Committee should not always
agree with the Panel's evaluations, the information it
provides is certainly very useful for its deliberations.
In that connection, we emphasize that the Panel of
Experts is an independent entity in its work and must
operate strictly under the principles of impartiality
and objectivity. In short, the information provided
by the Panel of Experts to the Committee should be
purely technical so that the latter may do the political
evaluation and the respective decision-making as it
considers necessary.

We once again express our solidarity with our
African brothers, who are the targets of more than
70 per cent of the sanctions regimes of the Security
Council. That is disconcerting and has no reason to be,
especially when the sponsors and drafters of resolutions
are precisely those who were the ones to colonize these
countries. This is a subject matter for reflection and
open debate. Those of us from Latin America and the
Caribbean will continue to work to the best of our
ability to promote political solutions, motivated and
grounded in the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, to all of these terrible conflicts
that affect our sister countries.

It is curious, however, that those who stand as strong
human rights defenders use sanctions regimes to punish
the peoples and Governments who are the objects of
such coercive measures. These sanctions regimes
infringe on elementary human rights by depriving
their citizens of basic health and food needs. Likewise,
those in favour of sanctions apply restrictive policies on
migration to prevent citizens who are victims of armed
conflict and extreme poverty from crossing borders in
search ofa better life.

How do we explain the fact that nations of the
developed world that are members of the Council have
refused to welcome more than 1,500 Syrian refugees?
Meanwhile, Lebanon, a country of 4.5 million people,
is sheltering more than 1.7 million Syrian refugees,
equivalent to 28 per cent ofthe country's total population.
That does not include the 300,000 Palestinian refugees
who have been living in Lebanon for decades. We
wonder why those countries are reluctant to respond
to the legitimate causes of self-determination of the
Palestinian and Saharawi peoples. Why does their
suffering not deserve the same attention? What about
the massacre of the Yemeni people and the invasion of
Iraq and Libya and their devastating consequences?

The deaths ofmillions ofinnocent people, including
hundreds of thousands of children and women; the
unprecedented expansion of terrorism; violence and
organized crime in the Middle East and North Africa;
and one of the greatest waves of forced migration in
the history of mankind are being ignored. Where are
the sanctions regimes imposed on the States - on
all States, without double standards - that commit
flagrant violations of international law? In light of our
consideration of the role of sanctions committees, and
bearing in mind the similar assessments of them by
other chairs of subsidiary bodies, it would be advisable
for the Council to consider giving the chairs greater
freedom in the preparation and issuance of reports to
prevent their possible blocking through the abusive
application of the consensus rule.

We also propose the establishment of the post
of ombudsman to examine with greater justice and
due process the inclusion on or exclusion from the
sanctions list of persons or entities that are linked to
a conflict situation. Furthermore, we recommend
that the Security Council end its dangerous trend of
controlling the management of natural resources of
sanctioned countries. That also applies to aspects
related to finances, budgets and all other decisions of
countries concerned. We also suggest that the Council
continuously consult with countries of the region,
neighbours of the States under a sanctions regime, as
they can play a positive role in achieving a solution,
bearing in mind that at the same time, those countries
are also affected by the adverse consequences resulting
from sanctions. The experience in these committees has
highlighted the need to address those matters in public
meetings ofthe Security Council, with the participation
of the States concerned.

Of equal relevance is the establishment of specified
limits for the duration of the work of the committee,
considering that we cannot place a country under a
sanctions regime indefinitely, without taking into
account the cooperation of that State and the opinions
of the groups of experts. In that regard, we should
avoid the biased use of the assessments of the groups
of experts by some permanent members that sometimes
accept or reject, as convenient, the points of View
and guidelines of the panels of experts that assist the
committees. What is required in sanctions cases is
constant review to help the country to achieve an end
to the conflict, and not to supervise the country or to
administer it under a permanent sanctions regime.

From the very outset, Venezuela took on the
intensive work in the framework of the Council's agenda
with a sense of utmost responsibility and a constructive
attitude. That led us to take positions on matters of
vital importance for today's world, matters that require
the international community's urgent attention with a
view to peacefully resolving the armed conflicts and
the situations of poverty and fear of millions of people
around the world. We were, and are, always ready to
condemn the structural causes of conflicts, such as
poverty and social exclusion, to help achieve real and
sustainable solutions to such problems.

Respect for the sovereignty and self-determination
of peoples as a principle, denouncing the real causes
of the crisis of refugees and migrants, the growing
expansion of terrorism and its promoters, induced
wars, preventive diplomacy and peacebuilding in
post-conflict areas, the role of regional organizations,
disarmament, the inalienable right of the Palestinian
people to their free self-determination, the Saharawi
cause, the war against the Syrian people: among many
current affairs of crucial importance, these were the
pillars of our actions during the last two years, both
in public positions and in negotiations. Throughout,
we embraced the principles of the Bolivarian foreign
policy that was promoted by President Chavez, such as
solidarity, integration and the vision of the countries
of the South. I am proud to say today that the work has
been completed, also thanks to the tireless efforts and
professionalism of a committed working team that,
with the support of those present, was able to complete
the ambitious task.

We speak out on important global problems that
many others, with significant power and influence,
ignore. At the same time, we contribute in a modest
and dignified fashion from our position, reaffirming
the importance of promoting a more just and inclusive
world, a more democratic United Nations and a
Security Council that can, many times, truly fulfil its
role in peacefully resolving conflicts that compromise
international peace and security.

The United Nations is entering a crucial stage next
year, both for the importance of making real progress in
the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, and the very serious humanitarian
and security crises that are unfolding. At the same
time, with Antonio Guterres assuming the position of
Secretary-General - and we wish him the best of luck
in the upcoming years - we hope that there will be an
effective improvement in the working methods of this
Organization, in particular of the Security Council, for
the sake of greater transparency and democratization. In
that connection, a thorough review of the performance
of the sanctions committees, as soon as possible, is
needed.

Very briefly, I would like to mention a few pending
tasks of the Security Council. Complying with the
responsibility of this organ to maintain international
peace and security means that we must draw attention
to those unresolved cases that require decisive and
urgent action by the Council.

The Palestinian issue and the colonial situation of
Western Sahara must no longer be silenced conflicts in
the Council, products of the policy of double standards.
It is necessary for the Council to speak out once and for
all through a resolution on ending the Israeli occupation
of Palestinian territory and its related policies with
a View to this body complying with its mandate of
effectively contribute to the achievement of the two-
State solution, where Palestine and Israel can live side

by side in peace, within the pre-1967 internationally
safe and recognized borders.

In the case of Western Sahara, the last colony
in Africa, there must be an end to the practice that
prevents the consideration of that important matter in
a public meeting, with a view to promoting a broad
discussion - which happens with other issues - that
would push the Council to move towards a referendum
on self-determination, as established by resolution 690
(1991), with the support of the United Nations and the
African Union, to enable the Saharawi people to freely
choose their future.

On another line of thought, we call on the Council
to avoid the harmful trend of dealing with items that fall
outside of its purview and correspond to other bodies,
in particular to the General Assembly.

The Security Council must stay vigilant, given the
very serious conflicts that are impacting the regions
of North Africa and the Middle East. It must promot
political and peaceful solutions to the armed conflicts
in Syria, Yemen, Iraq and Libya. Such conflicts stem
from interventism and military aggression that provoke
destabilization through the proliferation of terrorist
groups that are used to overthrow Governments. All of
that is to the detriment of the human rights of the people
of those countries - the men, women, young people
and children who are suffering the consequences of
those terrible conflicts and awaiting proper action from
this Council, in keeping with its mandate, and who
want to be taken into account.

To conclude, we would like to thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his tireless efforts in
promoting the objectives of the Organization in the
sphere of international peace and security and the
development of human rights. We would also like to
thank the representatives of the members of the Security
Council and their respective teams for the working
relationship that we have built over the last two years.
Despite our diverging, and sometimes even conflicting,
points of View, respect prevailed for the people and the
countries they represent.

Lastly, we extend our acknowledgement to all the
Member States that accompanied us without fail and
in the spirit of solidarity, the Secretariat staff and the
support staff of the Security Council, with whom we
developed a very fluid and constructive cooperation.
We thank the Organization and the membership from
here forward, keeping open the doors to our country
and to our Permanent Mission and giving our enduring
support as we enter into a new agenda of commitments
in favour of social struggles, the fight against poverty
and the true democratization of the Organization.

