Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his
briefing.

At the moment, the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is generally calm. China commends the
progress made by Bosnia and Herzegovina in
safeguarding peace, achieving national reconciliation,
rebuilding the economy and establishing the rule of
law. We welcome the agreements concluded by the
parties through dialogue and consultation, the
formation of the Council of Ministers and the signing
of an agreement on the ownership of defence and State

property.

China respects the independence, sovereignty,
national unity and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We also respect the choice of its people
on the future of the country. We support the
7

harmonious coexistence of its many ethnicities in
seeking common development. We hope that the
country's various ethnic groups will proceed from a
concern for the well-being of the nation and its long-
term interests. We also hope that they will resolve their
differences through dialogue and enhanced mutual
political trust, promote national reconciliation,
implement the comprehensive Dayton Peace
Agreement and work towards accelerated progress in
all areas.

China welcomes the efforts made by High
Representative Inzko to promote the political process
in the country. We hope that, in accordance with his
mandate, he will continue to play a positive and
constructive role in implementing the Dayton Peace
Agreement. We have noted the decision to reduce the
size of the European Union Force (EUFOR). We hope
EUFOR will expand its support for the Armed Forces
of Bosnia Herzegovina so that the country can soon
assume comprehensive responsibility for safeguarding
its sovereignty, security and stability.

Maintaining peace and stability in the country
and promoting its economic and social growth are
common interests of all parties concerned. At the same
time, the question of Bosnia Herzegovina is complex
and sensitive. It does not only involve the country
itself, but also the peace and stability of the entire
Balkan region. When dealing with this issue, the
international community should exercise prudence and
listen attentively to the views and concerns of all
countries. China will work with the international
community and continue to provide support and
assistance, within our capacity, to help the country
achieve lasting peace, stability and development.

