Mr. Schori (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The Central and
Eastern European countries associated with the
European Union ~ Bulgaria, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia and Slovenia - and the associated countries
Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, as well as the European
Free Trade Association countries members of the
European Economic Area, Iceland and Liechtenstein,
align themselves with this statement.

The EU would like to thank the presidency of
the Security Council for the report on the Security
Council mission on the implementation of resolution
1244 (1999). We also thank the Secretary-General
for his report on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), dated 7
June, and Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for his
briefing here today.

The European Union reiterates its strong support
for the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Hans Haekkerup, in his efforts to ensure
the full implementation of Security Council resolution
1244 (1999). We welcome the promulgation by Hans
Haekkerup of the Constitutional Framework for
Provisional Self-Government in Kosovo and the
announcement of Kosovo-wide elections to be held on
17 November of this year. The Constitutional
Framework is a landmark step in the implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999) and constitutes a decisive
move towards the establishment of meaningful and
democratic self-government in Kosovo. We urge all
individuals and communities in Kosovo to participate
actively and constructively in the election process
and in the future provisional institutions of self-
government. The EU welcomes the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia Government's support for the registration
of Kosovo Serbs, and calls upon Belgrade to continue
to cooperate with UNMIK in order to ensure their
participation in the elections.

The EU supports the mission's findings that there
is a need for intensified efforts on issues such as
increased security for all communities, in particular for
the Kosovo Serbs; freedom of movement; the fate of
missing persons; and the return of refugees and
displaced persons. We welcome the efforts made by
UNMIK and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) in this regard
and agree with the Security Council mission's
assessment that there is a need for continued and
enhanced dialogue between UNMIK and Belgrade in
order to ensure the full implementation of resolution
1244 (1999).

Both the report of Security Council mission and
the report of the Secretary-General point to the fact that
the level of violence and crime in Kosovo, in particular
that directed against ethnic minorities, remains
unacceptably high. Concerted efforts to enhance the
overall security situation in Kosovo are of vital
importance to the stability of the province and the
entire region. We support recent measures taken by
UNMIK and KFOR to counter illegal border crossings
and the illegal possession of arms, as well as the
adoption of a regulation to help combat terrorism in
Kosovo. The EU welcomes the timely establishment of
a new UNMIK pillar intended to provide greater focus
and coordination in the field of police, security and
justice. We are convinced that the new pillar represents
an important instrument in combating violence and
crime in Kosovo, and look forward to a comprehensive
UNMIK strategy for the justice sector. The EU also
supports efforts to develop a strategy to defuse tensions
and resolve the complex situation in northern Kosovo,
in particular in Mitrovica.

The EU welcomes the unilateral demobilization
by ethnic Albanian armed groups in south-east Serbia
and the peaceful completion of the return of Yugoslav
security forces to the ground safety zone, and in this
context expresses its appreciation for the constructive
efforts of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
Government. The European Union has worked closely
with other international organizations, in particular the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), to bring
the parties together and reach a peaceful solution to the
crisis. The EU encourages the Belgrade authorities and
ethnic Albanian representatives to make rapid progress
on the implementation of necessary confidence-
building measures, including the establishment of a
multi-ethnic police force, the return of all displaced
persons and the integration of the ethnic Albanian
population into local political, economic and social
structures. The European Union Monitoring Mission
will retain its presence in the area in order to contribute
to this process.

The EU remains deeply concerned about the
serious security situation in the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia. At its recent summit in
Gothenburg, the European Council reaffirmed its
strong attachment to the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and the need for a political solution to the
crisis. It is important that KFOR maintain a robust
border control and take a firm stance against ethnic
Albanian extremists operating from Kosovo. The EU
calls on ethnic Albanian leaders in Kosovo and
political leaders in Albania to use their influence to
isolate extremists and prevent the spread of violence,
which constitutes a threat to the stability of the whole
region.

The European Union fully supports the
intensified dialogue on inter-ethnic relations launched
by President Trajkovski, and stands ready to engage
further in facilitation of the political dialogue. To this
end, the EU has decided to appoint a representative,
resident in Skopje, who will act under the authority of
the High Representative, Mr. Javier Solana, who is now
in Skopje himself.

The EU is firmly committed to continuing its
efforts, in close cooperation with all main partners and
organizations, to promote stability, democratic
development and prosperity in the region.

