Mr. Kolby (Norway): First of all, Sir, I should
like to commend you and your presidency for
organizing this workshop. I think it is a very interesting
format, and I think it has been a very good discussion
so far. I thank those speakers that have made special
contributions.

We believe that significant progress has been
made towards a comprehensive and durable peace in
Sierra Leone, and I should like to join those who have
pointed to the integrated approach, careful
consideration of the situation on the ground, careful
planning, stamina and long-term commitment as
explanations for this success.

The United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) is the main guarantor of security in Sierra
Leone, and, learning from past lessons, we must avoid
a premature withdrawal. The downsizing of UNAMSIL
must be tied to a corresponding capacity increase in the
Leonean military police and justice system.

As has been mentioned, stability in Sierra Leone
is fundamental to improving the humanitarian situation
and to protecting refugees and internally displaced
persons. A regional preventive strategy must take into
account the serious forced-displacement situation.

Baroness Amos returned to the Chair.

The return of refugees and internally displaced
persons is a heavy burden on West African countries.
Humanitarian agencies need support in their
resettlement and reintegration activities.
Norway is a strong supporter of a holistic
approach to peace-building, with broad participation by
all parties involved, including civil society, States and
the international community. In West Africa, we see a
constructive engagement of the United Nations and the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), as well as other regional initiatives such
as the Mano River Union Rabat process. This political
dialogue must continue, and the United Nations Office
for West Africa should take a leading role in
coordinating various ongoing initiatives.

A main concern today is the danger of the
conflict in Liberia spilling over into neighbouring
countries. Sierra Leone must be supported in order to
be capable of defending its own borders, and the
sanctions on Liberia must be as effective as possible in
order to prevent President Taylor from continuing his
destabilizing activities and to minimize the negative
humanitarian impact.

Liberia's problems are complex, involving
political, economic and military aspects. The security
situation is precarious, and humanitarian organizations
have difficulties operating. This must be taken
seriously by the international community.

In conclusion, I should like to express our
appreciation for the efforts made by the United
Nations, ECOWAS, the Governments in the Mano
River region, the humanitarian non-governmental
organizations, and countries contributing troops as well
as financial means.

