Mr. Fathalla (spoke in Arabic): Allow me to
welcome the Foreign Minister of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela and to congratulate her on
Venezuela's assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of February. I would
also like to commend the President for the holding of
this important debate on the issue of respect for the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations in the maintenance of international peace and
security. Unfortunately, its convening coincides with
an absence of peace and stability in the Middle East
due to the conflicts that have erupted, which have led
to further destruction, terrorism, killing and suffering.

The creation of the United Nations was an
attempt to introduce the idea of world governance
by establishing a global forum with the authority to
take important decisions that guarantee respect for
all peoples and nations and the principles of stability,
security and peace, as stipulated in the Charter. The
Foreign Secretary of the United Kingdom at the time
stated on 22 November 1945 that he was

"prepared to sit with anyone, party or State, to
establish a Constitution, such as the Constitutions
of great countries, with the aim of establishing a
world council that serves peace and ends war".

The Security Council and this Organization are
the sole forum to put an end to war and destructive
conflicts and are entrusted with the maintenance of
international peace and security. Achieving peace based
on constructive dialogue and peaceful negotiations and
the principle of respect for the sovereignty of States and
non-interference in their internal affairs have always
been the main purpose for which the Organization
was established. It was founded shortly after the of the
League of Arab States with both organizations united
in their ultimate goal, namely, peace. Peace can be
achieved only through dialogue, cooperation, equality
and stability, without conflicts and disagreement. We
need that peace more than ever in the Middle East, it
being the region where conflicts have festered and led
to untold suffering, death and destruction.

For 70 years since the United Nations was established
and its Charter was adopted, thie Organization has
needed to undertake further work to strengthen the
purposes and principles of the Charter. That requires
political will. Membership in this world Organization
makes it incumbent upon its members to be committed
to its Charter and its purposes and principles. Its main
body in charge of the maintenance of international peace
and security, namely the Security Council, should take
the lead, particularly the Permanent Members of the
Council, and should set their selfish interests aside and
work together with a view to achieving the common
purpose.
In that regard, I hope what the Washington Post
has published today will not become reality. If further
fighting happens near Aleppo, it carries the danger of
becoming a world war. We believe that the international
system that we have all agreed to after the Second World
War should prevent such possibilities - 70 years since
international efforts have not been able to achieve the
desired peace in the Middle East.

Instead of settling problems that have lasted for
decades, those problems have been exacerbated. To
date, the Security Council has been unable to find
solutions to those problems and conflicts. That, in
and of itself, increases the dangers to international
peace and security, particularly with the emergence
of so-called non-State actors. The United Nations
has been attempting to find a successful method for
dealing with failed States, but we are afraid that the
further development of non-State actors may result in
the existence of more such States and increase the risk
of the political and legal failure of the international
community.

The Security Council is the only guarantor of
international peace and security in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, as it is the only international organ capable of
implementing its resolutions and addressing challenges
and dangers to international peace and security. The
time has come to reconsider the Council's policies
with regard to dealing with world conflicts and helping
peoples in conflict areas to overcome their differences
and face the challenges that threaten the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of States, in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter. Undoubtedly,
any review of those policies would require a review of
the working methods of the Security Council, including
the right of veto.

The implementation of the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and the maintenance
of international peace and security require solidarity
on the part of all international bodies that work in
combating terrorist organizations, with a view to
confronting their extreme ideologies, containing them
and stopping them, instead of watching them spread to
North Africa and potentially to Europe. It has become
necessary to implement Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations, in particular paragraph 1, Article
53:

"The Security Council shall, where appropriate,
utilize such regional arrangements or agencies for
enforcement action under its authority".
If the Security Council has been successful in
that regard in cooperation with the African Union, we
believe that it should also begin to consider doing the
same with the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
and the League of Arab States, particularly with
regard to establishing joint forces with the League
of Arab States. As a regional Arab organization, the
League of Arab States reiterates its respect for the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and commits to continuing its efforts with a
view to maintaining international peace and security
and promoting the protection of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States members of the League by
protecting them from extreme terrorist organizations.
In accordance with article 6 of the organizational
document of the Arab Peace and Security Council,
we intend to establish an Arab peacekeeping force
and continue our efforts on the ground aimed at the
implementation of Arab League Summit decision 628
of 2015.

In conclusion, the League of Arab States joins
the United Nations and other important regional
organizations in working for the maintenance of
international peace and security and expresses the hope
that the Security Council, the primary organ charged
with maintaining international peace and security,
will be able to put an end to conflicts, instead ofjust
managing them, in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations and with a view to realizing the
aspirations of peoples and preserving the credibility of
the Council.

