Mr. Cunningham (United States of America):
Madam President, I wish to thank you for convening
this meeting today, and especially for your continued
leadership on this issue. I also want to thank the
Secretary-General; his Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, Olara Otunnu; and the
Director of the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF), Carol Bellamy, for their statements this
morning. They were illuminating and help us, I think,
put this issue in perspective. It is important that the
United Nations, the Security Council and our
Governments as Member States keep the issue of
children and armed conflict in focus, and I agree with
Ambassador Greenstock that, for this Council, we also
need to look at it as an issue of security and of direct
relevance to our work and for the future of our work.

Mr. Otunnu and Ms. Bellamy's statements show
that progress is being made and also that Member
States are moving forward to help. Five additional
nations have ratified the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict, the
instrument that works most directly to address the
problem before us today. With the tenth ratification
filed by New Zealand on 12 November, the Optional
Protocol will enter into force in 90 days. The United
States is a signatory to the Optional Protocol, and
President Bush has submitted it to the Senate for
ratification. The Secretary-General's report also tells us
that there are additional gains on a number of fronts,
but that, unfortunately, there is still very much to be
done. This issue will be with us for some time.

We meet today at a time when a new conflict
dominates our thoughts and our work. The attacks on
the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, and the
subsequent action in Afghanistan, had not been
envisioned when the Security Council considered this
issue last year, or even when the Secretary-General
released, on 7 September, the report we are discussing
today. The war against terrorism has aspects that have
not been traditionally considered in the debate on
children and armed conflict, such as the thousands of
children who lost their parents on 11 September.

However, some aspects of the victimization of
children in this conflict are still frighteningly familiar.
As First Lady Laura Bush stated in last Saturday's
weekly presidential radio address, the plight of women
and children in Afghanistan is a matter of deliberate
human cruelty, carried out by those who seek to
intimidate and control. The State Department report
released in conjunction with that statement, entitled
"The Taliban's War on Women", tells the story of an
Afghan mother with a feverish child badly in need of a
doctor. Unfortunately, she had no male family member
to accompany her in public, a Taliban rule. Striving to
save her child, she went into the streets anyway, where
she was shot by a Taliban guard. Luckily, bystanders
were able to intercede to save her and the child.

Mercifully, the Taliban have been pushed out of
most parts of Afghanistan, and the international
community can now help bring relief to the people of
Afghanistan, and especially the women and children.
My Government has the honour of hosting today in
Washington, together with Japan, a working session to
advance that effort and to prepare for a better future.

As we have heard this morning, in addition to
children as victims, the problem of child soldiers
continues. Children under the age of 15 are still being
conscripted or recruited and are being used directly in
armed conflict. As the Secretary-General identified
again this year, children become at the same time both
victims and perpetrators. Our collective action is
making this more difficult; we applaud that and are
committed to a continuing effort to deal with the
problem.

The situation in Sierra Leone, the land of the
young man who spoke to us so eloquently this
morning, remains daunting. We commend the work that
the United Nations Children's Fund and others are
doing to address the physical, medical and
psychological damage done to the children of Sierra
Leone during the brutal civil war. These children are
maimed, torn from their families, forced to engage in
acts of brutality - helping them is an enormous
challenge, and one that we must meet.

We must continue to work together to protect
children affected by armed conflict. I have cited but
two examples, but there are, all too regrettably, many
more. We all have our roles to play, and the United
States will continue to do its part to support these
children and to make the world a safer place for them.

