Nana Effah-Apenteng (Ghana): First of all,
Mr. President, let me thank you for having convened
this meeting. My delegation also wishes to thank
Mr. Tuliameni Kalomoh, Assistant Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, for his briefing on developments
in the Middle East.

The grave situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory continues to threaten international peace and
security, and the Security Council cannot but address it
with serious concern. The Council should be guided by
its own decisions on the issue, which, over the years,
have consistently affirmed the rights and interests of
both Palestinians and Israelis. The Palestinians have a
right to their own independent State. It must be a viable
one that guarantees the freedom of movement of its
citizens, one that has real prospects for sustainable
development. Israelis equally have a right to their own
State within well-defined and secure boundaries.

The means to achieve these ends is through a
negotiated settlement between the two parties. Neither
the Palestinians nor the Israelis must be allowed to
impose unilateral solutions on the other party. Suicide
bombings, indiscriminate shelling of civilians, wanton
destruction of property, barricades, targeted
assassinations and all the other acts of violence that
have been used by both sides have not moved them any
closer to peace.

There has been no shortage of initiatives to bring
about a peaceful negotiated settlement to the question
of Palestine. The record is clear that neither the
Palestinians nor the Israelis have faithfully adhered to
their obligations and commitments.

As much as the election of Hamas may seem to
be an aberration, the reality is that the resounding
victory was achieved through free and fair elections, on
which the Palestinian people deserve to be
congratulated. It may be more productive for the
international community to listen more carefully to the
Palestinians and do more to address their rights and
legitimate concerns, even as Hamas is pressed to
abandon violence and extremism and enter into
negotiations.

We are concerned about reports of basic food
shortages increasingly making life unbearable for
ordinary Palestinians. The irony is that some of those
suffering may not even have voted for Hamas.
Therefore, while we support the efforts of the
international community to press Hamas to reconsider
its position, care must be taken not to cause the
economic and financial strangulation of the
Palestinians. My delegation wishes to stress that the
provision of funds for the humanitarian needs of the
Palestinian people, emergency assistance and basic
services, as well as for other purposes, must continue if
economic, institutional and political collapse is to be
avoided. In that regard, it is regrettable that Israel has
withheld taxes and customs duties levied on goods
destined for the occupied Palestinian territory. That
action is tantamount to financially strangling the
Palestinian National Authority and must be reversed
through the timely disbursement of all such monies.

It is imperative that the incoming Hamas
Administration earn the goodwill of all Governments
and peoples eager for peace in the Middle East. We
therefore urge Hamas to seriously rethink its position
and to commit its Government to respect all existing
agreements, including the ceasefire between the two
parties. The newly elected Israeli authorities and the
Hamas Government must be encouraged to re-examine
their positions in order to advance the peace process.

This is the time for the international community,
including the Quartet, to reflect seriously on the
prevailing situation and to decide what needs to be
done to achieve the long-sought two-State solution. In
that endeavour, we must be united around the
principles of international law and our shared
objectives, as any polarization on the part of the
Council would not help the cause of peace in the
Middle East.

