Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): It is most
appropriate, and we in the Security Council are
particularly honoured, that this meeting is being
presided over by you, Madam Minister, which is a way
of according to our deliberations the high importance
that they deserve.

I should like to thank the Chilean presidency for
convening this meeting, which translates the Security
Council's concern and renewed awareness about one of
today's most critical humanitarian issues, which the
international community must redouble its efforts to
eradicate completely from contemporary life. The
abuse of children and their exploitation to wage war
constitute the coarsest violation of human rights as
well as an unspeakable act of violence against the
universal conscience in a world that should aspire to
full respect for the integrity and development of human
life.

We welcome the Secretary-General's report on
children and armed conflict (S/2003/1053), and we
express our gratitude to Mr. Olara Otunnu and
Ms. Carol Bellamy for their briefings this morning. We
fully appreciate their important contributions on behalf
of children caught in the middle of armed conflicts -
contributions aimed at reducing their suffering and
eradicating this most condemnable phenomenon.

Thanks to the efforts of the Secretary-General, his
Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict and relevant United Nations bodies, an
international consensus has been reached to end the
involvement of children in armed conflicts and to
recognize children's rights in any conflict situation.
Such is the basic assumption embodied in the
Secretary-General's report on the issue we are
considering today, leading to some very important
conclusions.

The first is the commitment of the Secretary-
General and of the entire United Nations system to
improve and change the situation of children in armed
conflict. The second is the existence of a framework
comprising standards, norms, best practices and
policies, establishing benchmarks to be achieved by the
actors in armed conflicts and by the international
community in order to push forward the fundamental
objectives of protecting children and putting an end to
such abhorrent violations of children's human rights.
The third is the naming and shaming of those involved
in such practices. It is our expectation that that can be a
factor of deterrence or, otherwise, the first phase of a
process conducive to the imposition of targeted
measures against those who persist in challenging the
international community on such fundamental
humanitarian issues.

The Secretary-General's report refers in a number
of instances to the advances achieved in the protection
of children affected by armed conflict. The inclusion of
this issue on the Security Council's agenda is an
important contribution to such an endeavour. The
Council's adoption of four resolutions and its
undertaking of relevant initiatives such as the
integration of child protection into the mandates and
reports of peacekeeping missions and the training of
personnel to that end, as well as the creation of child
protection advisers and their deployment in
peacekeeping missions, are clear indications of the
progress we have accomplished.

Important international instruments are in force,
and concrete commitments on the protection of
children have been obtained from parties to conflicts.
In that regard, we fully agree with the strategy, outlined
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
of strengthening the foundation of an era of
implementation by facing the challenge of ensuring the
implementation of these standards on the ground.

The section of the report on the follow-up to
Security Council resolution 1460 (2003) portrays a
reality that is distressing indeed. Particular violations
and abuses against children, such as killing, maiming,
sexual and gender-based violence and the abduction of
children, continue unabated, with all parties mentioned
in the previous report engaged in the recruitment and
abuse of children - a situation that we condemn in the
strongest terms and that must be reversed through
determination and coordination of efforts on the part of
the stakeholders.

My delegation fully supports the blueprint for
action outlined in the Secretary-General's report to
counter the vicious exploitation of children in
situations of armed conflict. Disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programmes
must become an integral part of peacekeeping
operations and must include specific provisions for the
protection of children. The deployment of child
protection advisers in all peacekeeping missions must
become normal practice, ensuring that the situation of
all children affected by conflict is properly addressed.
The awareness of the parties to conflict must be further
intensified and refined with a view to obtaining
concrete commitments concerning the well-being of
children and ending child soldiering. The proposal put
forward by the Special Representative to ensure more
effective monitoring and reporting within the United
Nations system must become a central element in the
fight against the abuse of children in conflict
situations. We are convinced that those proposals, if
effectively brought into practice, will give a decisive
boost to the universal struggle against this
condemnable state of affairs.

In that connection, we consider it important to
strengthen the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
and the role it has played in facilitating and
coordinating the establishment of a monitoring and
reporting mechanism to achieve our objectives. Angola
fully commends the Office's mandate and recognizes
the importance of supporting it from the United
Nations regular budget, as decided in General
Assembly resolution 58/245, adopted by the Assembly
last month.

After 25 years of armed conflict, my country,
Angola, is now in the process of reintegrating into
normal life many thousands of children affected by that
conflict. Several steps have been taken and policies
have been put in place to guarantee the safety and
social reintegration of those children. The first is the
establishment of a youth court to receive complaints
regarding crimes committed against minors, in
particular those affected by the conflict. The second is
a family localization and recruitment programme to
help reunite children separated from their families
during the conflict.

The third is a national programme of free birth
certification, in collaboration with United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF).

In 2003, more than 600,000 children affected by
the conflict have been successfully integrated into the
national educational system. A number of programmes
for the reintegration of children in their communities
and for their mental and physical recovery have also
been established, as well as a disarmament and mine-
clearance programme aimed at protecting and
safeguarding the well-being of children.

A lot remains to be done in solving this most
painful heritage of war. But the Angolan Government,
civil society and the Angolan nation at large are
determined, with the assistance of the international
community, including the international civil servants
and non-governmental organizations, to definitively
turn this dark page of our recent history and ensure for
the Angolan youth a life of dignity and a future with
renewed hope.

To conclude, I would like to refer to the last
recommendation contained in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2003/1053), which addresses what we believe
to be the core question of the issue we are discussing
today. In fact, we fully subscribe to the
recommendation that greater and more concerted
efforts be deployed to end ongoing conflicts, which are
destroying the lives of millions of children, and to
address the key factors that facilitate the occurrence
and recurrence of conflict. This is not only possible, it
is imperative.

