Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): I thank you,
Sir, for convening today's debate on the situation in
Timor-Leste. I would like to extend a warm welcome
to His Excellency Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, President of
Timor-Leste, to the Security Council and thank him for
his statement. I would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Timor-
Leste, Ms. Ameerah Haq, for her comprehensive
briefing.

The Secretary-General's latest report (S/2012/43)
has provided us with an opportunity to reflect on the
latest developments as the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) prepares to draw
down by the end of this year. It is a matter of great
satisfaction that the overall situation in Timor-Leste
remains calm and stable and that the country is firmly
on the path to long-term peace, stability and
development. We are indeed encouraged by President
Horta's assessment of the progress achieved so far.

This year could be an important milestone for the
consolidation of democratic transition in Timor-Leste.
As the country marks the tenth anniversary of the
restoration of its independence, presidential and
parliamentary elections are scheduled later this year.
The continued and active engagement of all political
parties in the democratic processes and the
forthcoming elections are an encouraging indicator of
Timor-Leste's abiding commitment to democracy. We
are happy to note that there has been steady progress
towards organizing those elections and that an enabling
legislative framework has already been put in place.
We are appreciative of the technical and logistical
support extended by the United Nations and the
international community towards holding the elections.

We compliment the Policia Nacional de Timor-
Leste (PNTL) on its efforts towards institutional
development and capacity-building. The PNTL has
successfully assumed the responsibility for the
conduct, command and control of all police operations
in the country. The forthcoming elections will be the
final litmus test of its preparedness to maintain law and
order in the country. As the transition progresses, it is
important that UNMIT remain steadfast in its support
to the PNTL in accordance with the wishes of the
Government.

Moving ahead, it is critical that there be
necessary legislative and operational frameworks in
place for a clear delineation of authority between the
military and the police so that they can effectively
discharge their responsibilities under the overall
command and control of civilian Government. We
support the efforts of the Government to seek enhanced
regional engagement and to address the development
challenges confronting the country. We have noted with
satisfaction that overall economic growth, including
proceeds from the oil and gas sector, remains robust.
The Government's continued focus on infrastructure
and capital development would certainly be helpful in
ushering rapid socio-economic transition in the
country.

As UNMIT moves towards a drawdown by the
end of 2012 and the Government assumes full
responsibility for various processes, the United Nations
system and agencies present in the field must work in a
coherent manner. All critical aspects related to the
transition, including the downsizing of UNMIT's
police component following the elections, the
implementation of the Joint Transition Plan and the
contours of the future United Nations engagement,
must be decided in close consultation with the
Government. It is important that the transition be
guided and owned by the Timorese Government. We
look forward to the Secretary-General's report after the
elections.
India attaches great importance to its relations
with Timor-Leste, and we have sought to contribute to

the country's development by providing expertise and
training in areas of our competence and where we see
complementarities in their application. India has
extended its support to the Government of Timor-
Leste, including through assistance for the purchase of
equipment and materials related to socio-economic
development and in the human resource development
sector. We are also partnering with the Government of
Timor-Leste under the India-Brazil-South Africa
framework.

The progress achieved so far gives us confidence
that we are moving in the right direction and that
UNMIT is well on path to becoming a success story.
We appreciate the efforts of UNMIT, the international
community and bilateral partners towards peace,
stability and development in the country. We support
the Secretary-General's recommendation for the
extension of UNMIT's mandate until the end
December 2012 at the current authorized levels.

Before I conclude, I would like to express our
deep appreciation for the leadership of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Ameerah
Haq, and the dedication and hard work of her team in
supporting the Government and people of Timor-Leste.

