Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the Deputy Secretary-General,
Jan Eliasson, and the Assistant Secretary-General for
Human Rights, Andrew Gilmour, for their briefings.

Uruguay does not recognize limitations as to where
human rights should be discussed. The protection
of human rights is one of the pillars of the United
Nations and a cross-cutting issue within the entire
system. Clearly, there is a close link between human
rights violations and the rise of conflict and how
those conflicts turn into threats to international peace
and security.

Uruguay, as a country that defends, promotes and
protects human rights and fundamental freedoms,
would like to express its dismay at the human rights
situation in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
especially with regard to the violations of the rights
to life, the freedom of expression, privacy, access to
information, the freedom of peaceful assembly and
association and the freedom ofmovement - and the list
goes on. The human rights situation in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea is of particular importance
in the current context of heightened tensions at the
regional level, which not only endanger stability on the
Korean peninsula, but also threaten international peace
and security. Uruguay is aware that the situation is not
unique to the Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
as there are many other countries where Governments
constantly violate the human rights of their people; but
those countries are not necessarily on the agenda of the
Council nor are there General Assembly resolutions
regarding the abuses in those countries.

We acknowledge that there have been the faintest
positive signs that the Government of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea has showed itself to be
receptive to certain activities carried out by specialized
agencies in the promotion, protection and monitoring
of human rights, such as the cooperation of the North
Korean Government with the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights.

This year, the Third Committee considered and
commented on the report of the Special Rapporteur
on the human rights situation in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea (A/7l/402). In so doing,
the international community sent a clear message of
condemnation of the situation. Uruguay sees no other
option other than that of the path of dialogue, negotiation
and political commitment. Once more, we insist on the
resumption of the Six-Party Talks, the forum that, in
our view, is most conducive to finding a solution to the
problems on the Korean peninsula.

