Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank the Italian
presidency for organizing today's briefing, as well as
for championing the protection of cultural heritage in
conflict situations. We also thank all the briefers for
their respective presentations. I would also like to use
this opportunity to welcome Ms. Audrey Azoulay and
congratulate her on her recent election as the Director-
General of UNESCO.

We welcome the first report of the Secretary-
General (S/2017/ 969) on the implementation of resolution
2347 (2017) , which shows that cultural heritage on
UNESCO's List of World Heritage in Danger in Iraq,
Libya, Syria and Yemen continues to be damaged,
looted, destroyed and illegally excavated owing to
armed conflicts. The looting and smuggling of cultural
artefacts and ongoing exploitation of cultural sites by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in Syria and
Iraq, as well as by Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula
in Yemen, are also of great concern. Trafficking in
cultural heritage continues to generate income for
terrorist groups, such as ISIL, to fund their activities.
It is in that context that we note with appreciation
the positive developments that have occurred before
and since the adoption of Security Council resolution
2347 (2017), involving institutional capacity-building,
legislative accountability and enforcement measures
geared towards further strengthening the protection
of cultural heritage. We also welcome the work
undertaken by UNESCO, the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, INTERPOL and the World Customs
Organization to that end.
All parties to an armed conflict have the obligation
not to direct hostilities at cultural property, not to
use cultural properties for military purposes and to
avoid incidental damage to such property unless it is
located in the immediate proximity of military targets
or dictated by military imperative. Ensuring such
special protection of cultural heritage in armed conflict
requires a comprehensive approach that encompasses
a broad set of measures aimed at strengthening the
protective framework for cultural heritage and ensuring
accountability for properties.

We recognize that the primary responsibility for
protecting cultural heritage from damage, destruction
and looting lies with States themselves. They are also
required to take all measures necessary within the
framework of their criminal legislation to prosecute
and punish individuals, groups or entities responsible
for the destruction, looting, damage or trafficking of
cultural heritage. However, that requires enhanced
cooperation among Member States, as the report of
the Secretary-General indicates. Strengthening that
cooperation, including in the context of Security
Council resolution 2347 (2017), is important, and such
efforts could be complemented by measures at the
international and regional levels and may encompass
legislative enforcement, judicial cooperation and
temporary protection, among other things.

As affirmed in resolution 2347 (2017), United
Nations peacekeeping operations, when mandated,
could also play a critical role in assisting relevant
authorities, at their request, in protecting cultural
heritage from destruction, illicit excavation, looting
and smuggling in the context of armed conflicts. In that
regard, we take note with appreciation of the support
that UNESCO has provided to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali and the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon.

In our view, in addition to mandating peacekeeping
missions to assist States in protecting cultural heritage
in armed conflict, the Security Council could make
a significant contribution to protecting cultural
heritage and preventing its trafficking, theft, pillage or
misappropriation by armed groups and terrorists. In that
regard, I would like to underscore the significant role
that the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL
(Da'esh), Al-Qaida, and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities continues to play to that end
in providing the Committee with relevant information
regarding the illicit trade of cultural property for a
possible listing by the Committee, in accordance with
Council resolution 2347 (2017).

I would like to conclude my remarks by underscoring
the importance of continued implementation and
follow-up of the measures identified under resolution
2347 (2017) and relevant international legal frameworks
to further strengthen the protection of cultural heritage
in the context of armed conflict.

