Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): We would like first
to express our appreciation to you, Sir, for participating
and presiding over this meeting today. We also
welcome the presence of the Secretary-General at this
meeting.

We welcome this opportunity to once again
deliberate the role of regional and subregional
organizations in the maintenance of international peace
and security. We commend Indonesia for presenting us
with another opportunity to further discuss this issue,
which is becoming increasingly central to our
collective efforts to maintain international peace and
security.

Over the past few years, the role of regional
organizations in the maintenance of peace and security
has become increasingly prominent, representing, in
our view, a fuller articulation of the provisions of the

Charter. Experience has shown that cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
can enhance the maintenance of international peace
and security. However, that active role of regional
organizations should not be perceived as absolving the
United Nations, in particular the Security Council, of
its Charter-mandated responsibilities for the
maintenance of international peace and security. In that
regard, we reiterate our belief that we should
coordinate our collective security efforts through the
United Nations.

Regional organizations bring advantages to the
maintenance of international peace and security,
including through their proximity and an informed
understanding of specific conflict situations. Those
organizations have greater flexibility to intervene,
especially during the initial stages of conflict, and can
also be involved in mediation efforts when conflicts
arise.

The African Union has intervened in some
situations in which the United Nations has been unable
to intervene, as well as in situations in which rapid
interventions by the United Nations have been
necessary but not possible. In some cases, the United
Nations processes take a long time to finalize at a time
when security situations on the ground are
deteriorating. In such situations, regional organizations
can mitigate those shortcomings on the part of the
United Nations through rapid response and
intervention.

The African Union has developed mechanisms to
seek durable peace and sustainable development on the
African continent. The African Peace and Security
Architecture, launched in 2002, includes mechanisms
such as the Peace and Security Council, a Continental
Early Warning System, a Panel of the Wise, an African
Stand-by Force and a Post-Conflict Reconstruction and
Development Framework. Those mechanisms articulate
a wide range of underpinning norms and values, all
aimed at engaging in conflict prevention, resolution
and post-conflict reconstruction. It should be noted that
the protocol that established the African Peace and
Security Council also specifically stipulates that

"in the fulfilment of its mandate in the promotion
and maintenance of peace, security and stability
in Africa, the Peace and Security Council shall
cooperate and work closely with the United
Nations Security Council".
7

At the subregional level, the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) continues to play a
critical role in ensuring subregional stability. In that
context, its Organ on Politics, Defence and Security
has undertaken mediation efforts in quelling potential
conflicts. SADC has also recently launched the SADC
Brigade consisting of military, police and civilian
components from all SADC member States, which will
form part of the African Union Stand-by Force for
rapid deployment should the need arise.

The scope for regional peace operations is limited
by the lack of funds and logistical capabilities.
Fundamentally, the lack of predictable, sustainable
sources of funding often hamper well-conceived and
well-timed peacekeeping initiatives, with disastrous
implications for the communities affected by conflict.
It is for this reason that the African Union has
requested the United Nations to explore the possibility
of funding, even through assessed contributions,
peacekeeping operations that have been deployed with
the consent of the United Nations. It is imperative that,
as we further define the relationship between the
United Nations and regional organizations, we be bold
and ambitious in further exploring viable approaches to
the question of cost-burden sharing. After all, peace
and security in Africa are an integral part of global
peace and security. Both the causes and consequences
of conflict and instability in Africa have a significant
linkage with global developments and relations in the
international arena.

The recent adoption of resolution 1769 (2007) by
the Security Council, deploying the African Union-
United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), gives practical expression to the
partnership between the African Union and the United
Nations, which we hope will go a long way in
providing a strong basis for strengthened cooperation
between the two organizations. UNAMID represents
one of the innovative models of cooperation whereby
the African Union and the United Nations can
collaborate politically, logistically and financially to
resolve one of the intractable conflicts of our time.

My delegation looks forward to the report of the
Secretary-General, as requested by the Security
Council in document S/PRST/2007/7, which we hope
will include clear proposals on enhancing the
relationship with regional organizations, including
exploring ways on cost-burden sharing for maintaining
international peace and security. Without such clear

proposals, the report will not succeed in further
advancing the debate beyond the scope of mere
rhetoric. What is required are practical steps and
concrete proposals on the role of regional and
subregional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security.

In conclusion, we reaffirm our belief that closer
cooperation with regional organizations strengthens the
implementation of Security Council decisions by
widening the collaborative effort of all interested
parties in achieving a desired outcome. It is for that
reason that we are pleased to be discussing ways and
means of enhancing the role of regions in support of
the Security Council. Our discussions here will serve
as a useful resource on which we could build as we try
to find solutions.

Lastly, we support the issuance of the presidential
statement prepared by the delegation of Indonesia.

