Mr. Wisnumurti (Indonesia): Mr. President, allow me
first of all to express my delegation's congratulations to
you on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for this month. I am convinced that your leadership and
diplomatic skill will ensure that the Council's work this
month is productive.

I wish also to express my delegation's deep
appreciation to the previous President, Mr. Legwaila, the
Permanent Representative of Botswana, for the excellent
manner in which he led the work of the Council last month.

My delegation is gratified that the situation in
Afghanistan is now being discussed in this formal meeting
of the Security Council. It has become all the more urgent
to do so given the backdrop of a rapidly deteriorating
situation in the internecine civil strife, which has already
taken a heavy toll in human lives and has wrought material
devastation. This meeting also offers an opportunity for the
non-members of the Council to speak on an issue which
has for so long defied rational solution.

It is with deepening concern that Indonesia has
witnessed the continuing armed hostilities in Afghanistan,
in which hundreds of thousands of people have been
killed, maimed, disabled or displaced. Factionalism and
ethnic divides threaten to fragment the country
permanently. Further compounding the situation is the
coincidence of acute humanitarian conditions with a
virtual deadlock in the endeavours to seek a political
solution to end this tragic crisis. Hence the gravity of the
situation, not only for the people of Afghanistan but also
in terms of its ramifications for the region and beyond,
cannot be overemphasized.

My delegation is fully aware of the important
initiatives taken by this Council and the Secretary-General
to deal in a comprehensive manner with the complex
dimensions of this conflict. In this context, we particularly
welcome the renewed efforts made by the Secretary-
General, including the dispatch of Ambassador Mahmoud
Mestiri as Head of the Special Mission to the region and
his proposal for the establishment of a forum or
mechanism representing the various warring factions to
which power would be transferred. Such a modality
would also constitute a critical component in resolving
other contentious issues, such as the establishment of an
interim government, security and the demilitarization of
Kabul. These were envisioned as the essential first steps
towards the restoration of normalcy throughout
Afghanistan.

It is, however, regrettable that the leaders of the
various factions have failed to set aside their differences
in the broader interests of their people and to demonstrate
political will and a genuine desire for peace.
Consequently, the risk of a renewed major confrontation
among the contending forces, with its attendant
destructive consequences for the civilian population,
remains a distinct possibility. The situation is further
aggravated by external interference in the internal affairs
of Afghanistan, which has immeasurably complicated
efforts to restore peace and stability.

The presidential statement of last February fully
reflected the genuine concern of the Security Council and
called upon the parties concerned to terminate hostilities
and to lift the blockade of Kabul, so as to allow the
delivery of humanitarian aid and other desperately needed
supplies to the beleaguered population. My delegation has
also associated itself with the Council's support for the

 

efforts of the United Nations Special Mission to
Afghanistan, which offers the only hope for ending the
bloodshed through the establishment of a broadly based
transitional government acceptable to the Afghan people.

Along with the timely and balanced recommendations
of the Council and the Secretary-General to promote a
negotiated settlement in Afghanistan, my delegation wishes
to underscore the proposals that were advanced at the
Twenty-third Conference of Islamic Foreign Ministers, held
in Conakry last December. In particular, we fully agree that
the time has come for the launching of a credible
intra-Afghan dialogue to restore peace and stability and to
revive the political, economic, social and institutional
infrastructure of Afghan society.

To achieve the goal of lasting peace and tranquillity,
we call upon the parties concerned to extend their full and
unstinting cooperation to all personnel engaged in
humanitarian aid, in full conformity with the precepts of
international humanitarian law. We appeal to all States to
refrain from engaging in activities that would hamstring the
ongoing endeavours for a peaceful solution, especially in
preventing the flow of weapons to the parties in conflict.
Furthermore, in the light of the close proximity of
Afghanistan to a number of countries, my delegation would
encourage regional endeavours in assisting and augmenting
the peace process.

While these endeavours have in the past met with
setbacks, the Council should none the less be steadfast in
its determination to overcome the fratricidal aspects of the
conflict, which alone would facilitate progress towards
peace in that beleaguered country. However, the cornerstone
of the edifice for peace must necessarily rest on the
development of an intra-Afghan mechanism. At the same
time, we must not lose sight of the fact that humanitarian
conditions are inextricably linked to peace and stability and
will therefore continue to require extensive input from the
international community. As such, we cannot foresee the
prospect of an enduring peace taking hold in an
environment of profound human deprivation, fear and
insecurity.

While it is my delegation's earnest hope that the
Council and the Secretary-General will remain actively
engaged in assisting the parties to achieve national
reconciliation, the ultimate responsibility for peace resides
with the leaders of Afghanistan. It is up to them to resolve
their differences in a peaceful and democratic manner. We
do not, however, support the imposition of peace, as that
would violate the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of Afghanistan, to which Indonesia is
fully committed. It is therefore our firm belief that a
lasting peace can result only from the determination of
the parties concerned to engage in a constructive dialogue
based on compromise and cooperation.

In closing, my delegation wishes to express the hope
that our concerted efforts can, as they should, make a
decisive contribution to the ongoing peace efforts in
Afghanistan. If we choose, however, to shrink from our
solemn responsibility and abandon the people of
Afghanistan, then we should expect a loss of the
Council's credibility. We should therefore remain seized
of the situation in Afghanistan until the suffering, which
has been the only life many Afghans have come to know,
is alleviated and a lasting peace takes hold.

