Mr. Corr (Ireland): I, too, would like, on behalf
of my delegation, to thank Deputy President Zuma for
his very comprehensive briefing and for travelling to
New York to brief the Council today. I would also like
to express strong support and appreciation for the
Deputy President's efforts in helping to resolve one of
the most complex challenges to peace in Africa, and
for the leading role played by South Africa, including
by former President Mandela, in this process. This
reflects well on the African Union's attempt to find
African solutions to the problems of the region. It is
also important today to express strong support and
appreciation for the efforts of the regional initiative.

Like other speakers, I would like to welcome our
new colleague from France, Ambassador de la
Sabliere, to the Council.

As Deputy President Zuma said, this is good
news for Burundi, for Africa and for peace. It is
important now for both sides to follow up their words
and signatures with deeds and actions, and to fully
observe the ceasefire. It is also important to keep up
the momentum and to keep pressure on the parties to
reach early agreement on how to bring the Forces for
the Defence of Democracy into the power-sharing
arrangements. Clearly, it is crucial that the sides
implement agreements on the reform of the security
sector and the structure of the army. The transition
clock continues to tick, with the handover of power in
Burundi due to take place in May. Any slippage could
be damaging for the process and for the progress that
has been achieved. As my colleagues emphasized this
afternoon, it is also important to keep pressure on the
National Liberation Forces to join the process.

Nonetheless - and this point came out strongly
in the Deputy President's statement - after nine years
of conflict and close to 300,000 deaths, the agreement
is a major breakthrough. It offers a way forward to
allow a divided country to come together. It builds on
Arusha and the establishment of the Transitional
Government last November. Of course, there are
challenges and problems involved that have to be
faced. But the hope far outweighs them.

The breakthrough is also important in View of the
deterioration in an already appalling humanitarian
situation. The increase in the number of internally
displaced persons, the threat posed to civilians by
armed groups and the food security situation are all of
deep concern. This breakthrough will have important
implications for access to populations in need and will
begin at last to put Burundi on the road to recovery and
development.

It is now important for donors to honour the
pledges made, including those made at the donor
conference this week. The budgetary position in
Burundi is appalling, and major social programmes are
needed. It is one of the very poorest countries in the
world, and the peace that has now been achieved
deserves a chance.

Deputy President Zuma spoke of the wider goal
of creating a climate of peace, order, stability and
sustainable development on the African continent. The
developments in Burundi this week are an important
contribution to this. It is now important for the Security
Council and the international community to support, in
every way possible, the agreement and the wider peace
process.

