Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I would like to begin by
thanking Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his comprehensive briefing
on the latest report on the implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina (S/2018/974, annex). We would like to reiterate our support for the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

We welcome the positive developments apparent
in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the reporting period,
particularly its continued engagement with the European
Union (EU) on the country's accession process and
progress on some legislative aspects, such as the code
of criminal procedure. That progress is testament to the
country's commitment to the EU integration process,
with far-reaching long-term positive consequences
for the stability and prosperity of the country and the
region at large.

We are nevertheless concerned about some of the
reported developments that have undermined Bosnia
and Herzegovina's political stability. In particular, we
note the divisive rhetoric and actions that continue to
challenge the constitutional order and integrity of the
State-level judiciary system in the country. In that
regard, we call on all authorities and political leaders
to fully respect the decision of the Constitutional Court
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Respect for the rule of law
and the authority of the State institutions established
under the Dayton Accords is fundamental to the
State-building process in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
It is therefore important to ensure that all parties
refrain from provocative statements and actions that
could undermine the country's sovereignty, territorial
integrity, cohesion and constitutional order.

We also note the continued disagreement concerning
changes to Bosnia and Herzegovina's electoral law. We
believe the issue must be handled very carefully, as it
has the potential to undermine the country's continuity
and stability. It is our hope that the Constitutional
Court's ruling on its review of the election law will be
implemented in a manner consistent with the Dayton
Peace Agreement. We also encourage the relevant
parties to undertake serious political dialogue to
address and solve differences amicably.

In conclusion, we would like to express our support
to the High Representative and his Office in discharging
their mandate to monitor the implementation of the
civilian aspects of the Dayton Accords. We call on the
parties to extend the necessary cooperation, which is
crucial to the work of the High Representative. We
also recognize the vital role played by the EU military
mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, EUFOR Althea,
in maintaining safety and stability in the country.
We welcome the adoption of resolution 2443 (2018)
renewing the mission's mandate for another 12 months.

