Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I would first like to thank the Assistant Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, Ms. Bintou
Keita, for her presentation of the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2017/907), and to take this opportunity to
congratulate her on her successful work.

Uruguay emphasizes the report's message that
while there have been no open clashes between Sudanese
Government forces and armed groups in recent months,
the security and human rights situation in Darfur is still
unstable. We should also point out that the principal
remaining flashpoints continue to be intercommunal
clashes and hostilities, despite the reconciliation efforts
by the local authorities with the support of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) and the United Nations country team.

My delegation believes it is critical that the
Government of the Sudan and the armed movements
abide by their unilateral declarations on the cessation
of hostilities and move on to the next steps in the peace
process, facilitated by the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel with support from the Special
Envoy for Sudan and South Sudan and the Joint Special
Representative and Head of UNAMID. Progress in
those areas would help to create the conditions needed
to effectively address root causes ofthe conflict such as
intercommunal conflicts and to safely return the more
than 2 million internally displaced persons in Darfur to
their homes.

We are pleased that UNAMID is moving ahead
with the reconfiguration process, in accordance with
the Council's decision in resolution 2363 (2017). We
reiterate once again that the cooperation ofthe Sudanese
Government with the Security Council and UNAMID
is essential to the success of this transition. In that
connection, I should acknowledge the Government's
cooperation and support in the repatriation of uniformed
units and the closure of operations bases. We call for
finalizing the preparations for the establishment of
a temporary operations base in Golo. We also note
that the general environment in which UNAMID is
operating has continued to show signs of improvement
and that we have seen a drop in the crime rate and in
restrictions on movement.

However, the Mission is still dealing with various
logical challenges that continue to hamper its work,
including delays in issuing visas, especially for human
rights workers. We therefore urge the Government of
the Sudan to step up its efforts to remove the remaining
operational restrictions, fulfil all its obligations in that
regard and maintain the positive spirit that characterized
UNAMID's review process. Although the Mission is in
a drawdown phase, we want to highlight the important
and still necessary role that it plays in protecting
civilians, for example by monitoring human rights
violations, conducting daily patrols and supporting
mediation in intercommunal conflicts.

In conclusion, I would like to express Uruguay's
appreciation to all UNAMID personnel, the United
Nations country team in the Sudan and the humanitarian
workers who work tirelessly and often in difficult
conditions to achieve sustainable peace in Darfur.

Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(Spoke in Spanish): We thank the Assistant Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, Ms. Bintou
Keita, for her presentation of the report of the Secretary-
General on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) (S/2017/907) and for
the progress that has been made in implementing the
recommendations established in the wake of the latest
strategic review of UNAMID.

We want to highlight some of the positive aspects
mentioned in the report, which we see as the result of
the joint efforts of the African Union, the Government
of the Sudan and the United Nations. In the first place,
the fact that there were no clashes between the Sudanese
Government and rebel groups in Darfur during this
period is a major improvement, enabling the parties to
focus their efforts on the political process, address the
root causes of the conflict and promote development
and peacebuilding in Darfur.

We appreciate the Government's efforts to promote

the implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur. As we have frequently said, the only possible
solution to the situation in Darfur is through a political
process that can enable the parties to resolve their
pending issues, especially disputes about land ownership
and management, intercommunal conflicts, disarming
the civilian population and the militia, and a permanent
ceasefire. We must settle the differences regarding the
Document and we call on the non-signatory parties to
engage in constructive dialogue with the Government.
In that regard, we commend the initiatives taken by
Mr. Thabo Mbeki, the Chairperson of the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel tasked with
implementing the recommendations for the Sudan and
South Sudan, and Mr. Jeremiah Mamabolo, the Joint
Special Representative for Darfur, together with all
the staff of UNAMID and Mr. Nicholas Haysom, the
Special Envoy for Sudan and South Sudan.

Secondly, we would like to underscore the
improvements in the operating environment and the
decrease in obstructions to the free movement of
UNAMID and humanitarian personnel, as well as
in crime. There have been no obstructions of aerial
movements, humanitarian activities have not been
significantly restricted, and in Jebel Marra progress
has even been made in obtaining visas and authorizing
the passage of cargoes from Port Sudan, as well as
preparations for establishing an operations base in
Golo. That is all significant progress. While some
problems will still have to be addressed, there have been
clear improvements. We encourage the Government to
continue its cooperation with UNAMID in accordance
with the status of forces agreement.

Thirdly, the relative stability in the humanitarian
situation and the fact that no major displacements
have been reported in Darfur is a good sign. However,
the spread of disease and the effects of flooding are
worrying. We support the efforts of the World Health
Organization, UNICEF and humanitarian workers to
contain the situation and urge them to cooperate and
facilitate their work so as to help those affected as
effectively as possible. We must also continue our efforts
to improve the humanitarian situation for the internally
displaced. Although the cases of abuse, human rights
violations and other crimes have decreased compared
with the previous period, we must redouble our efforts
to put a stop to cases of illegal detention and violence
against women and girls, particularly sexual and
gender-based Violence, and promote access to justice
for women.

It is clear that one of the major current challenges
ahead lies in reducing tensions surrounding the weapons
collection, demobilization and reintegration promoted
by the Government. We believe that the success of
these processes is necessary to ensure lasting peace
and that we must avoid any possible division while
encouraging the engagement of the civilian population
and militia with this process. This governmental
campaign, which is in line with the peacebuilding
process led by the United Nations, needs the support of
the international community.

Today, the Sudan requires the joint work of the
African Union, the United Nations and the international
community in general in order to pursue its development
and peacebuilding efforts in Darfur. It is critical to
ensure State authority over its entire territory; that the
rule of law is established; that institutions, the police
and justice are strengthened; and that processes of
reconciliation and development projects are promoted.
Regarding the latter, we welcome the measures being
taken to address the difficult economic situation in
Darfur, such as the lifting of the unilateral sanctions
imposed by the United States on the Sudan. We also
believe that the time has come for the sanctions imposed
by the Security Council to be lifted.

In closing, we commend the progress made in
reconfiguring UNAMID. We must strengthen the
capacities of the United Nations country team so
as to ensure the successful withdrawal of the hybrid
operation. This must be ajoint effort ofthe Government
and interested parties, together with the United Nations.
We thank UNAMID for its dedication and efforts in
seeking to restore peace in Darfur.

