Archbishop Auza (Holy See): The latest briefings
on Yemen heard by the Counciljust over a week ago (see S/PV.8642) indicated that the humanitarian situation
remains very dire. Children are starving, access to
clean water is scarce, the economy continues to struggle
severely and those who cannot flee the front lines of
war remain cut off from basic supplies as humanitarian
workers are impeded from operating in some areas.
The Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs described September as the deadliest month
this year, with an average of 13 people being killed
every day. Although the Secretary-General's Special
Envoy for Yemen spoke of signs of hope, he also added
that they were "fragile and in need of our diligent
care and attention" (S/PV8642 p.4). In spite of some
small positive steps, a nationwide ceasefire, which the
Council has repeatedly called for, is essential if the
intolerable suffering of the Yemeni people is ever to
come to an end. Coherence and honesty demand that the
call for a ceasefire be accompanied by a concrete end
to the flow of arms in the region. Indeed, the world's
worst humanitarian crises play out where weapons and
ammunition freely circulate.

In Syria, the formation of the Constitutional
Committee, scheduled to convene in Geneva on
30 October, is a very important step towards rebuilding
trust and confidence among Syrians in a Syrian-owned
constitution and between the Syrian authorities and the
international community. However, the recent events in
north-eastern Syria are a cause for great concern. Pope
Francis renews his appeal to all to spare the population
from further suffering. He calls on all the actors
involved, as well as the international community, to
commit themselves to sincere and transparent dialogue.

Moving now specifically to the Palestinian
question, we are approaching the three-year anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 2334 (2016), and there is
indeed cause for concern as the situation on the ground
worsens. As the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process noted in his 20 September briefing
in this Chamber:

"Settlements have expanded, demolitions have
accelerated, violence and incitement have continued.
Achieving intra-Palestinian unity seems an ever-
more distant prospect, and credible negotiations
have yet to be launched." (S/PV8625 p. 6)

All of that impacts the prospects of durable peace
and a two-State solution. Israel's failure to form a
Government is also a cause for concern.

While everything must be done to ensure that the
Holy Sites are protected, in line with international law
and the status quo in the city of Jerusalem so that people
of all religions can visit and worship without fear, it is
of deep concern that native Christian communities feel
constrained to abandon those lands - the very cradle
of their faith - in search of peace and security for
themselves and for their children. More should be done
to ensure their protection and their full flourishing in
the land of their birth and of their ancestors.
Some have claimed that the Council's credibility
is being eroded precisely because of the failure to
fully implement its own resolutions regarding the
Palestinian question. It is high time that decisions taken
and mechanisms already in place be used effectively
to realize the objective of a Palestinian State living in
peace and security alongside the State of Israel, within
secure and internationally recognized borders.

In conclusion, as we consider the tragic conflicts in
the Middle East, it becomes all the more pressing that
all those concerned observe the limitations imposed by
international humanitarian law. It is indeed essential
to protect the life and dignity of the victims of armed
conflicts and to ensure the protection of defenceless
peoples and civilian structures, especially hospitals,
schools, places of worship and refugee camps.

