Mr. Mufioz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I too wish
to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Harri Holkeri, for his introduction of the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2004/348). We wish
also to welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia and Montenegro, Mr. Vuk Draskovic.

The report introduced this morning helps us
understand the dimensions of the setback experienced
in the process of establishing a multi-ethnic, stable and
democratic Kosovo. There is no doubt that recent
appalling and unfortunate events - loss of life,
hundreds of injuries and considerable material
damage - have had a negative effect on the pace and
the course of the process of reconstruction and
normalization in Kosovo. One example of the
devastation is that, as noted in paragraph 22 of the
report, in less than 48 hours, 4,100 minority
community members were newly displaced, more than
the total of 3,664 that had returned throughout 2003.

We are aware that as a result of the events of
March redoubled efforts will be required in such areas
as minority rights, human rights, equal security,
freedom of movement, and a return to sustainable
conditions for all inhabitants of Kosovo.

The Provisional Institutions of Self-Government
and local political leaders have major challenges ahead
of them. First and foremost, they must put an end to
calls to violence, irrespective of their source. They
must adopt measures to establish and ensure respect for
the rule of law, including by ensuring that the
perpetrators of violence are brought to justice and that
illegal weapons are seized. Thirdly, they must begin to
rebuild damaged or destroyed sites or to provide
appropriate compensation; they must rebuild holy sites
and must facilitate the return of persons who have been
displaced. Fourthly, they must ensure that no sector
gains politically from the March violence. Finally, it is
our view that they must fully comply with the
commitment set out in the 2 April 2004 open letter
signed by political leaders and officials from the
Institutions: to restore multi-ethnicity and
reconciliation throughout Kosovo.

These challenges underscore the validity of the
"standards before status" policy. The Kosovo Standards
Implementation Plan launched on 31 March was noted
by the Security Council in its 30 April presidential
statement (S/PRST/2004/ 13). It is urgent that we take
the opportunity to review two of the key elements of
the plan in the light of the inter-ethnic violence in
March: sustainable returns and the rights of
communities and their members; and freedom of
movement.

Cooperation between the Provisional Institutions
of Self-Government and UNMIK will be essential for
the success of the Kosovo Standards Implementation
Plan. Support from Belgrade is also critical. We
reaffirm that without significant, sustainable returns of
displaced persons and refugees, without sufficient
freedom of movement and without the dismantlement
of parallel structures it will be impossible to establish a
multi-ethnic, democratic society able to integrate all
inhabitants of Kosovo. Constructive dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina and between UNMIK and the
Kosovo Assembly is a key element for the success of
that undertaking.

We must spare no effort to avoid a repetition of
abhorrent acts like those we witnessed in March.

