Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Madam President,
for convening this important open debate to discuss
this essential topic. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing today, as well as
Mr. Yves Daccord, Director-General of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), and Ms. Hanaa
Edwar, Secretary-General of the Iraqi Al-Amal
Association, for their respective briefings.

Today's topic of debate - the protection of civilians
in armed conflict - is of particular importance to the
international community, especially in the light of the
existence of armed conflicts in many countries of the
world. Economic, political or social reasons give rise to
such conflicts. Unfortunately, they lead to an enormous
loss of innocent human life, even though civilians are
not parties to the conflicts. The report of the Secretary-
General (S/2018/462) indicates that the situation of
civilians in areas of conflict is alarming. He calls on us
to find a solution to prevent such a loss of human life
and put an end to hostilities, the targeting of civilian
facilities, forced displacements and the use of sexual
violence as weapons of war.

When it comes to putting an end to human suffering,
our responsibility as members of the international
community and the Security Council is even greater.
In order to find a viable solution and end impunity,
countries supporting parties to a conflict, or providing
them with weapons, should play a key role in helping
to end violations committed against civilians. We call
on countries with influence to present their military
support and arms sales contracts in strict adherence
to international humanitarian law and the protection
of civilians.

There is no doubt whatsoever that the continuation
of conflict and lack of lasting solutions increases the
number of displaced persons and those in need of
humanitarian assistance. As those present are aware,
conflict areas are often difficult to reach. We therefore
call on all countries concerned and armed groups to
honour their moral and legal obligations to make it
possible for humanitarian assistance to reach those
areas without any obstacles, especially given that the
number of people in need is constantly increasing.

In the Syrian crisis, for example, as members of
the Council, we achieved the adoption of resolution
2401 (2018) for a ceasefire for a period of no less
than 30 days, without any delay, in order to make it
possible for the United Nations and its partners to
provide humanitarian assistance and evacuate the sick
and wounded, in accordance with international law.
Unfortunately, to date we have been unable to enforce
that resolution. Once again, we call for a halt to all
attacks on civilians and populated areas, as well as
medical centres in Syria.

When it comes to providing humanitarian assistance
to civilians, we are pleased with the efforts of the
international coalition to restore legitimacy in Yemen
to help our brother country. Those efforts continue
through the global humanitarian assistance provided
for Yemen, including the generous contributions from
Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and the State
of Kuwait, which make up more than 50 per cent of
the contributions announced at the donor conference in
Geneva last April.

Next year, we will commemorate 20 years since
the inclusion of the protection of civilians on the
agenda of the Security Council. It is timely to reflect
on the progress achieved so far. It is very regrettable
that while we are marking that twentieth anniversary,
we have not managed to resolve one of the most long-
standing violations against unarmed civilians, that of
our brother people of Palestine. The Palestinian people
are suffering. They are being persecuted by Israel,
the occupying Power, which continues to carry out
systematic and repeated brutal acts against them, such
as those that took place last week against unarmed
demonstrators exercising their legitimate right to
freedom of expression in Gaza. Those abuses resulted
in the deaths of more than 61 civilians, including eight
children under the age of 16, and left 3,000 injured.
We want to remind the Council that Palestinians,
including children, continue to be detained in Israel
prisons. We condemn all such violations by Israel as
flagrant breaches of the norms of human rights and of
all international standards. As States Members of the
United Nations, it is our duty to bring an end to an
occupation and a conflict that has persisted for more
than 50 years.

The Charter of the United Nations stipulates that
States and their peoples have a right to enjoy security.
We have to wonder if that is a right for some people,
but not others. If the answer is that all peoples have that
right, then Israel, as the occupying Power, must respect
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law and protect Palestinian civilians. A
few days ago Kuwait submitted a draft resolution aimed
at providing international protection to the Palestinian
people in the occupied territories and the Gaza Strip.
We hope that it will be unanimously adopted by the
Council with a view to ensuring the protection of
civilians during armed conflict.

One regrettable outcome of armed conflicts is
the imprisonment and disappearance of civilians, an
issue that the State of Kuwait pays particular attention
to. We continue to lament the fact that some of our
civilians and citizens are still missing, almost two
decades after the invasion of Iraq. That is why it is
so important that all parties to conflicts all over the
world respect international humanitarian law by listing
the names of detainees, facilitating communication
between them and their families and protecting their
graves so that their remains can be recovered by their
bereaved families. Under international humanitarian
law, detainees and missing persons are included in the
category of those protected during conflicts. We call
on all Members of the United Nations and parties to
conflict throughout the world to respect human dignity
and the fundamental rights of detainees during armed
conflicts, and to provide civilians with legal andjudicial
guarantees and the humane treatment they deserve
during detention. We support political solutions and
efforts to realize the legitimate aspirations of people to
live in dignity, safety and peace.

We support the role of the United Nations,
particularly its peacekeeping missions, and urge it
to prioritize the protection of civilians with clear
mandates in accordance with resolution 1894 (2009).
We welcome what the Secretary-General has referred
to as a large-scale global effort to reduce the effects
of armed conflict on civilians. We welcome efforts
to encourage military and civilian leaders to be
accountable and ensure that proper training is provided.
We also advocate that all violations perpetrated against
civilians, war crimes and crimes against humanity be
referred to the International Criminal Court.

