The delegation of the Republic of Korea fully aligns itself with the joint statement of the MIKTA countries - Mexico, Indonesia, Republic of Korea, Turkey and Australia - and has the honour of submitting this statement in its national capacity. My country reiterates the importance of full, equal and meaningful participation of women in all aspects of peace and security. In particular, we highlight the importance of translating the guiding resolutions and strategies in this area into concrete actions. In 2014, the Republic of Korea established its National Action Plan for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and, in 2018, adopted its second National Action Plan, for the period of 2018-2020. Furthermore, the Republic of Korea is exerting its utmost efforts to increase the number of women serving as military observers or staff officers in United Nations peace operations to 25 per cent by 2028, in line with the Uniformed Gender Parity Strategy 2018-2028 of the Department of Peace Operations. We have already made steady progress, as the representation of women has increased from 18 per cent to 22 per cent since the Republic of Korea made its pledge last year. As the host country for the 2021 Peacekeeping Ministerial meeting, the Republic of Korea will strive to ensure that the voices of women in peace operations are duly recognized and endeavour to further contribute to the promotion of the women and peace and security agenda. My delegation would like to highlight the importance of preventing conflict- related sexual violence and protecting victims. In particular, a survivor-centred approach is critical to preventing and responding to conflict-related sexual violence. Accordingly, my delegation emphasizes the significance of implementing resolution 2467 (2019) adopted last year. Necessary assistance should be provided to all victims, including sexual and reproductive health-care services. To this end, the Republic of Korea, as one of the board members of the Global Fund for Survivors of Conflict- Related Sexual Violence, is participating in the Fund and will continue to provide support to it, including through financial contributions. Following the first International Conference on Action with Women and Peace last year, the Republic of Korea, on 24 November, will host the second international conference of this kind, using a virtual platform, with the survivor-centred approach as the theme. We greatly look forward to the Security Council's active participation. At this historic moment, in which we are celebrating the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), we would like to emphasize that its successful implementation has a very special meaning for Korea. The Government of the Republic of Korea will continue to endeavour to restore the honour and dignity of the victims known as comfort women and turn this painful experience into a lesson from history. The Republic of Korea has been exerting sustained efforts in the advancement of the women and peace and security agenda and will continue to spare no efforts to this end.
