Mr. Bakuramutsa (Rwanda) (interpretation from French): Allow me first, Mr. President, to congratulate
through you, Ambassador Terence on his appointment as
Ambassador and Permanent Representative of Burundi to
the United Nations. My delegation offers him its fullest
possible cooperation.

 

My delegation agreed to co-sponsor this resolution on
the establishment of a Commission of Inquiry into the
crimes committed in Burundi, mainly because of our
support for the Government of Burundi's request for such
a Commission to be established, a request accepted by the
main political parties of the country. In order to restore
peace to a country and, above all, to establish justice there,
the course to be followed must be charted by those
concerned. The international community can only provide
the support needed to complement internal efforts.

My delegation recognizes, above all, that Burundi is
part of a network of countries in the Great Lakes region
and cannot be separated from that whole. Consequently,
that country's problems cannot be resolved if one
disregards what is happening in the other countries of the
subregion.

Unlike the other subregions of Africa, the countries of
the Great Lakes have experienced, to the detriment of the
population, the institutionalization of a culture of impunity.
The Great Lakes region is now considered a powder keg
and a source of refugees. It is important for the Council to
understand the reasons for this.

While it has been said that the Balkans have produced
a history that could not be brought to fruition, the countries
of the Great Lakes have produced over the past 10
centuries a history worthy of them. A heterogeneous
population has lived there in harmony, concerned with the
creation of functioning States and the establishment of a
balance between States and the peoples of which they are
made. Foreigners visiting these countries have found
organized States in full expansion and populations with a
history and a culture. This was witnessed by the Arab and
German pioneers in the region.

The Council must recognize that this balance was
destroyed by the presence of foreign Powers, which had
interests that superseded those of local nationals. Let me
quote a leader of Burundi, who rightly said that
"If colonization had been such a good thing, the
European countries would have colonized one
another".

That is Why current events in the countries of the
region, especially in Burundi and Rwanda, are our
inheritance from the trusteeship the administration of which
the United Nations entrusted to Belgium and from the
linguistic and economic interests that France wishes to
pursue in the region, to the detriment of the interests of
these countries. It is important to note the historic role of
these two countries and their great responsibility with
respect to current events in the region. My delegation is
convinced that it is time for positive and constructive
cooperation and for abandoning a form of cooperation
that is partisan and destructive.

While having voted in favour of the resolution, my
delegation has some important questions with respect to
the role of the commission and, above all, the results it
will be able to achieve. There are a number of
preconditions that must be respected if the work of the
commission is to be effective.

The Council has just decided to come to Burundi's
aid. How can it be credible if in worse circumstances than
those in Burundi - those in neighbouring Rwanda - it
proved unable to put an end to the impunity enjoyed by
human-rights criminals who committed crimes against
humanity and who carried out genocide in the full View
of all the members of the Council? How can we convince
the Barundi people that the Council takes events in their
country seriously if those who committed genocide in
Rwanda have never been curbed, but, rather, have been
placed under the wing of the international community?
How can we convince the Barundi people that the
Council is serious when its most prominent members
armed, financed and continue to protect those who have
committed crimes against humanity, even though those
members are signatories of the Convention on genocide.
It is those very criminals who provide military support for
Burundian extremists.

Until the Council denounces the criminals who have
committed genocide in Rwanda, along with those who
support them, there will be no compelling reason to
denounce the criminals in Burundi. Until the Council
denounces the countries that arm the criminals and
support Governments that have institutionalized crime as
a management technique, it will be impossible to make a
real impact on the present situation in Burundi.

Indeed, the very methods that were used in Rwanda,
such as propaganda radio broadcasts, are being used in
Burundi. The very individuals who committed crimes in
Rwanda are providing technical and military support in
Burundi so that the same genocide can be carried out.
The very countries that provided political, financial and
military support to the criminals in Rwanda are now
collaborating with the criminals in Burundi.

 

What is the point of the commission's work and its
conclusions if Burundi's borders continue to be attacked?
What will be the point of the commission's results if radio
broadcasts from a neighbouring country continue to create
an atmosphere of tension and ill-feeling among the peoples
of Burundi? How can Rwanda finally think of
reconstruction while knowing that the criminals and
masterminds of genocide are encouraging extremists in
Burundi to do what they did in Rwanda in 1994? As
members know, if we want to put a stop to the impunity
that reigns in the Great Lakes region we must eradicate the
evil at its roots. We must wipe out impunity not by
addressing its symptoms, but by getting to the very causes
of the evil.

My delegation wishes also to recognize the
responsibility of the citizens of the region and of the
countries concerned. The Barundi themselves bear primary
responsibility for their future. We are certain that the
Barundi people possess the elements of an internal solution,
of which those outside cannot be unaware. In that
connection, Burundi has established a whole framework of
institutions, organizations and conventions, and a judicial
system to ensure the functioning of Burundi's society. That
is why my delegation appeals to the United Nations and to
the international community to support all these Burundian
institutions, which need support in order to fulfil their role,
as called for in General Assembly resolution 49/7, adopted
in October 1994.

As my delegation has said on previous occasions, the
United Nations and the Security Council cannot solve the
problems of the subregion without involving the regional
and subregional organizations established by the States of
the region. In most cases, these organizations have
demonstrated their know-how and have taken a thoroughly
suitable approach to solving the problems of their member
States. Yet they have never managed to go further in the
quest for solutions, because of a lack of means. It is
therefore necessary to provide them with material, technical
and financial support so that they can better fulfil their role,
a role that is indispensable and complements that of the
United Nations and the Security Council.

We close by appealing to the Security Council for
appropriate measures to save the subregion from another
bloodbath caused by certain countries that continue to fuel
or maintain conflicts by providing material and moral
support to extremists of various stripes. It would be cheaper
for the international community to prevent conflicts, which
would enable the countries of the subregion to focus their
efforts on development and reconstruction programmes.

