Mr. Jinga (Romania): I would like to commend
Equatorial Guinea for convening this timely meeting on
the theme "Silencing the Guns in Africa: cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations".

Allow me also to express my deep appreciation for
the informative briefings of Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo; Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, African
Union High Representative for Silencing the Guns in
Africa; and Mr. Vasu Gounden, Founder and Executive
Director of the African Centre for the Constructive
Resolution of Disputes.

Romania aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union.

I will now make a few remarks in my national capacity.

My country underscores the centrality of the
African Union-United Nations strategic partnership and
the trilateral cooperation between the United Nations,
the African Union and the European Union, as they
are essential frameworks for international security and
sustainable development in Africa. We also commend
the African Union Master Roadmap of Practical Steps
for Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020 as a flagship
initiative that will contribute to making Africa a
conflict-free continent.

Romania co-sponsored resolution 2457 (2019) on
silencing the guns in Africa, which was adopted today.
We also encourage a tailored approach that has African
solutions for African problems as its guiding principle.
During Romania's chairmanship of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) in 2018, that principle led to the
institutionalization of the annual meeting between
the Peacebuilding Commission and the African Union
Peace and Security Council.

In addition, during our chairmanship of the PBC,
Romania placed particular importance on conflict
prevention, including by promoting an enhanced
regional approach in the work of the Commission,
reinforcing partnerships with regional and subregional
organizations and supporting conflict-affected
countries through actions ranging from stopping
the outbreak of conflicts to peacebuilding and post-
conflict reconstruction.

During the field visits I conducted last year to
West Africa and the Sahel and in all the meetings I had
with relevant national and regional African actors, the
purpose was to identify ways to enhance cooperation
on financing for peacebuilding and to strengthen
cooperation, coordination and coherence in support of
the respective countries. Romania remains committed
to following the same path during our current mandate
as Vice-Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, as
we attach great importance to prevention, mediation,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and working on post-
conflict recovery and reconstruction.

Based on its deep understanding of the
multidimensional root causes of insecurity in the
region, Romania believes that the goals ofthe Silencing
the Guns in Africa by 2020 initiative can be reached
through partnerships between African countries and the
international community. In that context, I hope that on
Friday 1 March, the General Assembly will adopt, by
consensus, the draft resolution on the role of diamonds
in fuelling conflict, breaking the link between the
illicit transactions and armed conflict as a contribution
to the prevention and settlement of conflicts, which
Romania will introduce in its capacity as President of
the Council of the European Union.

I believe it is high time to permanently switch
from the paradigm of blood diamonds to that of
peace diamonds. In that endeavour, the effective
implementation of 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and African Union's Agenda 2063
for inclusive growth and sustainable development,
with the full participation of women and youth, will
remain fundamental.

Romania helps to increase opportunities for young
Africans through the scholarships we offer for higher
education and the training programmes we provide
for professionals. Currently, Romania participates
in United Nations missions in Africa on all relevant
security segments - in six United Nations missions
and operations in the Central African Republic, Mali,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Darfur, South
Sudan and Libya.

At the same time, we are the only Member State
that contributes close protection units to missions
coordinated by the Department of Safety and Security.
Starting on 15 October, Romania will provide the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali a military utility helicopter unit
comprising four Puma helicopters and 120 troops.

Finally, we are glad that Equatorial Guinea has
proposed the topic of collaboration with regional
organizations on the Security Council agenda, since
it was my country that promoted the very first United
Nations resolution on cooperation with regional
organizations (resolution 1631 (2005)) under the
Romanian presidency of the Security Council.

Romania is now a candidate for a non-permanent
seat in the Security Council for the 2020-2021 period.
My country will remain fully engaged in sustaining
peace in Africa and in enhancing cooperation with the
African Union.

