Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Edmond Mulet, for his
thorough briefing on recent developments in Haiti and
for presenting the report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) (S/2010/446). We welcome the
statement of the Permanent Representative of Haiti,
Mr. Merores.

We share the major conclusions and assessments
of the report. The political and socio-economic
situation in Haiti after the earthquake remains unstable.
The security situation, although calm on the outside,
remains fragile. Serious challenges also remain, such
as the presence of a large number of internally
displaced persons, difficult living conditions, an
increase in the activities of criminal gangs, and the
weakness of law enforcement agencies. The
preconditions exist for the emergence of social unrest,
particularly in the context of the upcoming electoral
campaign.

However, thanks to the efforts of the leadership
of the country and of the international community, the
Haitians have managed to avoid the post-earthquake
emergence of large-scale unrest and epidemics. Some
progress has been achieved in preparing the
parliamentary and presidential elections scheduled for
28 November. It is our view that MINUSTAH will play
an important role in ensuring security at the upcoming
elections and providing technical assistance in their
conduct. Moreover, the Mission should coordinate
external assistance in organizing the vote, together
with international and regional partners.

We are pleased to note that the urgent
humanitarian needs of the internally displaced citizens
of Haiti have generally been met. However, it is still a
subject of particular concern that about 1.3 million
Haitians remain in camps for internally displaced
persons.

The major responsibility for the recovery of Haiti
lies with the people of Haiti. In this regard, we
welcome the fact that the Haitian Government has
begun more actively to assume the lead functions in
coordinating humanitarian and recovery work. The
proof of this development was the establishment of the
Interim Haiti Recovery Commission and the ad hoc
Presidential Commission on Resettlement.

We appreciate the efforts of MINUSTAH and its
head, Mr. Mulet, in discharging the Mission's tasks. A
significant increase in the size of the military and
police components of the Mission has allowed it more
reliably to provide security in camps for temporarily
displaced persons and to protect the most vulnerable
segments of the population.
A serious destabilizing factor in Haiti is the drug
trade. Unfortunately, after the earthquake, the drug
transit routes were quickly restored. In this regard, we
support the measures of the Mission to help the Haitians
strengthen the guarding and patrolling of their borders.

We welcome the comprehensive support given to
Haiti by the countries of the region. We note the efforts
of the United Nations Special Envoy for Haiti,
President Bill Clinton, to mobilize donor support for
the country. We expect the Mission and the United
Nations country team to soon prepare a comprehensive
strategic framework programme as a basis for
designing subsequent activities for the United Nations
system to provide assistance to Haiti. We agree with
the view expressed in the report that, following the
elections in Haiti and the arrival of a new president and
Government, a comprehensive assessment of the
security situation will be necessary for the purposes of
developing a plan to draw down the additional military
and police personnel deployed to the Mission.

Bearing in mind the scope of the tragedy that has
hit Haiti, we support the Secretary-General's call on
the international community to continue to give
comprehensive support to that State until full
restoration of Haiti's national potential.

