Mr. Seenz Biolley (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): Building a firm and lasting peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is a process that requires meticulousness and
great care, and one that has been undertaken in difficult
circumstances. As the Secretary-General notes in his most
recent report, it requires patience and persistence. At this
post-conflict stage, when Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
international community are trying to build for the future,
we can View the true dimensions of the confrontation,
which rent asunder the country's entire political and
administrative structure and fractured coexistence among
the inhabitants to the extent that it virtually disappeared.

These difficult circumstances in which peace-
building is taking place in Bosnia and Herzegovina call
for an appropriate national and international effort,
because the breakdown is of such magnitude that it
demands a massive rebuilding effort in all areas of the
State and of society. A prerequisite for this process to
succeed is that the parties fulfil all their obligations, in
particular the local authorities, which must once and for
all adopt a constructive attitude in accordance with what
was agreed at Dayton. If the national and local authorities
refuse to fulfil those obligations, the international
presence in the country will have very little meaning.

Costa Rica therefore takes the View that a sound
approach has been taken with respect to the functions of
the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH). Its goal is essentially to lend momentum to
the establishment and strengthening of genuine local and
national administrative structures, which will promote and
guarantee social integration, national reconciliation and
the rule of law.

Here I wish to refer to two points of interest to my
delegation. Costa Rica is of the View that the question of
policing is of particular importance in this sphere; it
should therefore continue to be the object of special
attention aimed both at supervising the daily activities of
the police forces and at building for the future. In both
areas, emphasis should be placed on finding ways to
integrate the composition of the forces to guarantee the

 

inclusion of members of the various ethnic groups. It is also
essential that the conduct of the police in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to meet satisfactory standards that are in
accord with European norms for the maintenance of public
order with full respect for the human rights of all the
country's inhabitants.

Along these same lines, I wish to refer to the
administration of justice at the national level. The point in
Bosnia and Herzegovina is not merely speedy and complete
justice; it goes beyond that, and is closely bound up with
trust and credibility. Reconciliation and integration in
Bosnia and Herzegovina requires the existence of a judicial
system that is autonomous, effective and, above all,
trustworthy and credible for the entire population. We
believe that UNMIBH's role of supervision and training is
proper, and we trust that there will be positive results in the
near future.

All of us here agree that the tasks before us in Bosnia
and Herzegovina are not easy ones. They require patience,
which, of course, implies time and stability. We therefore
agree with the Secretary-General's proposal to extend the
mandate of UNMIBH for an additional 12 months. We
hope that during that time the Mission will continue to
follow the effective course it has followed thus far; this will
require constant political and material support from the
international community.

Costa Rica will therefore vote in favour of the draft
resolution before us today.

