Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): At the outset, let me
quote the famous American poet Edna St. Vincent Millay
who, more than 60 years ago, said that childhood is the
kingdom where nobody dies. It is a good wish, but
unfortunately, in reality, every day we witness the deaths
of many children around the globe. In the past two
decades, 2 million children have been killed in armed
conflicts, and about three times that number have been
seriously injured. In today's wars, children make up about
half of the casualties. They are being deliberately
recruited as combatants. Often they are even unaware of
the real dangers they face. Millions of children have been
forced to flee to neighbouring countries as refugees or
have been internally displaced within their home
countries.

Among other problems are gender-based Violence,
the danger of landmines and many indirect results of
warfare, such as malnutrition and other diseases, long-
lasting psychological disorders and the loss of families.

In other words, wars violate every right of a child:
the right to live, the right to be with family and
community, the right to health, the right to development
of the personality and the right to be nurtured and
protected.

It cannot be denied that the international community
has been greatly concerned about this situation and has
taken many steps to improve it. International law,
including the four Geneva Conventions, the two
Additional Protocols, the Declaration on the Protection of
Women and Children in Emergency and Armed Conflict,
the Declaration on the Rights of the Child and the
Convention on the Rights of the Child recognize the right
of children to the necessary protection. In addition,
various regional and national instruments provide specific
protection for children in armed conflicts.

Unfortunately, as has been said, when arms speak,
documents remain silent, lacking enforcement. In this
regard, we hope that the future international criminal
court will be able to play an appropriate role in
responding to this challenge.

 

Ukraine has always paid great attention to the
strengthening of the legal regime in the sphere of protecting
the rights of human beings, especially those of children. We
emphasize the importance of the appeal made by the World
Conference on Human Rights, which urged the universal
ratification of the Convention on the Rights of the Child
and its implementation by all the States parties through the
adoption of all the necessary legislative, administrative and
other measures and the allocation, to the maximum extent,
of the available resources.

We would like to note the extremely relevant efforts
undertaken by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Children and Armed Conflict, Ambassador
Olara Otunnu. It is very important to ensure that the
necessary support is made available for the effective
performance of his mandate.

What is important and, in principle, attainable today is
the need to create a universal mechanism that would
effectively and unconditionally penalize the perpetrators of
crimes against children, especially in armed conflicts. In
this respect, a clear signal should be sent from this meeting
of the Security Council to the ongoing Diplomatic
Conference in Rome in support of the establishment of a
strong, effective and universal international criminal court,
the jurisdiction of which would include these kinds of
crimes as the most serious crimes against mankind.

Secondly, there is a need to promote regional
mechanisms and arrangements for the prompt and impartial
investigation and prosecution of persons responsible for
crimes against children. Thirdly, we need the establishment
of a global "search and capture" system that would create
conditions in which the perpetrators would not be able to
find safe havens for themselves anywhere in the world.

In addition, humanitarian norms should be
implemented and measures taken in order to protect
children and facilitate assistance to them in war zones. Such
measures should include protection for children against the
indiscriminate use of all weapons of war, especially anti-
personnel mines. The need for aftercare and rehabilitation
of children traumatized by war must be addressed urgently.

Finally, I would like to recall the lesson learned by
Ms. Graca Machel, the Expert of the Secretary-General on
the Impact of Armed Conflict on Children, who spent two
years in different countries that were involved in wars and
who prepared a report entitled "Impact of armed conflict on
children", document A/51/306. She concluded that despite
being targets in contemporary armed conflicts, and despite
the brutality shown towards them and the failure of adults
to nurture and protect them, children are both our reason
to eliminate the worst aspects of armed conflict and our
best hope of succeeding in that endeavour. In a world of
disparity, children are a unifying force capable of
bringing us all together in support of a common ethic.

Protecting children from the impact of armed
conflict is the responsibility of everyone: Governments,
international organizations and every part of civil society.

Our delegation is very hopeful that today's
consideration of this issue in the Security Council will
make a substantial contribution to the efforts of the world
community in its successful and, more importantly,
effective response to this challenge.

