Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The Russian Federation notes with regret that the
item on the situation in the occupied Arab territories is
before the Security Council for its consideration now for
the second time this year.

We are disturbed that once again the Middle East
peace process has run into difficulties that have prompted
the Palestinians, with the support of the League of Arab
States and the Islamic Group at the United Nations, to
request the Security Council to consider the Israeli
Government's decision to confiscate Palestinian lands in the
area of East Jerusalem. Russia was one of the delegations
that supported that request during the Council's informal
consultations. My country's position on this matter was
clearly set out in a statement of 6 May 1995 from the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

As a sponsor of the Middle East peace process and as
a State that on 13 September 1993 signed, as a witness, the
Israeli-Palestinian Declaration of Principles, Russia has
consistently tried to do its utmost to promote the
implementation of the provisions of the Declaration and
to promote progress in Palestinian-Israeli negotiations on
introducing Palestinian self-rule in Gaza and the West
Bank.

As is well known, the Declaration provides that the
future of Jerusalem is to be the subject of future
negotiations on the final status of the Palestinian
territories. Until then, any action to alter the status quo in
Jerusalem can be viewed only as contravening the spirit
of the Palestinian-Israeli agreements and of the peace
process as a whole.

The Russian delegation hopes that the Israeli
authorities will deem it possible and appropriate, given
the current crucial and very sensitive stage of the
negotiating process in the Middle East, to reconsider its
view on the issue of confiscating Palestinian lands in
Jerusalem. It is our understanding that the necessary legal
machinery for this does indeed exist. This would be no
more than consonant with the goal of establishing lasting
peace and good-neighbourliness between Arabs and
Israelis, as defined at the Madrid peace conference and in
subsequent Arab-Israeli agreements.

Experience shows that problems in the peace process
cannot be solved by unilateral actions affecting sensitive
aspects of the Arab-Israeli conflict. The only reliable way
is to take timely and effective steps to maintain the
momentum of the peace process and ensure that it makes
progress. It is important to avoid at all cost both actions
and public statements that could undermine the climate of
businesslike cooperation between the parties.

The international community must continue to lend
its full support to the parties in their efforts, without, of
course, thereby replacing direct, bilateral talks. As a
sponsor of the Middle East peace process, Russia will
continue energetically promoting the establishment of a
comprehensive, lasting peace in the Middle East, and the
inception of broad international cooperation there.

