Mr. Wang Xuexian (China): The Middle East conflict
has been going on for several decades, during which war
has broken out many times, bringing tremendous suffering
to the people in the region. In the wake of changes in the
international situation, the PLO and Israel finally signed the
Declaration of Principles in September 1993, which marked
a breakthrough in the Middle East peace process and
opened up the way for harmonious coexistence between the
Arab and Jewish nations. Since then, there have been more
positive developments in the peace process. China, like the
international community as a whole, is greatly encouraged
by this fact.

However, the Middle East peace process is still fragile
and is full of pitfalls, interference and challenges. Recently,
the dispute between the parties concerned with regard to the
question of Jerusalem has again intensified. The Chinese
delegation is deeply concerned over this development. The
realization of peace in the Middle East region is the
common aspiration of all nations in the area. The
achievements of the peace process have not been come by
easily. At this highly sensitive and critical moment, we
hope that the parties concerned will do their utmost to
create favourable conditions to further promote, rather than
undermine, the peace process in the Middle East.

The question of Jerusalem involves religious faith as
well as the fundamental interests of all nations in the
Middle East, and should be treated with prudence. In our
view, the recent action by Israel contravenes the spirit of
relevant United Nations resolutions and the agreement
between Israel and Palestine, and is detrimental to the
Middle East peace process. It is hoped that the Israeli side
will abide by relevant United Nations resolutions and the
agreement with the Palestinian side, and will seek a proper
solution through negotiations and dialogue. Pending a final,
proper solution, neither side should take any unilateral
action that might change the status of Jerusalem or lead to
the aggravation of the situation, lest the Middle East peace
process be adversely affected.

Reviewing the past on the occasion of the
commemoration of the fiftieth anniversary of the end of the
Second World War, we are well aware how precious peace
is. The political will of the leaders of the two sides for a
peaceful solution is needed now more than ever before in
order to build mutual trust and jointly overcome obstacles.
They should base their actions on whether or not those
actions would contribute to the Middle East peace
process. Only in this way can contradictions and
difficulties be defused and the ship of peace sail to
victory.
China has no self-interests whatsoever in the Middle
East. We have all along supported the Middle East peace
process and have stood for a political settlement of the
Middle East question on the basis of the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations. We wish to see people
of all nations in the region living in peace, stability, good-
neighbourliness and amity at an early date, and hope that
the actions taken by the international community will also
help achieve this objective.

