Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): Uganda welcomes the
holding of this open debate on the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) and the briefing
by Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Iraq and head of UNAMI.
We also welcome the briefing by the Permanent
Representative of Iraq.

From those briefings it is clear that significant
progress has been made. We welcome the successful
holding of provincial elections on 31 January. We note
with appreciation that those elections were more
representative and inclusive of the various political
sectors of Iraqi society. We encourage the Iraqi people
to build on these achievements, which create a more
stable and peaceful Iraq in which all the people of Iraq
can live in peace.

To that end, Uganda also commends the leading
role played by UNAMI in assisting and supporting the
Independent High Electoral Commission of Iraq as
well as the earlier interim Government and transitional
National Assembly of Iraq.

We note from the report that a number of Iraqi
political leaders have indicated their willingness to
play a constructive role in national dialogue and
reconciliation as a way of ensuring sustainable and
lasting peace. In spite of progress made, there remain
key challenges. I would like to mention a few of them.

One challenge is to develop an effective security
sector, as well as civil and social services capacities. A
second is the delivery of reconstruction, development
and humanitarian assistance. A third is the protection
of human rights and national reconciliation as well as
judicial and legal reform, which are needed in order to
strengthen the rule of law in Iraq. The fourth is the
eradication of acts of terrorism and violence. Finally,
the return of refugees and internally displaced persons
needs to be facilitated. On this last point, we are happy
to note the increasing returns of Iraqis to their country.
We note that despite these numerous socio-
economic challenges, the Government of Iraq
continues to make commendable efforts to meet
internationally agreed development targets, including
the Millennium Development Goals. In this regard, we
welcome the Paris Club's cancellation of about 80 per
cent of Iraq's debt, as well as the establishment of an
Iraq Partners Forum. There is no doubt that this will go
a long way in helping Iraq realize the targets set out in
the International Compact for Iraq.

Uganda welcomes the commitments made to the
Iraq Trust Fund, amounting to $1.36 billion as of
December 2008. We call upon the Government of Iraq
and international partners to ensure that the approved
projects and programmes are implemented
expeditiously while ensuring that they create an impact
in the reconstruction of Iraq and improve the standards
ofliving of the people of Iraq.

Finally, in spite of the economic challenges, there
is a need to ensure that public funding for
reconstruction and development activities is not unduly
reduced, as this would affect the recovery process.

