Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
There are fewer than 10 minutes remaining before a
critical moment comes and we take a first and decisive
step to put an end to the war on the ground in Syria.
Only a few minutes remain for the most crucial phase
to begin, and Spain demands that the parties to the
conflict and their allies fully comply with resolution
2268 (2016), which we have just adopted.

I am grateful for the agreement reached by the
United States and the Russian Federation on the
cessation of hostilities in Syria, which has allowed
us to adopt this resolution today. Spain is ready to
support all United Nations efforts to that end. We
are confident in the work being carried out by the
International Syria Support Group to the draw the
map for the implementation of this agreement and
to implement a supervision mechanism. In the days
to come, transparency and rigour will be essential
elements for the success of this endeavour. After five
years of war, we face an extraordinarily complicated
theatre of operations in which the slightest provocation
can have consequences of enormous scale. That is why
we call for strict respect of the terms agreed upon, and
I reiterate that. We voted for this resolution with the
conviction that it can lead us to a new phase in Syria,
thereby contributing to establishing the necessary
conditions to provide a political solution to the crisis.
We welcome the fact that Syrian authorities and the
High Negotiations Commission of the opposition have
alreadyjoined the agreement.

The Secretary-General was very clear in his recent
report (S/2016/152) to the Security Council on the
situation in Syria. The fruitless logic of the military
path has left us with more than one quarter of a million
people dead, the largest humanitarian crisis of our time
and a sanctuary to the terrorism of Da'esh and Al-Qaida.
The sole alternative to breaking the cycle of violence
of the past five years is to implement resolution 2254
(2015), which underscores the importance ofthe parties
to the conflict to adopt confidence-building measures to
contribute, first, to the viability of the political process
and, secondly, to a sustained ceasefire over time. I
would like to highlight two such confidence-building

measures, namely, humanitarian access and the release
of prisoners. Humanitarian access is already covered in
the terms of the cessation of hostilities. Moreover, it is
a demand that is supported by a long series of Security
Council resolutions. It is indispensable for there to
be continued and unhindered access. Restricting the
activities of medical and surgical teams cannot be
justified under any circumstances, and even less so
when there is a cessation of hostilities. The Sectretary-
General, on his part, has called for freedom of
movement for the civilian population in besieged areas.
This resolution also calls for the release of arbitrarily
detained individuals, particularly women and children.
All along we have asked for an end to indiscriminate
attacks on the civilian population. We now trust that
resolution 2268 (2016) will make it possible for us to
leave behind this tragic chapter of the war in Syria.

However, we must call on the Government of Syria to
protect the civilian population, while strictly complying
with the standards of international humanitarian law
and human rights law. Those are necessary steps to
provide credibility to the parties staking everything on
a political solution. The fight against terrorism cannot
serve as a pretext to keep testing the process of dialogue
under the auspices of the United Nations.

Resolution 2254 (2015), which we adopted
unanimously barely two months ago, continues to be a
valid road map in Syria. The United Nations has played
the role we entrusted it. Spain has full confidence in
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Staffan
de Mistura, and we thank him sincerely once again for
his decided action for peace in Syria. The international
community is already prepared for a new scenario of
reconciliation in Syria.

