Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I too would like to join the delegations that
have spoken before me in thanking Mr. Michael
Steiner, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Kosovo, for the information he has
provided us and for his presence among us at this
meeting of the Council. We also thank him for his
introduction of the report of the Secretary-General. We
encourage Mr. Steiner to continue to work with the
same diligence, dedication and ability he has
demonstrated in the discharge of the duties assigned to
him by the Secretary-General. We also wish to
welcome the presence among us of Mr. Nebojsa Covic',
Deputy Prime Minister of the Republic of Serbia, and
to thank him for his statement.

With the support of KFOR and the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), the province has embarked upon what is,
frankly, a phase of institutional consolidation and
intensive work to give fluidity and stability to the
political processes of its autonomous Government.
However, the information we receive from Kosovo
alternates between optimism and pessimism. On the
one hand, we see progress in the consolidation of the
interim autonomous Government; on the other hand,
we hear that inter-ethnic relations continue to be
difficult and that progress in integrating the various
ethnic groups into Government structures is slow, and
even conflict-ridden and tortuous.

It seems at times that two Kosovos exist. One is
moving towards civility, democracy, tolerance and
respect for human rights, as well as the re-
establishment of normal life under the rule of law.
However, the other Kosovo is characterized by ongoing
inter-ethnic discord, rejection and the worsening of
differences. All those elements encourage violence and
political intolerance.

The Secretary-General's report and the monthly
report of the United Nations on KFOR operations
strongly claim our attention by the clarity with which
they describe some cases of violence between ethnic
groups and against UNMIK personnel. In this context,
Mexico calls on the authorities of Kosovo to ensure the
security of international staff and personnel stationed
in the area. Although guilty individuals can be found
for each act of violence, we cannot forget that the most
important priority is to achieve reconciliation among
all the province's inhabitants and the integration of
Kosovo. The construction of a multi-ethnic and
democratic society in which minorities feel fairly
represented undoubtedly constitutes an essential part of
UNMIK's mandate and of Mr. Steiner's work.

Exclusion will make democracy impossible.
Exclusion only fuels the conflicts that will arise
tomorrow. That is why reconciliation among all
Kosovars can be achieved only through a series of
firm, consecutive actions, some of which require the
continuation of others. One of those steps is the
essential task of ensuring the return of more than
200,000 refugees and displaced persons. In this
context, we encourage UNMIK to make progress
towards that objective, which is one of the
responsibilities entrusted to it by Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999).

Along with political violence, Kosovo is
experiencing the ravages of organized crime.
Organized crime corrupts institutions, damages the
morale of peoples and breeds distrust. The
establishment of the rule of law in Kosovo is also a
priority. In this context, Mexico takes note of the
progress made on the issue and of the decisions taken
by the North Atlantic Council, in consultation with the
countries of the region, on measures to strengthen
border security and to combat smuggling in the
Balkans. The rule of law not only strengthens the
institutions and individuals, but also fosters economic
growth, development and social integration. Kosovo
needs not only assistance, but also investment. It is
therefore essential that the rule of law provide a
climate of security for investment. Mexico takes note
of the announcement that an agency in charge of
privatization will be created.

The international community and several
international organizations have provided Kosovo with
the resources, the firm political will and the hope to lay
the foundations of peace, understanding and stability
throughout the region. We all wish to see a prosperous,
democratic Kosovo that fully respects human rights
and is free of prejudice and violence. Mexico takes
note of the creation of indices to measure progress
made in fulfilling UNMIK's mandate.

The United Nations and the international
community, with full respect for the decisions of the
inhabitants of the province and in consultation with the
regional actors, must ensure that coordination efforts
among all parties involved culminate in a lasting peace
in the region.

