Mr. Errazuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome you, Mr. President, and congratulate you
and your delegation on having convened this meeting.
We thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
statement, and the High Representative of the European
Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Baroness
Catherine Ashton, for her briefing.

As we have noted in previous statements to the
Council, Chile believes that collective action is crucial
for addressing the threats to international peace and
security, and that such action is enhanced by the
involvement of regional and subregional organizations.
That is the way in which my country interprets Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. That leads
us to promote efficient multilateralism that is endowed
with the ability to effectively include contributions by
regional and subregional organizations in order to face
crises and conflicts that may affect international peace
and security.

The presidential statement that we have just
adopted (S/PRST/2014/4) reflects the appropriate way
to make use of the potential of that Chapter's provisions
and outlines the strategic alliance between the United
Nations and the European Union (EU). We therefore
welcome the strengthening of the work that the United
Nations has been carrying outwith the European Union
in the interest of international peace and security.

Today's presidential statement acknowledges the
growing and unique role of the EU as a major player
in the international system, especially with regard to
its contribution to the maintenance of international
peace and security. The work that that organization
performs in support of other regional and subregional
organizations is therefore particularly important, and
we believe that that interaction is positive and should
be continued in a collaborative and coordinated way in
each case.

As a country, we have found that to be true in the
active participation of Chilean troops in Operation
Althea, in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which has been
ongoing for 10 years now. The recent signing of the
framework agreement on crisis management, which
provides a legal basis for Chile's participation in
civilian and military crisis management operations
led by the European Union, will allow for a deepening
of that cooperation and provide a concrete example of
our excellent relationship and collaboration in various
areas, the maturity of our bonds and our shared values.

Chile believes that it was important to have supported
the presidential statement, which acknowledges the
values and principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations that we share. It also highlights the
crosscutting issues of interest to the United Nations
that are supported by the European Union and in line
with the elements of Chile's foreign policy, namely,
development cooperation, the promotion and protection
of human rights and fundamental freedoms, the
protection of civilians and the participation of women
in the prevention and resolution of conflict and in
peacebuilding and peacekeeping.

We also have common views on the relevance of
the rule of law in the promotion and maintenance of
peace, stability and development, including cooperation
with international justice mechanisms, inter alia the
International Criminal Court.

In its presidential statement of 6 August 2013
(S/PRST/2013/l2), the Council recognized that regional
and subregional organizations were well placed to
understand the causes of armed conflicts, given their
knowledge of the region, which can help in the efforts
to prevent or resolve such conflicts. We fully agree with
that concept and believe that it reaffirms that actions
taken by regional and subregional organizations can
complement the work of United Nations on international
peace and security.

I conclude by thanking Baroness Ashton for her
personal commitment to the resolution and prevention
of conflicts, peacebuilding and peacekeeping.

