Mr. Djedje (C6te d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Taye-Brook Zerihoun, Assistant Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, and Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC), for their excellent briefings. I would
also like to welcome the participation in this meeting
of Mr. Mauro Vieira, Permanent Representative of
Brazil and Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission. I also take this
opportunity to congratulate Mr. Jose Viegas Filho on
his appointment as Special Representative for Guinea-
Bissau and Head of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS),
as well as to pay tribute to his predecessor, Mr. Modibo
Toure, for his outstanding work as head of the Office.

Since the adoption of resolution 2404 (2018), on
28 February 2018, on the renewal of the mandate of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau, encouraging information from the
country marks a real break with the previous situation,
which was characterized in particular by an institutional
and political deadlock. Indeed, on the basis of frank
dialogue and quiet consultations, political actors in
Guinea-Bissau, including President Jose Mario Vaz,
the African Party for the Independence of Guinea and
Cape Verde and the Party for Social Renewal, seem
resolutely committed to work together to lead their
country on the road to lasting peace.

At this point, I would like to congratulate all
stakeholders, including civil society and religious
leaders, and encourage them to continue those efforts,
with a view to a better future for Guinea-Bissau. In
that regard, the appointment of a consensus Prime
Minister, Mr. Aristides Gomes, the setting of the date
for the parliamentary elections, on 18 November 2018,
the reopening and functioning of the Parliament, as
well as the formation of an inclusive Government, on
25 April 2018, are proof of this new impetus, which
is certainly fragile, but which brings hope. These
various acts, which lay the foundations for a peaceful
end to the crisis, are the result of the progress made
in the implementation of the Conakry Agreement of
14 October 2016, which remains the only consensual
framework that should make it possible to find a lasting
solution to the situation in Guinea-Bissau.

However, despite theose positive signs, the
enormous challenges ahead require the continued
support and assistance of the international community,
in order to overcome the obstacles to a definitive
peace in Guinea-Bissau. These are the next stages of
the Conakry Agreement, namely, the organization of
a round table for national dialogue, the signing of a
stability pact and the preparations for parliamentary
elections. In that regard, the clear priority objectives
assigned to UNIOGBIS by resolution 2404 (2018),
particularly with regard to elections, should be taken
into account. My country would therefore like to appeal
to donors and the international community to create
the technical conditions necessary for the organization
of open, fair and credible legislative elections. In
addition, cooperation between UNIOGBIS and regional
organizations, including the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), and international
partners, should continue to help stabilize the country.

One of the major challenges facing Guinea-Bissau
relates to security issues, both within the country and at
its borders. Meeting this challenge requires the updating
of relevant legislation and national mechanisms to
combat transnational organized crime more effectively,
including drug trafficking and money-laundering, which
threaten the security and stability of Guinea-Bissau and
the subregion. With this in mind, the Security Council,
through its resolution 2404 (2018), encourages greater
involvement by the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime in order to vigorously combat these scourges.

In that regard, my country would like to recall,
particularly in the framework of UNODC-ECOWAS
cooperation, the existence of the ECOWAS Regional
Action Plan for West Africa for the period 2016-2020,
the implementation of which aims to contribute, inter
alia, to the reduction of drug addiction, drug trafficking
and crime in the subregion. It is important to bear in
mind that poor management of the security issue could
have a negative impact on the ongoing political process.

In that perspective, we believe it is essential to
provide UNODC with the necessary means to fulfil its
mission, in order to contribute to a successful way out
of the crisis. Ultimately, only the ownership by Guinea-
Bissau's political stakeholders of their own destiny and
the continued support of international partners will
enable Guinea-Bissau to recover peace, a guarantee of
its economic and social development.

