Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): On behalf
of France, I would first like to express to the Chinese
presidency of the Security Council our warmest wishes
for success this month.

France supported the renewal of the sanctions
regime against Libya for an additional 15 months and
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2441 (2018). It is
critical to maintain a constructive dynamic within the
Council on this issue that will enable us to develop a
positive vision of the stages to come and to help ensure
overall stability in Libya in a context in Tripoli that is
extremely fragile, as we have seen this month.

Although the text of the renewal is essentially
technical, it includes certain welcome additions that
strengthen the sanctions regime, specifically the
introduction of sexual and gender-based violence as a
designation criterion for sanctions. That is an important
step forward in the Libyan context, and its proper
implementation must be achieved.

The text maintains and strengthens the mechanisms
in force with regard to the illicit export of all types
of petroleum products. It reaffirms that Libya's oil
resources must remain under the exclusive control of
the Government of National Accord and the Tripoli-
based National Oil Corporation for the benefit of all
Libyans. The resolution also helps to safeguard the
arms embargo provision, which is critical. In the light
of the ongoing instability, building a unified national
security architecture, under the control of the civilian
authority, is a top priority.

Lastly, the text reaffirms the Council's support
for the Government of National Accord and the urgent
need to arrive at a political solution. It is critical to
persevere in our initiatives along two lines * on the
one hand, combating all those who jeopardize the
tenuous political balance and exploit the situation to
divert Libyan economic resources, which must remain
a priority for us; on the other hand, fully supporting
the efforts of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya and the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Libya to advance the democratic transition
in Libya. Libyan stakeholders must work on this
together with Special Representative Ghassan Salame,
whose initiatives we fully support, without extending
the deadlines.

Respect for the commitments undertaken in Paris
is essential to move beyond the status quo, which only
prolongs the instability. It is more important than ever
before for the Council to remain united and mobilized
around these shared goals, and the Council can count
on France's commitment to that end.

