Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Haile Menkerios for his briefing and his
outstanding work at the head of the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS). I also thank President
Mbeki and President Mkapa for their decisive work
alongside UNMIS in the past few months. I should also
like to thank Mr. Deng Alor Kuol and Mr. Osman, the
representative of the Sudan, for their statements. I also
welcome the commitment shown by the two parties
throughout the referendum process. Finally, on behalf
of the French authorities, I congratulate the people of
Southern Sudan on the maturity they have shown on
this historic occasion.

The immediate recognition by the parties of the
official results announced Monday by the Southern
Sudan Referendum Commission shows the significant
progress that has been achieved since the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement was signed in 2005.
The authorities in Khartoum and Juba have chosen the
path of peaceful cooperation to achieve a successful
conclusion to the referendum and acceptance of its
results. We welcome this common will to overcome the
past.

However, as previous speakers have said, much
remains to be done before the end of the interim period
in July. First of all, a solution must be found to the
issue of Abyei. A temporary agreement has allowed for
the cessation of Violence between the parties. A lasting
solution must be found in order to determine once and
for all the status of the province and the terms on which
the populations there can coexist. We would request
that the two parties find a solution before March, as
they agreed at the presidential level on 27 January.

In addition, the pending post-referendum
questions must be resolved. The future of the
relationship between the North and the South depends
on a common understanding of the border demarcation
and of issues of security, citizenship and wealth
sharing. As the clashes last week in the Upper Nile
region have shown, a solution must be found for the
Southern forces that are there as part of the Sudanese
Army, as well as for the Northern forces in the Sudan
People's Liberation Army stationed in Blue Nile and
Kordofan. We encourage the continued mediation by
the Mbeki Panel on these subjects and call on the
parties to spare no effort and make the necessary
concessions to allow for the establishment of a lasting
peace.

For its part, the United Nations will now start the
important task of adapting its presence and work, with
the participation of the Sudan, in two distinct
countries. A new mission will have to be re-established
in Southern Sudan in order to carry out the task of
peacebuilding there. Its mandate will have to take into
account the decisive role that the United Nations team
established in Juba will be called to play in
coordination with bilateral donors.

In North Sudan, retaining a cell from UNMIS
would be a valuable step to take in terms of providing
follow-up to the implementation of post-referendum
issues and supporting the final stages of the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, that is, the conclusion of the popular polls
in the Blue Nile, where they have begun, and in
Southern Kordofan, where they have not yet been
organized. This would provide support to the two new
neighbours in the early stages of their bilateral
relations. We are at the Secretariat's disposal in terms
of contributing to the consideration under way on the
reconfiguration of the United Nations presence in the
North and the South.

While we welcome the successful holding of the
referendum, we cannot ignore the current deterioration
in the situation in Darfur. The number of displaced
persons has increased. Humanitarian access is not
always possible. We are therefore left to wonder
whether some have not indeed chosen the military
option. We know that this is not a viable option. The
Sudanese Armed Forces and the rebel groups must
reach a ceasefire with delay, followed by a lasting
peace agreement.

The developments we have seen in recent weeks
in the context of the Doha negotiations are
encouraging. The Sudan People's Liberation Army,
headed by Abdul Wahid al-Nur, must, from now on and
without delay or preconditions, join the talks, as have
the Liberation and Justice Movement and the Justice
and Equality Movement.

We also support the efforts undertaken by the
African Union for peace in Darfur. As highlighted
recently by the solemn declaration made by the heads
of State and Government of the African Union on the
Sudan, a political process in Darfur will be able to
complement the efforts in Doha once those efforts have
created an environment that allows for such talks to be
held.

We also continue to support the African Union-
United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and firmly
condemn the hindrances it faces. The mission must
redouble its efforts to protect civilians, as required by
its mandate. Progress must still be made in this respect.

I would like to conclude by recalling that there
can be no peace without justice in Darfur.

