Mr. Prodi: I am very grateful for the opportunity
to brief the Security Council for the second time and
to present the report of the Secretary-General on the
Sahel (S/20l3/354). My appointment as Special Envoy
in October was made in recognition of the need to
focus on the Sahel as a region and on a strategy that
is therefore a strategy for a region, in order to help the
people and Governments of the region to sustain peace,
security and development in the short and long run.

As I mentioned in my last briefing to the Council,
in December 2012 (see S/PV.6882), the challenges
facing the peoples of the Sahel are immense, and only
a strategy that goes beyond existing efforts will allow
the Governments of the region to overcome them.
The ongoing efforts in the Sahel remain critical, and
enhanced coordination between them is essential. But, in
all honesty, I must say that a strategy that only enhances
coordination between the current efforts is not sufficient.
A wider vision is necessary; hence my vision of a four-
by-four strategy based on the four pillars suggested
by the Secretary-General - governance, security,
humanitarian requirements and development - as
articulated when I was appointed, with a request for
areas of cooperation between the Governments of the
region, the international community, among the peoples
of the Sahel and, finally, within the United Nations
system. I believe that four-by-four strategy should be
the foundation of a collective response to the challenges
of the region, and all of us must therefore be engaged
in it.

I have had considerable consultations with the
leaders of the Governments of the region as well as

with key interlocutors of the international community,
in bilateral meetings as well as in multilateral
forums on the Sahel. During my visits to the region,
I have met with representatives of civil society and
traditional tribal, religious and women leaders. As far
as coordination within the United Nations system is
concerned, I have coordinated closely with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the Office for West Africa, Mr. Said Djinnit, and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Cote d'Ivoire, Mr. Albert Gerard Koenders, as well as
with the former and current Regional Humanitarian
Coordinators, Mr. David Gressly and Mr. Robert Piper.
The annex to the report highlights the division of labour
within the United Nations system.

Within a broader concept, I felt there has been a
need to act with urgency from the very outset, while
planning for the long run. Urgency is needed not only
because of the gravity of the situation, but also to
harness global support for the Sahel, as it will not last
forever. I am afraid that, with all the problems around
the world, if we do not act immediately the problem
of the Sahel will take second place. The unanimous
international concern over the spread of terrorism
in the Sahel has provided me with an opportunity to
gain support for the peoples of the region, both for the
short and for the long terms. Of course, all of that was
triggered by the crisis in Mali.

The situation in Mali is clearly seen by all to
be symptomatic of what will happen in other parts
of the Sahel if a timely response is not generated to
the challenges facing the entire Sahel region. While
the timely intervention of France has preserved the
territorial integrity of the country and prevented a
takeover of Mali by extremists and terrorists, it is
now critical that the success be followed by a credible
and all-inclusive political dialogue that addresses the
genuine problems of all communities in the country.

I am mentioning Mali early on in my brief for two
reasons. First, success or failure in Mali will affect the
entire Sahel, and secondly, while focus and attention on
Mali are critical, they should not be at the cost of the
rest of the region. In other words, when we talk about
Mali we must never forget the Sahel.

The strategy focuses on five key Sahelian countries
in the greatest need. I have taken into consideration
Mali, Burkina Faso, Mauritania, the Niger and Chad. As
far as the implementation of the strategy is concerned,
it requires an innovative approach that clearly shows
the peoples of the Sahel that it is no longer business
as usual for us. In that regard, I firmly believe that we
should focus on peace and security in the Sahel.
Let me now elaborate that point further. When
it comes to the region's humanitarian requirements,
I believe that the humanitarian efforts under way in
the region represent a success story - truly, I have
never seen such a fantastic effort - and are being well
coordinated under the regional coordinator. I have met
the resident coordinators of the region twice, listened
to them, and made it clear to them that I stand ready
to help in any capacity that they feel can enhance their
efforts or remove any impediments they face.

The Sahel undoubtedly suffers from a myriad
of governance and security challenges. I have taken
a careful look at the situation and the actors and the
challenges faced or created by them. In the light of
the foregoing, I strongly believe that the development
pillar - development that empowers Sahelians to take
care of the Sahel themselves - will provide the best
opportunity to improve peace and security. There is
a need to formulate concrete regional development
priorities with short-term impacts, in close collaboration
with the Governments of the region, while laying the
foundation for sustainable long-term development.
That must be followed, of course, by requisite resource
mobilization through an innovative coordination
mechanism that is capable of progress monitoring.

We know that success in all ofthis will be contingent
upon progress on good governance, and I am confident
that it will happen. In that respect, greater efforts on
cooperation and on commitments to good governance
and security will foster a greater scope of development.

I think it is very appropriate that I am briefing the
Council before the start of the implementation phase. In
line with the principle of empowering the Sahelians in
defining solutions to their problems, a second seminar,
as a follow-up to the first one of March 2013, was held
on 14 June. It was similarly attended by experts from
the region and academics working on the Sahel issue.

We are in the process of formulating the
recommendations of the seminar into concrete,
specific, quick-impact regional projects aimed at
laying a foundation for long-term structural change
in the region. Once finalized and after consultations
with the relevant United Nations actors - including
the United Nations Development Programme - have
taken place, we intend to take the project to the regional
Governments for discussion, endorsement and
commitments to participate in implementing bottom-
up strategies aimed at obtaining concrete results.

Resource mobilization for the project will be
the next critical phase. Any one can choose how to
contribute to that. Accordingly, resource mobilization
will demand a more innovative approach. It will require
a mechanism that is flexible enough to receive any form
of assistance, in cash or in kind, by directly delivering
the object of their choice. It will enable us to act quickly;
most importantly, it will have a low operational cost
so that most of the assistance can be expended in the
Sahel. In view of these criteria, I am recommending
the setting-up of a Sahel action fund that will act as a
platform for the resources necessary to meet the needs
of the Sahel, which will be defined through the regional
development projects.

As I stated, donors will be free to choose the type
of assistance they wish to offer, and the peoples of the
Sahel will know the source of the assistance. In that
regard, I have begun consultations with the African
Development Bank. Ihave already met representatives of
the World Bank, and tomorrow I will meet the President
of the World Bank, in order to explore the possibility
of the two Banks co-managing the fund, with support
from a pool of other international financial institutions,
including the Islamic Development Bank, the European
Investment Bank, and others, each of which has already
expressed an interest in participating in the effort. At the
same time, a coordination mechanism will be needed to
monitor progress and to ensure that no resources are
wasted due to duplication of efforts.

It is an innovative process. The development
proposal has come from Sahel University, with the
support of the United Nations. The proposal will
become the development plan, after approval by the
Governments of the countries of the Sahel. The main
sectors addressed will be water and agriculture,
new energy sources, decentralized solar energy,
transportation infrastructure, and infrastructure for
hospitals and schools.

An action fund platform is to be established and
managed by a pool of international development
institutions and coordinated by the World Bank and the
African Development Bank; a coordination mechanism
will be established among the United Nations, banks
and donors to monitor the process.
I would like also to clarify that the resource
mobilization will be in addition to the assistance
required for the ongoing humanitarian development
activities of the United Nations in the region. I call
upon the donor community to maintain its assistance to
that critical project.

Finally, taking into account the necessity to bring
about long-term sustainability by enabling the peoples
and Governments of the Sahel, I have recommended the
establishment of a Sahel development research institute,
because the people will have to work together, which
they have never done. They have worked in Paris and
elsewhere, but never together. The research institute will
be funded through the Sahel action fund. The institute
will be located in the region. It will constitute a very
light administrative and management structure and will

act as a training facility to generate local expertise in
issues confronting the Sahel. We will request the donor
community to second experts on specific issues, as
in-kind assistance, to form the faculty and substantive
body of the institute.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate two
messages. First, we cannot forget the Sahel, or we will
have more Malis; secondly, I appeal to the international
community to be as generous to the Sahel as it has been
towards Mali.

