Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank the
Ambassador of Belgium for his briefing. Let me take
this opportunity today to make three points, first,
on the central role the sanctions regime plays in
maintaining peace and security in the region; secondly,
our expectations of the upcoming mandate renewal; and
finally, the importance of the Government of Somalia
engaging with the Panel of Experts.

We all have shared interests in working towards
the overall goal of transition to Somali-led security.
The Council has been unified in its support. The arms
embargo, charcoal ban and targeted sanctions were
put in place to support Somalia's efforts, not to hinder
them. The now partial arms embargo is designed not
only to allow partners to support Somalia in its security
sector reform, as the United Kingdom is doing, but also
to prevent Al-Shabaab and other armed groups from
getting hold of those weapons.

The work that the Panel of Experts, the Security
Council Committee pursuant to resolution 751 (1992)
concerning Somalia and Member States have done to
disrupt the charcoal trade - which was undertaken,
of course, at Somalia's request - has resulted in a
reduction of charcoal exports. The Panel, through its
work, has uncovered more evidence and information
about Al-Shabaab's use of chemical precursors. Those
chemicals can be used to make homemade improvised
explosive devices, which have been used to kill innocent
people. The sanctions regime is there to enhance
Somali security.

Turning to the mandate renewal and the future of
the sanctions regime, we believe that our collective aim
is to reach a stage where the arms embargo is no longer
needed, and the United Kingdom is, at the moment,
providing substantial bilateral support to the Somali
Government. Our support is focused on building
the capacity of Somali security forces, including on
weapons management. I know that other partners are
doing the same.

However, we still believe, at the moment, that the
partial arms embargo is essential to limiting weapons
and other materials from falling into the wrong hands.
We intend to present a draft resolution that makes
the sanctions regime more effective, sets out the key
requirements in one place and strengthens measures
against Al-Shabaab, which remains a serious concern in
Somalia and a growing threat to the region. As always,
we are willing and want to work with our Somali
partners to chart a path towards progress. Let me thank
the Chair for his work over the past year and the Panel
of Experts for their vital role in monitoring the regime.

It is unacceptable and regrettable that Somalia has
not cooperated fully with the Panel for the majority of
its mandate, which, let us remember, was established
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.
The Committee, and its Chair in particular, have
continued to engage with Somalia to find a solution.
I believe that the Committee and the Council are open
to progress and to finding a way forward and through
this problem, but in order to do so we need Somalia to
engage with us.

Let me conclude by saying again that we depend
on the Vital work of the Panel of Experts, as we do for
many issues before the Council. Its work is to support
peace and security in Somalia. Our efforts to support
Somali-led security will be effective only if we all
work together.

