Mr. Ryan (Ireland): Ireland welcomes you, Mr.
Minister, to the Security Council and congratulates
Bulgaria on assuming the presidency of the Council
during what will certainly be a challenging month.

We are also very grateful to Assistant Secretary-
General Hedi Annabi for his, as always, full and
detailed briefing.

Ireland fully supports the statement that will be
delivered shortly by the representative of Denmark on
behalf of the European Union. Like the French and
British representatives, therefore, I will restrict my
comments to a few issues of particular concern to my
delegation.

First, it is important to stress again our full
support for work of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)in
implementing resolution 1244 (1999). This includes the
anti-crime initiative. The allegations levelled against
UNMIK and KFOR following the arrest of various
suspects are baseless and serve only to engender
suspicion and distrust. It remains the firm and agreed
aim of the Council to achieve a society in Kosovo that
is based on the rule of law. The Special Representative
and the Mission should continue to apply the law
regardless of the ethnic, national or political affiliation
of those accused. All Kosovar political leaders should
support UNMIK and KFOR in the exercise of their
responsibilities and should not exploit or encourage
needless fears. In the meantime, we welcome the
manner in which UNMIK and KFOR have calmed
down the situation and the more helpful statements
made recently by Kosovo Albanian leaders.

Secondly, the building of democratic institutions
is vital to the transition to a fully functioning, multi-
ethnic society, nowhere more so than in Kosovo. We
welcome the progress already achieved with the
provisional institutions in establishing concrete actions
designed to meet the benchmarks set out by the Special
Representative. It is important that the Assembly
should remain fully engaged in order to achieve the
objective of local ownership of the process.

Thirdly, Kosovo's minorities must not only be
accepted; they must be fully integrated. Serbs and other
minorities returning to Kosovo must do so in the
knowledge that they will live there in normal, secure
conditions and that their concerns and views will be
taken into account. Kosovo must be for all its people.
Ireland is therefore encouraged by the improved
security situation for minorities, by their increased
representation in the police and judiciary and, more
recently, by the range of political entities that have
been certified and the number of voters registered for
the municipal elections.
All organizations, including organizations outside
of Kosovo concerned with internally displaced persons,
should act constructively and try to facilitate as many
individual returns as possible. There is a continued
need for all political leaders to develop a substantive
dialogue between and within the various communities.
This is particularly important in order to enable them to
represent their constituencies effectively and to prepare
for the municipal elections.

Progress on this issue is of course linked to the
development of dialogue with the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. We welcome the improved nature of the
meetings of the high-ranking Working Group and the
fact that voter registration for the municipal elections
bore witness to a positive relationship with the
Belgrade authorities. Such cooperation in this and
many other areas is indeed welcome. It is now also
essential that the parallel structures be dismantled
rapidly, particularly the parallel security structures in
Mitrovica.

Fourthly, Ireland strongly supports Special
Representative Steiner's efforts to focus the
Assembly's attention on the wide range of issues for
which it is responsible, including health and education.
We have all seen recent reports about the lack of
mental health facilities in Kosovo. I am sure that all of
us agree that more attention must be paid to this
important issue and that necessary resources must be
provided. This, we believe, is not a choice; it is a duty.

Fifthly, it is clear that economic progress will be
a vital component in encouraging lasting returns to
Kosovo, as well as creating the conditions for real
investor confidence and, ultimately, a stable society.
The close cooperation between UNMIK and the
provisional institutions of self-government will be
especially important in achieving economic stability
and growth.

Finally, we continue to believe that Kosovo's
vocation lies in Europe. Its leaders must work to build
a truly multi-ethnic, democratic society in order to
ensure Kosovo's progress towards European
integration. Ireland, together with its partners in the
European Union, will continue to support such
integration and regional cooperation through the
Stability Pact and the Stabilization and Association
Process, as well as in our bilateral engagements with
the region.

