Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): My
delegation acknowledges the presence of the Prime
Minister of Kosovo in the Council Chamber this
morning. My delegation is also grateful to Mr. Soren
Jessen-Petersen, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his informative briefing. We pay
tribute to him and to the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) for their
commitment and dedication in assisting Kosovo in the
implementation of the standards and for their support
for Mr. Martti Ahtisaari, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, in the talks on future status. My
delegation also recognizes the presence of Ms. Sanda
Raskovic-Ivic, President of the Coordination Centre of
the Republic of Serbia for Kosovo and Metohija, and
thanks her for her insightful statement.

We congratulate the new leadership of Kosovo
and commend the democratic process through which
they were elected. That is a demonstration of the
political maturity that will continue to be required in
the progress towards a comprehensive settlement of
Kosovo's future status.

When we discussed the issue of Kosovo in
February this year (see S/PV.5373), we noted that
progress had been made in the preparations for the
talks on the future status of Kosovo. We were pleased
to note that four rounds of direct talks among the
parties have since been held in Vienna. However, we
regret that the absence of Kosovo Serbs in these talks
has continued to be highly conspicuous. The Secretary-
General's report cites several other areas where the
participation of Kosovo Serbs is lacking or has
remained marginal.

Tanzania believes that for Kosovo to become a
truly multi-ethnic and democratic society, all ethnic
groups must be represented in all spheres of political
life, including in future status talks. We therefore urge
the Kosovo Serbs to fully cooperate and to participate
not only in these talks but also in other Provisional
Institutions. We share the Secretary-General's view
that the leaders and the people of Kosovo also should
increase their outreach efforts with respect to minority
groups so as to promote confidence across ethnic lines
and start engaging in reconciliation.

Madam President, let me thank you warmly for
having reminded us that today is World Refugee Day.
My delegation would like to express its solidarity with
refugees and to commend all humanitarian
organizations such as the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) for
protecting, assisting and finding durable solutions to
the problems of refugees the world over.

In that regard, we are concerned at the low
number of refugees returning to Kosovo. We call for
the creation of a conducive climate that will encourage
refugees and internally displaced persons wishing to
return to Kosovo to do so and that will ensure for them
conditions of safety and dignity. Similarly, efforts
should be geared towards improving the living
conditions of, and providing opportunities for, the Serb
community in Kosovo.

We are encouraged to note that regional
integration has improved and that progress has been
registered in the decentralization process despite the
lack of participation by Kosovo Serbs. We are also
pleased to note that the security situation has remained
stable, albeit fragile. We commend UNMIK and KFOR
for their even-handed determination to enhance
security to support and shepherd the political process
leading to a determination of Kosovo's future status.

We also welcome the efforts of UNMIK and other
international partners in assisting Kosovo in the
decentralization process and in other reforms,
including in the police and the judiciary. We support
UNMIK's restructuring to reflect the changing phases
of Kosovo's political process and a possible
international civilian presence in the future.

My delegation wishes to recognize the important
role and contribution of all the different players in
Kosovo, including United Nations agencies and the
European Union.

I wish to express to Mr. Saren Jessen-Petersen
our profound gratitude and appreciation for his
tenacious work in Kosovo, in one of the most
challenging post-conflict situations in recent years. He
has brought to the challenge tremendous humanitarian
and political experience, which we believe will
contribute positively to the future of Kosovo. We wish
him all the best in his future engagements.

