Mr. Bamba (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation takes note of the report of the Secretary-
General (8/2013/197) and would like to thank
Mr. Edmond Mulet, Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, for his outstanding briefing.

I should like to make several brief comments on
certain points that my delegation deems essential.

As pointed out by Mr. Mulet, considerable progress
has been made at all levels - especially with regard to
stabilizing the security situation and as concerns the
political dialogue, national reconciliation and economic
revitalization - although major challenges remain that
require pursuing the ongoing efforts.

With regard to the stabilization of the security
situation, the Government is fully aware of the priority
importance of managing the security situation given
that consolidating the progress already made or
anticipated in other sectors depends on stabilizing the
security sector. Since the President of the Republic
himself took control of the defence sector and with
the establishment of the National Security Council,
the security services are more consistent and effective
in responding to threats and attacks. Such incidents
have significantly declined, in particular thanks to
the improved reorganization of the law-enforcement
forces and the increased anticipation capacity of the
intelligence services.

The second meeting of the consultative group on
security sector reform, held on 3 April at the Office
of the Prime Minister, facilitated the establishment of
the Coordination Centre for Operational Decisions.
The Centre has proved effective and useful by pursuing
racketeering and by dismantling rebel barricades in
the city of Abidjan, thereby improving the increasing
control of the security situation. In addition, the senior
commands of the national security forces and the
municipal police have been reorganized. Similarly, a
military planning law and a law on the administration
and organization of national security are being drafted.
All those efforts are aimed at establishing a national
army.

Regarding disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR), the Authority on DDR has begun
its activities. We welcome the skill and effectiveness
demonstrated by Mr. Fidele Sarassoro as the head of
that structure. Indeed, the number of people involved
in DDR is now known and is estimated at 64,500
ex-combatants. The Government is taking steps to
complete the database of ex-combatants, which, once
finalized, can be consulted by all potential donor
partners.

A first tranche of 2,000 ex-combatants have been
disarmed and demobilized and are being trained to
reintegrate as prison guards. Under the same plan,
a second tranche of 2,000 others is expected to be
reintegrated into the customs administration and the
border police. That skills training and the reintegration
should be accelerated thanks to the support of
international partners, whose highly appreciated
contributions are welcomed by the Ivorian Government.

Moreover, in that context, on 11 April Prime
Minister Kablan Duncan presided over a signing
ceremony of an agreement between the post-crisis
assistance and the DDR programmes. The agreement
will facilitate the funding of DDR activities, in
particular with regard to raising awareness for the
acceptance of ex-combatants by host communities,
on the one hand, and by economic actors, or potential
employers, on the other. That financing will also help
to prepare ex-combatants for their rehabilitation and
reintegration into the socioeconomic fabric. It will
also assist community infrastructure rehabilitation
projects for the rehabilitation and reintegration of
ex-combatants. Regarding the dozos, or traditional
hunters, the census has started and is being undertaken
jointly with the Ministry of Culture so that they can
regain their cultural identity and traditions.

In terms of political dialogue and national
reconciliation, dialogue with the opposition continues
and is strengthening, in particular in the context
of the permanent forum for dialogue. However, we
must condemn the "empty chair" policy of the Front
populaire ivorien, which has just refused to take part in
the local elections, scheduled for 21 April. Moreover,
the current enthusiasm caused by the local elections
affirms that the culture of democracy is irreversibly
rooted in Ivorian society and strengthens the expression
of individual freedoms.

Regarding national reconciliation, the Government,
through Prime Minister Duncan, believes that "it is not
an option but a common-sense obligation". The entire
country is determined, with resolve and commitment,
to dedicate the required energy to it. In that regard,
the Government has undertaken to restore traditional
chiefdoms so that they can play an increased role in
conflict prevention, the preservation of social cohesion
and reconciliation, in short, community peace, in
particular in settling land disputes, given that a rural
land reform law is being drafted.

With regard to justice and the fight against
impunity, the National Commission of Inquiry on
post-election events has submitted its conclusions. I
would like to affirm that the judicial process has been
initiated, in implementation of the recommendations,
and that preliminary inquiries are under way. Justice is
therefore taking place. However, it must be understood
that the confidential inquiries require that we do not
report further on that topic. In that connection, we
would affirm the commitment of President Alassane
Ouattara in the fight against impunity. Recently, during
an official Visit to Paris, he reiterated that "no one will
be spared, but it will be at the pace of Ivorian justice,
which is independent".

Regarding refugees, of the total 350,000 refugees
two years ago, there remain only 60,000 today. Similarly,
of the seven Ivorian refugee camps in Liberia, two have
been closed and the remaining five are located along
the border.

With regard to sexual violence, no new cases have
been brought to the attention of the Government since
2012. That issue is given consideration not only in the
overall context of the security sector reform but also
by the ministries for justice, solidarity and women's
affairs.

In economic terms, the signs of recovery are
visible. Since the end of the post-election crisis, the
entire country is under construction. Almost every
month, we see construction work starting on bridges,
roads, highways, hydroelectric dams, power plants and
processing plants for agricultural products, to name but
a few.

The national development plan for the period
2012-2015 reflects the great ambition ofthe President of
the Republic to make Cote d'Ivoire an emerging country
by 2020. To that end, the objective is to achieve strong
and inclusive economic growth, of which investment is
one of the pillars. We need to upgrade our economic
and social infrastructure. It has become dilapidated and
inadequate owing to a lack of maintenance during the
long and difficult decade of crisis that our country has
just experienced.

For the year 2012, the achievements are therefore
much better than expected. The economic growth rate
was 9.8 per cent, as compared with an initial forecast of
8.6 per cent. Continuing the efforts under way should
allow us to achieve a growth rate of 9 per cent in 2013.

The redeployment of the mining administration
to diamond-production areas is under way, and Cote
d'Ivoire fully adheres to the Kimberley Process. A
permanent representative office of the Kimberley
Process in Cote d'Ivoire was established on 18 May
2012, and a focal point has been appointed. In that
connection, Cote d'Ivoire participated in a meeting of
the Kimberley Process, held in Washington, DC, in
June 2012.

In conclusion, regarding adjustments to the
structure and troop strength of the United Nations
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire, I would like to point out
that the Government of Cote d'Ivoire believes that the
current level of troops is good. However, if the planned
reductions are to be implemented, my delegation
would like the withdrawal of the Blue Helmets to be
compensated for by the deployment of qualitative
resources, such as surveillance drones in the border
area between Cote d'Ivoire and Liberia.

