Mr. Mero (United Republic of Tanzania):
Congratulations to you, Mr. President, on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of September.

First and foremost, my delegation condemns the
terrorist attack in Burkina Faso and wishes to convey
its heartfelt condolences for those who lost their lives.

As we have all witnessed the most significant
systemic changes and processes since 1 January 2019
in the history of the United Nations, allow me to add
my voice to those of previous speakers to commend the
Secretary-General for the successful implementation of
the United Nations reform agenda and the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative, especially in the key areas of
management, the United Nations development system
and peace and security. By all accounts, Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres and his team have ably
demonstrated the commitment needed to meet Member
States' expectations, although challenges remain. I am
honoured to be given an opportunity to address this
important meeting on peacekeeping operations.

Tanzania acknowledges the insightful briefing
that was delivered by Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-
Secretary-General for Peace Operations, which offered
a snapshot of the implementation of reforms in the areas
of peace and security and the management structure.
While Tanzania pledges its full support to the new
peacekeeping management structures, we highly value
and cherish the outstanding and productive roles played
by the entire Department of Peace Operations and the
Department of Field Support, under Mr. Atul Khare,
as well as Ms. Jan Beagle, former Under-Secretary-
General for Management, in improving the conduct of
United Nations peacekeeping operations and delivering
regular briefings to Member States to seek possible
advice and input as they adapted and made new
approaches possible.

As Tanzania is one of the highest-ranking troop-
contributing countries, I wish to take this opportunity to
commend the Under-Secretaries-General of the newly
formed departments under the new structure, namely:
the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs,
the Department of Peace Operations and the Department
of Management Strategy, Policy and Compliance.

Although at this point it is too early to measure
the positive results of the United Nations reforms
and the Action for Peacekeeping initiative, I am
gratified to note that, as expected, the current set-
up in peace and security has provided a conducive
atmosphere for a more integrated approach, with a
single regional political-operational structure, which I
believe will provide coherent guidance for mission and
non-mission settings.

There is no doubt, therefore, that the structural
changes aim to enable greater integration within the
peace and security pillar, as well as greater alignment
with the United Nations development and human rights
pillars. Looking at the overarching peace and security
reform goal, the aim is to facilitate the United Nations
playing a more effective role in peace and security by
combining United Nations capacities across the board,
which is expected to yield better results in regional
strategies, integrated analysis and improved reporting
to Member States. It is our sincere hope that this set-
up will effectively provide direction, management and
support of peacekeeping and link all aspects of conflict
resolutions, such as prevention, mediation, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding, as well as connect them to long-
term development, so as to avoid segmentation.

On the peace operations management reforms,
we are delighted to note that the Secretariat has been
able to review the support management systems, has
eliminated most of the redundant administrative
structures and has updated many others in order to
ensure a simpler and more user-friendly management
framework. The famous newly established one-stop-
shop supply chain management is a key example of
how the United Nations is determined to simplify and
optimize the chain of activities that supports clients
in field missions effectively and efficiently. We are
very confident that the new management set-up will
deliver improvements in efficiency, responsiveness,
effectiveness and client satisfaction along the field
support supply chain.

Onasimilarnote,wehighlyvaluethe Comprehensive
Performance Management Framework, which aims
to provide checks and balances of the United Nations
systems to ensure evaluation, monitoring and control
of effectiveness and efficiency across the board. In that
regard, I wish to commend the Secretariat for putting
in place all the performance benchmarks, including
the new 360-degree performance evaluation system to
ensure effective performance at all levels.

We also appreciate efforts of the Secretariat to
develop plans to achieve and advance greater regional
diversity. The Secretary-General will be updated
quarterly on those plans. In that regard, we are fully
confident that the management reforms will ultimately
contribute to better mandate implementation in field
missions within the Action for Peacekeeping initiative.

We all agree that peacekeeping is one of the most
effective tools ofthe United Nations in maintaining peace
and security and an important pillar for post-conflict
reconstruction and development. It is in that regard that
Tanzania wishes to reiterate its continued readiness
to participate and contribute troops to peacekeeping
operations. Furthermore, we will continue to work with
the new United Nations structures and collaborate with
other troop-contributing countries to ensure effective
peacekeeping operations.

We welcome all initiatives by the Secretary-General
and his recommendations to solve new emerging
challenges in peacekeeping operations. We appeal to the
Secretariat and the international community to provide
financial resources accordingly and facilitate triangular
cooperation mechanisms among the United Nations
bodies, troop-contributing countries and regional
bodies in order to achieve strengthened strategic
coherence in peacekeeping operations, because it takes
two to tango. It takes the one who finances those who
are sending the troops and the Secretariat to contribute
to the maintenance of peace.

