Mr. Ryan (Ireland): The Secretary-General's
report represents a challenge to the Security Council, to
the United Nations system and to the wider
international community, which requires action-
focused responses. The Secretary-General presents a
compelling case for a culture of protection for civilians
in armed conflict. We know only too well that conflicts
are increasingly internal, rather than inter-State.
Article3 common to the four Geneva Conventions
remains of singular importance in this regard. Civilians
are frequently the principal object of violence rather
than incidental victims. The shocking number of
civilian victims in recent conflicts adds urgency to our
work here today. As High Commissioner Robinson said
earlier, civilians look to the United Nations to help
them. She also said that victims are often denied the
right to be heard. We must therefore move beyond
rhetoric to specific action.

The Secretary-General is absolutely correct in
demanding that we implement the action which he has
recommended and which we ourselves agree is
required. The Security Council must act within the
terms of its own mandate and capabilities, but we must
cooperate proactively with the rest of the United
Nations system and the wider international community
to ensure a fully coherent and effective response.

You, Mr. President, have rightly asked that we
take an action-oriented approach in our statements
today. In support of that, I will make some specific
observations and related proposals, adding that Ireland
fully associates itself with the statement that will
shortly be made by Sweden on behalf of the European
Union.

First, Ireland reaffirms the need for all States to
comply strictly with their obligations under
international law. National Governments have primary
responsibility for ensuring the protection of
civilians - both their own citizens and refugees within
their borders. They must observe international
instruments providing for humanitarian access as an
inviolable right of those adversely affected in conflict
situations. This is a frequently repeated mantra, but the
core message must issue unambiguously from our
deliberations.

Secondly, we must address the growing need for
humanitarian agencies to deal directly with armed
elements in a conflict situation in order to secure
access to refugees and internally displaced persons in
need of aid. No matter how diverse the circumstances
of conflict situations, there are certain basic guiding
principles relevant to all agencies. Agencies in such
difficult situations need to preserve the perception of
their neutrality and to avoid provocation by the armed
groups in question by ensuring absolute transparency in
their work. They must also achieve the sometimes very
difficult objective of avoiding being played off against
each other by their interlocutors.

The report rightly asserts how essential it is to
develop more coordinated and creative approaches to
access negotiations, for example, by pooling agency
interests consistent with their mandates, and by
agreeing on mutually complementary sectoral
negotiations. We welcome the action of the Secretary-
General in requesting the Inter-Agency Standing
Committee to develop a manual for access negotiations
and strategies, including benchmarks for engagement
and disengagement. This is an area of enormous
practical importance, and we look forward to progress
here.

Thirdly, the Secretary-General draws attention to
the actual and potential further effects of the presence
of armed elements among civilians in refugee camps.
Failures to deal with this issue have had disastrous but
predictable consequences. The Secretary-General's
report points to a number of practical difficulties and
makes a number of important recommendations in this
area. We welcome the agreement between the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, of June 2000, to ensure close cooperation on
this issue, and their agreement to deploy, as
appropriate, multidisciplinary assessment teams to
evaluate the situation on the ground in emerging crisis
areas. We believe that the development of clear criteria
and procedures for the identification and separation of
armed elements in situations of massive population
displacement should be a core element of any follow-
up to this discussion. My conviction in this area is
underpinned by my recent visit to southern African
States in my capacity as Chairman of the
Angola/UNITA sanctions Committee. Here I wish to
echo Ambassador Levitte's concern, in the context of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, about how the
dangerous vacuum created by military withdrawal is to
be addressed effectively.

Fourthly, the report draws attention to the
particular position of internally displaced persons.
Internally displaced persons suffer through the failure
of their own countries to respond to their needs, and
because there is no established system of international
protection and assistance for them. Ireland supports
strongly the activities of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Internally Displaced Persons,
Mr. Francis Mading Deng. We welcome the use of the
Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement.

Fifthly, we agree strongly with the Secretary-
General's observations on the detrimental effects that
media can have in fomenting and prolonging conflict,
and with his comments on the positive practical role
that media can play in building a culture of strong civil
society. Ireland has supported the Integrated Regional
Information Network, run by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. We attach
particular importance to paragraph 18 of resolution
1296 (2000). Peacekeeping missions should, where
appropriate, have a mass media component which can
disseminate information about international
humanitarian law, human rights law, peace education,
children's protection and the activities of the United
Nations. The Secretary-General notes that no
peacekeeping or peace-enforcement mission has yet
been authorized to close down the assets of "hate
media". We support action against the instruments of
hate media in the context of peacekeeping and peace-
enforcing missions. Channels for the dissemination of
ultra-nationalistic and ethnocentric hate campaigns are
a direct obstacle to the accomplishment of the mission
and should be treated accordingly.

In the longer term, there is clearly a need to
develop educational systems and syllabuses which
inculcate the values of tolerance and shared human
rights. This is a challenge not just to national and local
authorities, but also to other organs within the United
Nations system, including the United Nations
Educational, Cultural and Scientific Organization.

Sixthly, the creation and entrenchment of robust
legal structures which adequately defend the rights of
civilians and act as a real deterrent to potential
violators of international human rights law remains a
vital component in a global approach to the protection
of civilians. While the granting of amnesties in certain
very restricted circumstances may, after deep
reflection, be warranted, the granting of amnesties
from prosecution to those who have committed gross
violations of human rights should not be countenanced.
We have seen all too clearly that amnesties are not a
pragmatic, convenient fix to attain peace and
reconciliation but in fact undermine those objectives by
emboldening, and often empowering, the transgressor
as well as by debilitating the development ofthe rule of
law. Those who commit grave offences under
international humanitarian and human rights law must
be brought to justice. Ireland has long been an advocate
of the International Criminal Court. We urge its coming
into operation as soon as possible. I noted Deputy
Secretary-General Frechette's earlier strong emphasis
on those points.

In that regard, it is imperative that proper
financing be provided to fund ad hoc criminal tribunals
from the outset of their operation. Adequate financing
is required so that the special court for Sierra Leone
established under Security Council resolution 1315
(2000) last year can begin its investigative and
prosecutorial responsibilities.

We are hearing today some powerful and
convincing arguments and recommendations. We need
to follow up on them and on the recommendations
contained in the Secretary-General's two reports.
Ireland supports the setting up of a working group of
the Council charged with submitting to the Council
practical proposals for implementing, within the terms
of the Council's mandate, such recommendations as
well as the commitments of resolution 1296 (2000).
One such measure could be the drawing up of a
checklist of requirements which could be applied, on a
case-by-case basis, depending on the particular
prevailing circumstances, to the establishment or
renewal of peacekeeping mandates. One concrete
example, in Ireland's view, is that all peacekeeping
operations should contain a human rights component,
funded from assessed contributions. We would also
strongly support further reports to the Council by the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Mrs. Robinson, following important fact-finding
missions to areas of major conflict, and would support
Arria-formula meetings of Council members being
used more regularly in this area.
Finally, I must re-emphasize that the Security
Council alone cannot deal with the issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. National
Governments, the rest of the United Nations system
and the wider international community must also work
together in a joined-up way. We are making a start here
today, and we will have an important opportunity, later
in the week, to explore with the members of the
Economic and Social Council and other important
actors how to ensure a more coherent response to this
challenge.

