Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia thanks the
Egyptian presidency for convening this meeting. We
also thank Assistant Secretary-General Wane and
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General Haysom for
their briefings. We particularly welcome the Chair
of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission
for the Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan, His Excellency
Mr. Festus Mogae. Bolivia reiterates its support for,
and recognition of, the important work he is doing.

South Sudan continues to face a grave economic,
political, security and humanitarian crisis with serious
consequences that can be felt both domestically as well
as in neighbouring countries. It is alarming that there
are 1 million South Sudanese refugees in Uganda.
As we stated previously, an immediate cessation of
hostilities between the parties is a crucial step towards
achieving peace.

Bolivia believes strongly that the conflict in South
Sudan should be resolved through an inclusive political
process. Dialogue, understanding, reconciliation and
compliance with the 2015 Agreement are the way
forward. In that regard, we must highlight, and above
all support, the work being done by the main regional
actors to that end.

The efforts of the international community, in
particular such regional actors as the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) and the African
Union, may provide fresh impetus to, and lead to the
resumption of, the political process. In that connection,
we welcome the communique on the situation in South

Sudan issued by the fifty-eighth extraordinary session
of the IGAD Council of Ministers, which provides a
clear message and guidelines for the action the Council
should support in an united manner. IGAD initiatives,
in coordination with the African Union and the United
Nations, are the most appropriate alternative to achieve
stable peace in South Sudan. In addition, the high-level
Revitalization Forum is an invaluable opportunity
for that country to emerge from the political crisis in
which it finds itself. However, for that to work, the
commitment of the authorities and opposition groups
must be genuine. We highlight the efforts of His
Excellency Mr. Yoweri Museveni to bring together
different factions of the Sudan People's Liberation
Movement, as well as the role of Chair Mogae in the
mediation and revitalization of the political process,
which is of crucial importance.
With regard to the current state of the Regional
Protection Force (RPF), the deployment of vanguard
units is a very important development that we should like
to highlight. We welcome the progress and encourage
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
and the Government to continue to work together to
facilitate the deployment of the remaining troops. We
followed the recent visit oer. Lacroix to South Sudan,
and we highlight the commitment of the Secretariat
to undertake all possible efforts to accelerate the
deployment of the Regional Protection Force with 4,000
troops. The presence of the RPF could make it possible
for UNMISS to extend its presence to other areas of
conflict, provide humanitarian assistance and improve
the security situation in rural areas - something that
is tied to agricultural development, which is very
important to increasing agricultural production, which
in turn is necessary to combat the hunger situation,
contribute to economic growth and improve the quality
of life of the South Sudanese in those areas.

Moreover, Bolivia takes note of the release of
political prisoners after the announcement of an
amnesty in May. We believe that is a step in the right
direction that will strengthen the national dialogue.

Finally, as we have stated on previous occasions,
all the efforts of the international community will
mean nothing if the Government and the opposition do
not enter into a serious and constructive commitment
to resolve the conflict, and therefore achieve a stable
and lasting peace.

