Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I welcome
you, Minister Yun Byung-se, and congratulate you on
your presidency of the Council. I would like to thank the
Government of the Republic of Korea for its initiative
in holding this open debate on the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, and I congratulate it on
its leadership in implementing resolution 1540 (2004).
I would also like to thank Mr. Jan Eliasson, the Deputy
Secretary-General, for his statement.
Today's debate is timely, since it is taking place
on the tenth anniversary of resolution 1540 (2004),
which established a committee pursuant thereto whose
main aim is to prevent the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction and their means of delivery, as
well as any kind of activity on the part of non-State
actors connected to such proliferation, particularly for
reasons of terrorism. Unfortunately the current climate,
featuring the re-emergence of global terrorism and fear
that non-State actors may acquire weapons of mass
destruction, is no different from earlier years, and in
some situations has actually worsened.

In the decade since the adoption of resolution 1540
(2004), we have seen some significant achievements
in its implementation. As speakers before me have
said, 172 of the 193 Member States have submitted
their national reports to the Committee. Dialogue
between the 1540 Committee and Member States,
including visits to the countries concerned, has
intensified. The sharing of experiences and effective
practices relating to implementation of the resolution
between Member States and internation, regional and
subregional organizations has increased. Cooperation
between the Committee and the International Atomic
Energy Agency, the Organization for the Prevention
of Chemical Weapons, the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011),
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities, and the Counter-Terrorism Committee has
been strengthened. Awareness-raising workshops and
seminars have increased and proliferated around the
world.

Despite these commendable efforts on the part of
the international community, Chad is concerned about
the fact that a number of Member States have porous
borders and do not possess effective security forces
or border officials with the tools necessary to enable
them to detect illicit trafficking in nuclear, chemical or
biological materials and to confront terrorist threats. I
should recall that in 2011 terrorist groups acquired arms
from Libyan bases in order to invade a sovereign State,
in this case Mali. What might have happened if they
had been able to get their hands on nuclear, chemical
or biological weapons or their means of delivery?
Paragraph 14 of resolution 2118 (2013) established
Member States' obligation to inform the Security
Council of any violation of resolution 1540 (2004),
including acquisition by non-State actors of chemical
weapons, their means of delivery and related materials.
How can a State meet such an obligation if it does not
have the capacity to effectively control its borders?
We should stress the importance of strengthening the
capacity of Member States' security forces so as to
ensure that their border controls are effective, as well
as to promote synergy between non-proliferation and
the fight against terrorism within the framework of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

The continent of Africa is where terrorist groups
have proved the most dangerous in recent years. The
invasion of northern Mali by drug traffickers and the
armed groups of Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb,
the kidnappings and attacks perpetrated by Boko
Haram in Nigeria and the asymmetric war waged by
Al-Shabaab in Somalia and the Horn of Africa are
all serious threats to the Sahel region. Chad therefore
reiterates its commitment to working for the effective
implementation of resolution 154 (2004).

In conclusion, all strategies designed to combat the
threat posed by the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction should include capacity-strengthening for
countries that are exposed to that threat and without the
means to deal with it.

