The President (interpretation from Chinese): At the
outset of the meeting, I should like, on behalf of the
Security Council, to express deep sympathy to the
Government and the people of Bahrain for the great loss
they have suffered as a result of the passing of His
Highness Shaikh Isa Bin Salman Al-Khalifa, Amir of the
State of Bahrain. The long and distinguished leadership of
His Highness leaves an enduring legacy of pride and
honour, and of a deep commitment to the cause of peace
and stability in the region. I would request the
representative of Bahrain to convey to his Government and
to the bereaved family our deep condolences.

I now invite members of the Council to stand and
observe a minute of silence in tribute to the memory of His
Highness Shaikh Isa Bin Salman Al-Khalifa.

The members of the Council observed a minute of
silence.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President

The President (interpretation from Chinese): As this
is the first meeting of the Security Council for the month
of March, I should like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency
Mr. Robert Fowler, Permanent Representative of Canada to
the United Nations, for his service as President of the
Security Council for the month of February 1999. I am sure
I speak for all members of the Security Council in
expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Fowler for the
great diplomatic skill with which he conducted the
Council's business last month.

On behalf of the Council, I should also like to express
deep gratitude to His Excellency Mr. Michel Duval, Deputy
Permanent Representative of Canada to the United Nations,
for his very effective conduct of the Council's business
during the first week of February.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Sierra Leone
Fifth report of the Secretary-General on the

United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone
(S/1999/237)

The President (interpretation from Chinese): I
should like to inform the Council that I have received a
letter from the representative of Sierra Leone in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite that representative to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Dabor (Sierra Leone) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (interpretation from Chinese): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda.

The Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the fifth
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations

Observer Mission in Sierra Leone, which is contained in
document S/1999/237.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/1999/262, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council's prior
consultations.

I should also like to draw attention to the following
other documents: S/1999/174, letter dated 16 February
1999 from the Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1132 (1997)
concerning the situation in Sierra Leone addressed to the
President of the Security Council; S/1999/138, letter dated
10 February 1999 from the Charge d'affaires ad interim
of the Permanent Mission of Sierra Leone to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council; S/ 1999/ 186 and S/1999/224, letters dated 10 and
22 February 1999 and 1 March 1999, respectively, from
the Charge d'affaires ad interim of the Permanent Mission
of Sierra Leone to the United Nations addressed to the

 

Secretary-General; and S/ 1999/ 193 and S/1999/213, letters
dated 22 and 25 February 1999, respectively, from the
Charge d'affaires ad interim of the Permanent Mission of
Liberia to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-
General.
The first speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Sierra Leone, on whom I now call.


