Mr. Mercado (Philippines): The Philippines
would like to thank Lord Paddy Ashdown for his final
briefing to the Council on the developments in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and to commend him for his tireless
efforts over the last three and a half years on the
implementation of the Peace Agreement in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

We are pleased to note that, as Lord Ashdown is
about to end his present mandate, Bosnia and
Herzegovina has made significant progress on political
and economic structural reforms, particularly in the
area of State law enforcement, fiscal matters,
legislation and defence.

We note in particular the increasing economic
stability achieved during the reporting period, brought
about by, among others, the reforms initiated by the
High Representative to improve the business
environment and the fiscal system in order to create an
environment conducive to job creation.

The effective operations of the European Union
Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR) following
the transfer of authority from the NATO-led
Stabilization Force (SFOR) less than a year ago is also
commendable. The importance of a safe and secure
environment as a vital element in supporting political
and economic reforms after conflict cannot be
overemphasized. Thus, the presence of EUFOR is a
testament to deepening European Union (EU)
commitment to contribute to the maintenance of a safe
and secure environment in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The continuing contribution of its robust force should
be preserved.

Bosnia and Herzegovina should also be
commended for the notable process it has made
towards achieving the objectives of the international
community's efforts to pursue Euro-Atlantic
integration and establish contractual relationships with
both the European Union and the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO). Cooperation with the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) has also substantially improved
since the establishment of the ICTY Monitoring Group
early this year. This was evident with the surrender and
transfer of several indictees to The Hague this year. We
hope that Bosnia and Herzegovina will eventually be
able to remove the stumbling block to its membership
in NATO's Partnership for Peace - that is, the
apprehension of the two most-wanted fugitives, Mladic
and Karadzic.

We are gratified to hear from the High
Representative that the obstacles posed by Republika
Srpska police reform have been overcome and the way
is now open for Bosnia and Herzegovina to begin
stabilization and association agreement talks.

In this connection, we are also pleased to learn of
the EU foreign ministers' decision to welcome the
European Commission's recommendation to start
drawing up and negotiating a mandate for a Bosnia and
Herzegovina Stabilization and Association Agreement.

A decade after the Dayton peace Agreement,
Bosnia and Herzegovina now stands at the gates
opening to the path to integration. The international
community looks forward to the Government of Bosnia
and Herzegovina's achieving its objective of forming a
better, prosperous and democratic future in the family
of nations. The positive developments in Bosnia and
Herzegovina should be further pursued, and greater
efforts at compromise should be exerted by its leaders
to overcome the hurdle of the remaining challenges
that impede its Euro-Atlantic integration.

Lastly, we agree with the High Representative
that much still needs to be done and that Bosnia and
Herzegovina still needs concerted support, both from
EU and non-EU countries. At the same time, we also
believe that Bosnia and Herzegovina leaders should
continue to demonstrate the political will to fulfil their
responsibilities to their constituents and the
international community. The sooner Bosnia and
Herzegovina conforms to European democratic and
legal systems, the earlier its citizens will enjoy the
benefits of Euro-Atlantic integration.

