Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): The
Security Council is meeting once again this evening to
express the extreme concern of the entire international
community at the unleashing of increasingly
uncontrollable violence, which inexorably leads the
Palestinian and Israeli peoples into a never-ending
spiral of hatred, repression, vengeance and death.

Inexcusable acts of murderous violence,
disproportionate repression, more and more victims -
basically on the Palestinian side. Every day the
escalation increases one more step. On behalf of France
and on behalf of the entire European Union I wish to
express condolences to the families of all the victims. I
also wish forcefully to say that there is nothing
inevitable about the continuation of this tragedy. It is
possible to put an end to it. An end must be put to it.

On 20 November the 15 Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of the European Union met and adopted a
declaration the terms of which I wish to recall for the
Council:

"For weeks, every day has seen more
deaths, Palestinian or Israeli. That is not
tolerable. The European Union appeals to the
sense of responsibility of both sides, urging them
not to respond to provocation.

"The lack of progress achieved in the peace
process, including on the settlements' problem,
lies at the heart of the Palestinian people's
frustration and of the Violence.

"The European Union exhorts the Israeli
and Palestinian leaders immediately to honour in
full the commitments they made in Sharm el-
Sheikh five weeks ago now and in Gaza on 2
November.

"It asks the Israeli authorities:

"to withdraw their armed forces to the
positions they occupied prior to 28 September
and to put an end to the restrictions imposed on
the movement of people and goods in the
Palestinian territories;

"to lift the financial sanctions imposed on
the Palestinian Authority;
"in cases where the intervention of the
security forces appears absolutely indispensable,
to use only non-lethal methods, in accordance
with the appeal issued by the United Nations
Secretary-General.

"It asks the Palestinian Authority:
"to do its utmost to end the violence;

"to give strict instructions to the security
forces in order to stop the attacks against the
Israelis, in accordance with the announcement
made by President Arafat.

"The European Union asks the fact-finding
commission - created following the Sharm el-
Sheikh summit, and in which the European Union
is represented by Mr. Javier Solana - to begin its
work on the ground as soon as possible.

"It supports the United Nations Secretary-
General's endeavours to explore with the parties,
the terms and conditions of the deployment of an
observer mission, in accordance with the mandate
given by the Security Council.

"It continues to support President Clinton's
efforts and personal commitment in the search for
peace.

"The aim naturally remains the resumption
of the dialogue and peace negotiations, the only
way out of the current crisis. The protagonists
know this. The top priority is the cessation of
violence.

"The European Union is ready to contribute
to this. It is ready to shoulder its responsibilities."

I should like, following this quotation from the
declaration by the European Union, to emphasize, once
again, something that is clear - that there is no
alternative to the quest for peace. Violence must come
to an end and the peace negotiations must resume on
the basis of resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), as
well as the Oslo Accords.

The Security Council can play a useful role with
the consent of the parties to contribute to the search for
peace. The Secretary-General, last Friday, received
from the Council a mandate to consult with the parties
on the possibilities for, and the acceptable modalities
for, an observer mission of the United Nations. It is our
fervent hope that an agreement can rapidly be reached.

The events in recent days show that this is both
necessary and urgent.
