Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): The issue of the arms
embargo in South Sudan has been the subject of intense
debate in recent months. While it is a matter of urgency,
some delegations continuously advocate second-chance
diplomacy. Ukraine is all in favour of using diplomacy
as the primary path towards the resolution of the conflict
in South Sudan. However, we have a couple of simple
questions. How many more second chances should the
parties in South Sudan be given to stop the deliberate
killing of civilians, the rape ofwomen and girls, and the
incitement to ethnic violence? How many more towns
and villages must be burnt before the Council reaches a
consensus on further action?

South Sudan is on the verge of chaos. The conflict
has touched almost every South Sudanese family,
ruining hopes for a peaceful future. To give just one
example - the town of Yei in the south-west was once
considered one of the safest places in South Sudan, but
not any more. Once bustling streets are now deserted,
schools and hospitals closed, and stores and markets
looted. Government soldiers patrol neighbourhoods
with Kalashnikovs in their hands. No-go zones are
controlled by rebels. More than half of the town's
population has fled, and those who remain live in a fear
of being murdered, raped, arrested or disappeared.

Is that something that the international community
chooses to tolerate in the twenty-first century? Are we
ready to ignore yet another looming human tragedy that,
if not stopped, can lead to irreparable consequences.
The answer is obvious. We must not let the South
Sudanese people share the grief of Srebrenica, Rwanda
or Aleppo.

With that in mind, Ukraine voted in favour of
the resolution. We are fully conscious that it does not
represent a solution in itself. However, we are convinced
that the arms embargo and additional targeted sanctions
would reduce the ability of the parties to continue
fuelling the conflict in South Sudan. It would help to
silence the already procured military equipment and
stop the spending of desperately needed financial
resources on new weaponry. The arms embargo is not a
punishment, but a prerequisite and a tool for peace. We
regret that the Council was not able to use it.

