Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): Please accept,
Madam, President, my most sincere wishes of success
for Sweden's presidency. It is deeply symbolic that the
year 2017 starts with a renewed focus on prevention,
jointly facilitated by Sweden - a nation with an
impeccable record of promoting the values of the
United Nations - and the new Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Antonio Guterres, a trusted leader and
a symbol of the Organization's ideals. May I remind
the Council that the first-ever United Nations office
on prevention was established in my region, Central
Asia, 10 years ago. Now it is time for the rest of the
Organization to follow suit.

Clearly, the prevention of conflicts requires a
complex approach that, in fact, requires a paradigm
shift. Being seized with addressing the crises ofthe day
might be a good excuse to avoid adopting audacious
visions and taking bold steps. Global economic
uncertainty, political disagreements and narrowly
formulated national priorities might prevent us from
fostering dialogue and trust in international relations.
Still, the United Nations has a duty to ensure a safe
and prosperous future for all, and fulfilling it requires
practical steps to build a world free of the virus of war
and conflict.

In March last year, my President, Mr. Nursultan
Nazarbayev, published the manifesto entitled "The
World. The 21st Century", a far-reaching document
combining a realistic take on the world with an
ambitious vision based on unity rather than on
division, and on cooperation rather than on rivalry. On
1 January, on the first day of Kazakhstan's tenure in the
Security Council, President Nazarbayev unveiled his
policy address on sustaining a global partnership for a
secure, just and prosperous world, copies of which are
available in the Chamber. Dwelling on the principles
of the manifesto, the policy address puts forward seven
points related to making Kazakhstan's contribution to
the work of the Council as meaningful and constructive
as possible.

In the context of today's agenda, the President's
address makes it clear that, without genuine dialogue,
preventing conflicts and sustaining peace are
unattainable. At the global level, it requires setting
a goal of building by 2045, the United Nations
centenary, a world free of nuclear weapons. Such a very
practical decision will send a message that political
leaders - and the nations they represent - are strong
enough to destroy invisible walls and build bridges for
the common good. The policy address emphasizes the
need to do much more at the regional level. In line with
our commitment to strengthen peace and security in
Central Asia and Afghanistan, we will endeavour to
develop a regional model of peace and cooperation,
taking special care to address the root causes of the
ongoing conflict in Afghanistan and the prevention of
the proliferation of terrorism and violent extremism.

Rivalries, lack of trust and unity of purpose,
injustice, as well as stark economic and social
inequalities and underdevelopment, prevent the global
community from achieving progress in the Middle
East. As a nation committed to dialogue and mediation,
we are ready to host talks in Astana to help pave the
way for restoring peace in Syria. We also believe
that dialogue between political leaders and religious
authorities, as the Secretary-General has mentioned,
should be intensified with a view to finding lasting
political solutions to eradicate the threat of terrorism.
We invite all Member States to jointly draft an Astana
code of conduct for international counter-terrorism
operations as a step towards the creation of a global
anti-terrorist coalition or network. The adoption of a
comprehensive convention on international terrorism
as soon as possible will undoubtedly be a major
prevention measure.

We endorse the Secretary-General's remarks
on the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) as a
key prevention tool. My President's policy address
emphasizes the role of the security-development
nexus in preventing wars, protecting human rights and
building a safer and prosperous future. The SDGs are a
direct and significant contribution to the 2045 Vision.
Astana, the capital of Kazakhstan, will host EXPO-
2017 this summer, and we hope that that event, along
with obvious benefits such as greater international
cooperation in the area of sustainable energy, will
produce added value in the form of stronger collective
commitment to security through development.

During Kazakhstan's tenure in the Security
Council, we will support efforts to make the Council
and the entire United Nations better equipped for
the challenges and opportunities of the twenty-first
century. To enhance the level of trust between States
and generate the political will required, the President of
Kazakhstan proposed to convene Council meetings at
the level of Heads of State and Government on a regular
basis. We believe that this is a timely and highly relevant
initiative to achieve a paradigm shift in the Council.

As far as the United Nations machinery is
concerned, we welcome the recommendations of
the United Nations-commissioned reports on peace
operations (see S/2015/446) and the peacebuilding
architecture (see S/2015/490). A systemic approach
should be further developed to identify and prevent
emerging crises, take into account new factors, such
as cybercrime and the deployment of weapons in outer
space, and pay foremost attention to development and
human rights.

We strongly believe that the Security Council
should have a direct oversight role in the peace
continuum, including through greater cooperation with
the Secretary-General. Regular joint consultations,
both formal and informal, between the Security
Council and the Secretary-General continue to create
important opportunities for cooperation, prevention,
conflict resolution, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
long-term development.

I conclude by voicing my support once more for the
vision of Secretary-General Antonio Guterres. As the
honest broker, bridge-builder and messenger of peace,
he should play the crucial role in conflict prevention at
the earliest stages, by bringing to the attention of the
Security Council any matter that, in his opinion, may
threaten the maintenance of international peace and
security. Article 99 of the Charter of the United Nations
is very clear on that point.

