Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes your presence, Sir, as Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Belgium, at this public meeting of
the Security Council, to which it attaches particular
importance. I wish also to congratulate you warmly on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council and
on having taken the initiative to hold this open debate
on the link between natural resources and conflict. The
reality of that link has been clearly demonstrated by
most of the speakers who have preceded me. I endorse
the statements made this morning by the representative
of Tunisia on behalf of the African Group and by the
representative of Congo, whose views on the matter I
fully share.

Natural resources are an essential factor for the
prosperity of States. The course of human history has
been constantly influenced by the quest to control
natural resources, which are an important driving force
in international relations. Globalization has encouraged
the illegal exploitation of natural resources, in all its
forms, both in the context of actions by non-State
armed groups and as part of the informal economy, as
is the case of panning for gold. The illegal exploitation
of natural resources leads to the deterioration of the
environment. It promotes international organized
crime, in particular the trafficking of children who are
used as labour in quarries. Annually, it deprives
African economies of billions of dollars, money that is
used to finance, depending on the circumstances,
illegal trafficking of arms or the influence peddling and
corruption that undermine State structures and
jeopardize their ability to function.

From the standpoint of the principles and
purposes of the Charter, it is fortunate that the link
between natural resources and conflict is fully taken
into account in the activities assigned to the Security
Council as part of its mandated responsibilities. It is
crucial that the Council be able to resolutely fight the
illegal exploitation of natural resources, as it set about

doing in resolution 1625 (2005) on conflict prevention,
in particular in Africa. In order to do that, it must
continue to make appropriate use of the powers
conferred upon it by the Charter whenever situations
emerge that could pose a threat to international peace
and security with respect to natural resources.

Beyond the management of specific situations, it
is incumbent upon the Security Council to consider
systemic measures that could be taken to fight
practices that are harmful to the maintenance of
international peace and security as it relates to natural
resources. Within that framework, the Security Council
could commission studies on the trafficking of natural
resources and high-value commodities that could or do
contribute to the outbreak, escalation or continuation of
conflict. Such studies could be aimed at identifying the
mechanisms by which such trafficking develops and
measures that could be recommended to States - both
nationally and within the framework of multilateral
cooperation - taking into account all of the relevant
actors.

In managing certain armed conflicts linked to the
control of natural resources, the Security Council has
often made use of sanctions, in particular embargoes
targeting the products in question. It is clear that the
effectiveness of such measures depends on compliance
and on their consistent application by all States.
However, when an internal conflict is caused by the
monopolization of natural resources by a minority,
sanctions may not be the only valid option. If the
circumstances so require, such measures need to be
imposed as long as necessary in order to be able to
establish legitimate mechanisms for exploiting
resources, so that the countries involved can mobilize
their domestic resources to finance reconstruction and
development.

That concern should be taken into account in
defining the mandates of peacekeeping operations, so
that the international community possess the means to
use its authority to contribute to replacing an economy
of war, spawned by conflict, with an economy of
peace. That means that assistance to countries
emerging from conflict to establish solid and
sustainable national institutions must be supported by
assistance towards national ownership of the natural
resources that are in dispute, and towards their
transparent management. In the final analysis, that is a
key aspect of the rule of law and good governance.

Consolidating the mechanisms established to that
end will ensure the lasting stabilization of countries.
The equitable distribution of income is key in that
regard. The Security Council needs to support the
parties to a conflict in defining the standards for
peaceful relations between them - ensuring respect
for the United Nations Charter and the general
principles of international law - and to ensure that all
parties comply with agreements reached.

In conclusion, my delegation welcomes the
proposal made this morning by the President of the
Economic and Social Council to establish a forum
between the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council on the link between natural resources
and conflict. My delegation believes that that proposal
could form part of the institutionalization of conflict
prevention within the United Nations, something which
my country is urging.

