Ms. Zerrougui: Let me start by thanking the
delegation of Luxembourg for hosting this open debate
during its presidency and for its invaluable work as
Chair of the Security Council Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict.

This open debate comes at a crucial time when
there is an upsurge in conflict in many places around
the world. Roughly two months have passed in the year
2014. Taking stock of what this year has brought for
children so far yields a dire conclusion.

In South Sudan, a new nation's horizon darkened
in December 2013. Even today we have not yet grasped
the extent of the grave violations against children
committed in the renewed violence. Not only have tens
of thousands of children been displaced, deprived of
education and separated from their families and social
networks, they have also recruited, used in horrific
fighting, maimed or killed or forced to kill and maim.
Initial reports I have received on raids on hospitals,
including summary executions of the sick and old,
leave me without words. When we think of South
Sudan, we have to bear in mind that more than half
of the population are children. A whole generation that
should be entrusted with building a new nation is about
to be deprived of a fair chance to do so.

As the Security Council was briefed in-depth
yesterday (see S/PV.7128), the situation in the Central
African Republic remains tragic. Its impact on children
continues to be devastating. Resources are too limited
to address the challenge of providing assistance and
protection to thousands of children, including those
recruited and used by parties to the conflict. I hope that
the Security Council will address this situation with a
robust response providing the actors on the ground with
the necessary means and capacity.

In Syria, despite all the efforts of various actors,
armed violation has intensified. The killing and
maiming of children and attacks on schools and
hospitals continue unabated. Children are recruited and
used by various armed groups, and are often lured into
battle, where they are among the first to die. Reports
of organized sexual Violence as a tactic of humiliation
persist. While humanitarian access in limited areas is a
glimmer of hope in the darkest of times, the hardships
of children have barely improved. We cannot afford a
lost generation in Syria.

These first two months of 2014 have revealed once
again that we must not rely on hope when children
suffering in armed conflict are calling upon us to be
heard. Only action and concrete measures will ultimately
make a difference; only action and concrete measures
will allow us to look back at 2014 and conclude that we,
together, had made a difference for children this year.

Since the creation of my mandate by the General
Assembly, we have seen such concrete action. The
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict has
adopted a number of conclusions over the past year,
urging parties to conflict to end and prevent grave
violations and calling for country-specific action. The
Working Group has also visited Myanmar to assess
the situation and advocate for the plight of children.
The Security Council has continued to mainstream the
children and armed conflict issue into both thematic
and country-specific agendas, addressing new trends
when and where they arise with new and innovative
measures. I hope that the Council will do so again if the
draft resolution before it is adopted.

I dearly welcome the endorsement of the "Children,
not soldiers" campaign. It was before the Council that
I first expressed my intent to work towards child-free
Government armed forces by the end of 2016. It is my
firm belief that this goal is an achievable one. Eight
national Government forces remain on the Secretary-
General's list for this violation. Yesterday, I had the
honour to welcome representatives from each of these
Governments at the launch event for the "Children, not
soldiers" campaign. The commitment shown by the
Member States concerned is a powerful message to the
international community and parties to conflict - State
and non-State actors alike - all over the world. It is
time to make child soldiers history. I want to stress here
that the "Children, not soldiers" campaign is not only a
joint effort of my Office and UNICEF; it must be ajoint
effort of all of us who have gathered here today.

We have already begun to establish road maps to
expedite the implementation of action plans with parties
listed. Road maps are set up jointly with the concerned
Government to tackle priority issues and are based on a
joint assessment ofachievements made and existing gaps
in the implementation of agreed action plans. In Chad,
the road map was agreed last year and is the basis for
action taken. In Afghanistan, the road map has already
been drafted jointly with Government representatives.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, too, we are
close to the establishment of such a document. The
sustained implementation of commitments agreed upon
by the signatories to the action plan will ultimately lead
to the better protection of children and the delisting of
the concerned party from the annexes of the Secretary-
General's annual report.

In the course of the campaign, we have been able to
benefit from the expertise of a variety of Governments,
United Nations agencies, non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), and child protection experts,
giving us a better understanding of challenges and
solutions alike. This enables us to even better protect
children in unique cultural, economic, political and
social contexts.

New partnerships and the strengthening of existing
ones also lie at the heart of the implementation of
resolution 1998 (2011). By taking the lead with UNICEF
in drafting a guidance on how to monitor and report
attacks on schools and hospitals, threats and attacks
against education and health-care-related personnel,
and the military use of schools, we have reached out
to specialized United Nations agencies and NGOs that
in turn will adopt the children and armed conflict
agenda in their own programmes and projects. New
stakeholders are thereby won for our cause, and we
learn to understand how our cause can strengthen theirs.
The guidance on the implementation of resolution 1998
(2011), which we intend to launch in the coming weeks,
will mark another important step forward.

I am heartened by the fact that the Security Council
has strengthened the language on the military use of
schools in today's draft resolution. As members know,
military use puts schools and school children in danger.
We would like to see schools not become potential
battlefields. Seeking ways to better prevent attacks on
schools calls for efforts to incrementally prevent their
military use by parties to conflict.

My Office and all other child protection actors at
the United Nations Headquarters level - including
UNICEF, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Department of Political Affairs - will continue
to stand ready and support the task forces with all
means possible. However, it is impossible to monitor
and report on violations against children in conflict
and to address such violations appropriately without the
necessary capacity on the ground. Almost weekly, task
force members approach my Office and plead for the
continued support in advocacy for enhanced capacity
in child protection. We must be able to respond to their
pleas with adequate resources and innovative models
drawing from past experiences.

It is also important to mainstream child protection
into peacekeeping and special political missions
through the predeployment training of troops. I cannot
stress enough in this regard the importance of knowing
that the Security Council stands behind this. We owe
it to the children affected by armed conflict and to the
dedicated men and women putting their own lives at
risk to ensure that the voices of these children reach
our ears.

I began my statement with a grim picture in
three situations of conflcit. But children face similar
atrocitiets in many other conflicts. We must not leave
them in despair. Today we know that measures can be
taken successfully to end and prevent grave violations
against children in armed conflict. Dialogue with
non-State actors, engagement with Governments,
capactiy-building on all levels and the mainstreaming
of our agenda into all aspects of peace and security
continue. Those activities would be unthinkable without
the framework developed by the Security Council in
the past years. Hundreds of thousands of children have
their eyes upon the Council as it continues to lead the
way in protecting children from armed conflict.

