Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the participation in today's
meeting of Mr. Leonard She Okitundu, Vice-Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Regional
Integration of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We would like to thank the Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) for his
detailed briefing on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo sanctions regime. We greatly appreciate his
leadership of the Committee and share his assessment
of what is happening in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Great Lakes region. We support his
proposal for visiting the country and the region at the
end of October. Similar visits have already shown the
relevance of that practice.

We would like to express our sincere condolences
and sympathy to the family members of Michael Sharp
and Zaida Catalan present here today. They gave their
lives while fulfilling their mission in the name ofa goal
they sincerely believed in - that their work could bring
peace to a conflict-torn African country. We believe
that their killers and all who were involved in that
barbarous incident will be found and punished as they
deserve, while we, in memory of Michael and Zaida,
should redouble our efforts in working for peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Sanctions are an important element in the Security
Council toolkit. However, such restrictions cannot and
should not be an end in themselves. Their job is to help
to achieve the political and diplomatic settlement of a
conflict. We share the concerns about the worsening
situation in the Kasai provinces, where the escalating
confrontation between the authorities and armed tribal
groups is alarming. There can be no question that the
Government and the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo should take additional steps to mitigate the
situation. However, we would like to warn against any
sweeping attempts to blame the Congolese military
and police for everything that is happening through
an alleged disproportionate use of force. It is the
members of the opposition Kamuina Nsapu sect who
are responsible for the attacks on Government officials,
schools and polling stations and the recruitment of
child soldiers. Of course, that should not be an excuse
for human rights violations by any of the parties,
who should rather await the results of the authorities'
official investigation.

In our view, it is crucial to ensure that all
the Congolese parties consistently implement the
comprehensive political agreement of 31 December
2016, if stability is to be maintained in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. However, we would like to note
that the modalities of its implementation, as well as
any possible corrections to the timing of the elections,
are the exclusive prerogative of the Congolese people
and should be addressed only through a dialogue
between the authorities and the opposition without any
outside interference.

We agree with the opinion of Egypt's Permanent
Representative that the illegal exploitation of natural
resources continues to be one of the main challenges
facing not just the Democratic Republic of the Congo
but the entire Great Lakes region. And while the
financial fuelling of insurgents through this kind of
activity is steadily declining, it is essential to ensure
that the countries of the region can consolidate their
efforts to come up with realistic ways of dealing with
the problem. We see good potential in this area for the
1533 Committee's work.

We noted the timeliness of the 1533 Committee's
open meeting on 4 August and commend Egypt's
efforts in organizing it. At the meeting we looked at
the statement by the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo that the United Nations
Mission issued a fraudulent certificate of conformity
for exporting Congolese gold, in contravention to the
certification procedure for exporting precious metals
out of the country. We hope that this issue will be
comprehensively investigated.

We took note of the summary in the report circulated
to the Council on 15 August (see S/2017/672/Rev.1) on
the work of the United Nations Board of Inquiry into the
death of the sanctions experts. We would like to draw
attention to its first recommendation, which supports
the idea of conducting a transparent and comprehensive
criminal investigation under the jurisdiction of the
authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and with the support of Member States. We have been
in favour of that format from the very beginning. Our
optimism is buttressed by the attitude from Kinshasa,
which is already cooperating with the United States
investigation and is prepared to do the same with
Sweden's representatives.

Lastly, we would like to comment on one of the
Group of Experts' recommendations, about extending
its mandate by a year and a half owing to the Congolese
authorities' tightened security rules. We think this
would be counterproductive and could send the wrong
message to Kinshasa, as if we had no expectations
of seeing rapid improvement in the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We should remember
that the sanctions' job is to stimulate political dialogue
and that decisions to extend or remove them must be
made based on real progress.

