Mr. Kelapile (Botswana): At the outset, my
delegation takes this opportunity to sincerely
congratulate you, Mr. President, and your country,
the Dominican Republic, on your election as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council for
the term 2019-2020. We also congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
the month of January, immediately upon your election
to the Council.

In the same vein, we convey our deepest
congratulations to the other new members of the Council:
South Africa, Belgium, Germany and Indonesia. We
wish them well as they assume their duties in this very
important organ of the United Nations.

At this juncture, allow me to convey our
delegation's sincere condolences and sympathies to
our dear brother and friend Ambassador Jerry Matjila
and the people of South Africa on the passing of the
former Permanent Representative of South Africa to
the United Nations, Ambassador Dumisani Kumalo.
Representatives who knew him knew his contributions
not only to the Security Council, but also in many other
ways, including his leadership of the Group of 77 (G- 77) and China.

My delegation further condemns in the strongest
terms possible the recent acts of terrorism in Kenya and
Colombia, both of which claimed many innocent lives
and caused injury to many more. We also condemn the
deadly attack on a United Nations camp in northern
Mali, which claimed the lives of 10 peacekeepers
from Chad. It is our hope that the perpetrators of these
heinous crimes will be tracked, found and brought
to justice.

My delegation conveys its sincere appreciation
to your delegation, Mr. President, for convening this
quarterly open debate on a matter of great importance
to many of us, including my delegation - that is, the
situation in the Middle East, including the question of
Palestine. I would like to thank the Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, for his invaluable perspectives on
this subject.

My delegation aligns itself in advance with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

Allow me to further use this opportunity to
congratulate the State of Palestine on its historic
election to the chairmanship of the Group of 77 and
China for 2019. Its election to that very important
role demonstrates the confidence of a large number of
Member States in the State of Palestine. There is no
doubt that regional and other groupings - including
the largest of all, the G-77 and China - play an
instrumental role in ensuring a harmonized approach
to multilateral engagements and better coordination
among the United Nations main organs, such as the
General Assembly and the Security Council. It is not
surprising that a large number of countries, including
my own, stands firm in solidarity with, and support for,
the Palestinian people in their inalienable right to self-
determination and independence.

Botswana's pronouncement on this subject in
various forums has always been that there is merit in
the two-State solution. We still believe that Israel and
Palestine can coexist as two sovereign States that not
only share a common border, but a common desire for
peace, security and prosperity.

However, we remain concerned by the ongoing
impasse in the negotiations on the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, as that poses a serious threat to international
peace and security and in the Middle East as a whole.
We are of the view that there must be intensified efforts
to eventually return to meaningful negotiations aimed
at bringing about a just, lasting and comprehensive
solution to the conflict. We therefore urge the
international community to strengthen efforts towards
finding a negotiated settlement, facilitated by the
Middle East Quartet, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
Madrid terms of reference, as well as other actors, on
the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions.
We furthermore encourage all peace-loving nations,
especially those in the Middle East region with a better
understanding of the dynamics to the conflict and
leverage, to summon the necessary will and courage
to work towards embracing dialogue as a means to a
lasting solution.

Certainly, both the old, who have endured the
situation for far too long, and the younger generation in
the Middle East, as anywhere else in the world, deserve
a future of peace, tolerance and harmony. In the interests
of peace and protecting the lives of innocent civilians,
we wish to echo the call for all actors to fulfil their
obligations under various international instruments
and refrain from any steps that could undermine the
momentum of the negotiation process.

We furthermore call for all the relevant United
Nations resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016),
to be respected and given full effect, along with strict
observance of basic international humanitarian law and
human rights law by all parties to the conflict.
In the midst of the worsening humanitarian
situation in Gaza and other affected areas, we implore
both parties to cease hostilities, return to peace talks
and refrain from exacerbating an already deteriorating
situation. We have the utmost faith in the international
community's collective ability to put more pressure on
the parties to resume dialogue and intra-Palestinian
peace talks and relaunch the Israeli-Palestinian dialogue.

Wenotewithregretthat, despite global condemnation
and pronouncements from the Security Council and the
General Assembly, settlement activities continue in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem. We
reiterate that those actions violate international law and
constitute a significant obstacle to achieving peace.
Furthermore, we are gravely concerned about pockets
of violence and tensions, which pose challenges to
the deteriorated humanitarian, security and political
situation, especially in Gaza.

In conclusion, I once again reiterate my delegation's
long-standing position and conviction that there is no
alternative to the two-State solution. We believe that
to be the only long-term solution that can provide a
safer, freer and sovereign Palestinian State, along the
pre-l967 international borders and with East Jerusalem
as its capital, in line with the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

We reaffirm Botswana's solidarity with the
Palestinian people, as well as our unwavering support
for theirjust cause. We renew our call for strengthening
the coordination of international efforts to promote a
just, lasting, comprehensive and peaceful solution
to the situation in the Middle East, in particular the
question of Palestine.

