Mr. Neewoor (Mauritius): We thank you,
Mr. President, for holding this important meeting at the
request of Ambassador Lavrov of the Russian
Federation, whom we also thank.

The Gulf War of 1990 was short-lived and ended
swiftly with Iraq withdrawing its invading forces from
Kuwait under overwhelming military and political
pressure from the international community. Today, ten
years later, that war continues to cast its long shadow
over peace in the Gulf and in the Middle East region.
The outcome of the war was clear from the very
beginning. It was a reminder to all of us that the days
of achieving territorial ambitions through military
ventures are long over, and that the international
community will never condone any such pursuit by any
nation. The invasion of Kuwait was an act that
seriously violated the fundamental principles of the
United Nations Charter. The robust reaction by the
international community to end the invasion was fully
justified.

Unfortunately, the consequences of the war have
been terrible for the Iraqi people. Imports into their
country take place under the sanctions regime imposed
by the United Nations with the aim of controlling
Iraq's acquisition of materials that may be used to
produce weapons of mass destruction. Its oil exports
today are restricted with a View to monitoring its
revenues and expenditures for the same purpose. The
sanctions also require the inspection of the military
production facilities in Iraq to ensure that its capacity
to produce nuclear and other weapons of mass
destruction is fully terminated.

The implementation of the sanctions require the
full cooperation of the Government of Iraq in order to
ensure that the purposes of the sanctions are met
without unduly hurting the Iraqi people. I must add
here that the sanctions regime in itself may not be
perfect, but through a process of constructive dialogue
with the Security Council, Iraq can have the
imperfections addressed.

However, regrettably, implementation of the
sanctions has always been a rough ride, mainly because
of inadequate dialogue. This is clearly evident from the
fact the oil-for-food programme, designed to facilitate
availability of essential goods and services, has never
been a smooth operation, resulting in continued
scarcities of food, medicines and other commodities
with devastating effects on the people of Iraq. A
terrible humanitarian situation has unfolded in Iraq
over the years due to the enforcement of the sanctions
regime. At the same time, due to a lack of cooperation
on the part of Iraq, the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
is prevented from carrying out its inspection work
inside Iraq in fulfilment of its mandate under Security
Council resolutions.

The present stalemate cannot be allowed to go on.
The humanitarian situation has been bad enough for a
long time and has assumed such serious proportions
that the international community cannot remain
indifferent to it any longer. In recent months there has
been a growing demand from international public
opinion for a relaxation of the sanctions against Iraq. In
the Security Council, too, many members, including
Mauritius, sensitive to the sufferings of the Iraqi
people, have been calling for new initiatives that can
engage Iraq in a positive dialogue, so that the present
stalemate may be broken.

On his part, the Secretary-General has made
every possible effort in this regard. We have welcomed
the review process undertaken in Washington, DC. and
London with a view to bringing about a relaxation of
the sanctions against Iraq. My delegation has also been
contributing to the discussions at the level of experts of
the Security Council, aiming to evolve the package that
would ease the sanctions against Iraq but, at the same
time, not absolve Iraq totally from honouring its
responsibility under the relevant Council resolutions.
This important work must continue.

We take this opportunity to urge Iraq to respond
to the efforts of the international community to ease the
sanctions to which it is subjected and to take some
concrete steps of its own as a reciprocal action. We
believe that as a first step in this direction, Iraq should
resume cooperation with UNMOVIC and allow the
designated inspectors to do their work inside the
country. It is our considered View that Iraq has no need
for nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction. Iraq
should not find it difficult to reassure the international
community that it has no designs in this regard. Last
but not least, Iraq must, once and for all, close its
painful chapter in relation to Kuwait, by showing full
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the State of Kuwait and returning its historical and
cultural heritage, including Kuwaiti archives, as well as
repatriating missing Kuwaiti persons.

This meeting is taking place at a crucial juncture
of the important question of Iraq at the United Nations.
My delegation hopes that our discussion will be
dispassionate and focused so that, in the end, the
Security Council is helped in the search for a pragmatic
way forward on the difficult issue of Iraq.

