The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Afghanistan, Australia, Belgium,
Canada, Germany, India, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Italy, Pakistan and Turkey to participate in this meeting.

On behalf of the Security Council, I welcome Her
Excellency Ms. Julie Bishop, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Australia.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan; Ms. Habiba Sarabi, Deputy
Chairperson of the Afghan High Peace Council;
and Ms. Mariam Safi, Executive Director of the
Organization for Policy Research and Development
Studies.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Her Excellency
Ms. Joanne Adamson, Charge d'affaires a.i. of the
delegation of the European Union to the United Nations,
to participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2018/198, which contains the text ofa draft resolution
submitted by the Netherlands.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/l65, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.

The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.

A vote was taken by Show ofhands.
Infavaur:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Cote
d'Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, France,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Netherlands, Peru, Poland,
Russian Federation, Sweden, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America

The President: The result of the voting is as
follows. The draft resolution received 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 2405 (2018).

Recalling the Security Council's latest note 507 on
its working methods (S/2017/507), I wish to encourage
all participants, both members and non-members of the
Council, to deliver their statements in five minutes or
less. Note 507 also encourages briefers to be succinct and
to focus on key issues. Briefers are further encouraged
to limit initial remarks to 15 minutes or less.

I now give the floor to Mr. Yamamoto.


