Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I wish to thank Special
Envoy Said Djinnit for his comprehensive briefing on
the general situation in the Great Lakes region over the
past six months. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Bale', Permanent Representative of the Congo, for
his presence in the Chamber today and for his very
useful statement.

We very much appreciate the great contribution
that Special Envoy Djinnit has made for peace in the
Great Lakes region. It must of course also be mentioned
that we remain very grateful for his major contribution
to peace in the Horn of Africa in his previous role.

Five years after the signing of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region, the security
situation in the Great Lakes region remains worrisome
despite the many efforts to find peaceful solutions to
the conflicts in the region. The continued instability in
the countries of the Great Lakes region has displaced
many people and caused a major humanitarian crisis,
which requires close attention. However, we also note
the modest progress registered in some of the key
conflict-affected countries in the region.

For obvious reasons, I will focus mostly on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The challenge that
the Democratic Republic of the Congo faces in terms
of the presence of numerous armed groups operating in
the eastern part of the country and the huge implications
for the security of the country and the region cannot be
overlooked. That is why we believe that there is a greater
need to address the challenge, including in the context
of cooperation among countries of the region within the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework.

We thank Special Envoy Djinnit and the Permanent
Representative of the Congo for stressing the destructive
role of negative forces, including with respect to the
preparation for the elections. One hopes that the Council
will consider this matter as a serious challenge. In the

light of that, we once again welcome the progress made
in the electoral process in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the steps taken so far by the Government
to organize the elections. We hope more efforts will
be made in promoting confidence-building measures,
which we believe are vital to creating the atmosphere
needed for the successful holding of elections this year.

It is also absolutely necessary for all Congolese
parties to exercise maximum restraint, refrain from
making inflammatory statements, defuse the political
tensions prevailing in the country and seize the positive
momentum created to implement the 31 December
political agreement, which is the only viable framework
for resolving the current political impasse in the
country.

We express appreciation for the role of countries
in the region, particularly President Denis Sassou
Nguesso, in his capacity as the current Chair of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and the Regional Oversight Mechanism of the Peace,
Stability and Cooperation Framework. Trust is of
critical value, not only in business, it is perhaps even
more critical in politics. It is in that spirit that we
attach great importance to the role of the President of
the Congo, Mr. Sassou Nguesso. We believe enhanced
coordination between the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region, the United Nations, the
African Union, the Southern African Development
Community and other international partners will be
vital to ensuring the successful holding of the elections.
While taking note of the improvements in the overall
security situation in Burundi, the current political
situation can be resolved only peacefully through an
inclusive dialogue on the basis of the Arusha Peace
and Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi and the
Constitution of Burundi.

It is imperative to ensure that the ongoing efforts
towards constitutional reform are conducted through
broad consensus on the part of all stakeholders so as
to preserve the country's security and stability. The
peace process laid out by the East African Community
in that regard remains very important. We believe that
coordination and coherence among the East African
Community, the African Union and the United Nations
is key to making progress in the peace progress.

Looking forward, the work of the Office of the
Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region and the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region remain absolutely critical. We appreciate
the outcome of the meeting held in Addis Ababa last
month on the occasion of the fifth anniversary of the
signing of the Framework, which brought together
representatives of the signatories and guarantors to
review the status of the implementation. We recognize
that, five years on, important challenges remain. In
the light of the regional dynamics and the continuing
multifaceted challenges, the need to redouble efforts
towards the full implementation of the Framework
Agreement cannot be overemphasized.

Finally, we fully concur with the priority areas
identified in the report with regard to achieving peace
in the countries of the Great Lakes region.

