Mr. Antonio: Let me start by conveying
the apologies of Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma,
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, who
would have loved to join this meeting, but could not
attend due to other commitments on the continent. She
has therefore instructed me to represent her here.

I wish also to salute the presence of Minister
Traore Rokiatou Guikine of Mali and Mr. Kadre
Desire Ouedraogo, President of the Commission of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS).

I congratulate Morocco on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
December and thank the President for inviting the
African Union (AU) to this very important meeting.

We are highly appreciative of the efforts of the
Security Council regarding the situation in Mali and the
support extended so far to the AU and ECOWAS. I would
like in particular to highlight the adoption of resolutions
2056 (2012) and 2071 (2012) as a demonstration of the
commitment of the Security Council and its members
fully to shouldering their responsibilities on an issue
that clearly and obviously threatens international
peace and security, as underlined by the report of the
Secretary- General (S/2012/894) that wasjust introduced
by Mr. Feltman, whom we also thank.
I also would like to reiterate the AU's appreciation
to the Secretary-General for the invaluable contribution
of the United Nations towards the elaboration of the
strategic concept for the resolution of the crisis in
Mali, as well as for its active involvement, including
through experts dispatched to Bamako, in the process
of developing the concept of operations for the
deployment of the African-led international support
mission in Mali.

As all Council members are aware, the situation in
Mali is of utmost concern to ECOWAS, the countries of
the region and the AU. It poses a serious threat to Mali,
the region and far beyond, particularly in view of the
entrenchment of terrorist and other criminal groups in
the northern part of the country.

The situation also calls into question the basic
principles of the AU and the larger international
community. Let me highlight here respect for the unity
and territorial integrity of Mali, the repudiation of the
recourse to armed rebellion to further political claims,
and the rejection of terrorism and criminal activities.
Because those principles are so fundamental to the
maintenance of peace, security and stability on the
continent, we need to react swiftly and strongly against
any attempt to undermine them.

Since the outbreak of the crisis in Mali, ECOWAS
and the AU have exerted sustained efforts to address
the situation, as demonstrated by the initiatives taken
by the ECOWAS Chairman, President Alassane
Ouattara, and its Mediator, President Blaise Compaore;
the encouragement to the Malian stakeholders to adopt
an inclusive road map on the conduct of the transition;
and the planning for the deployment of an operation.
The Chairperson of the AU Commission, Ms. Dlamini-
Zuma, has appointed former President Pierre Buyoya
the AU High Representative for Mali and the Sahel. He
has since travelled to Mali and elsewhere in the region
to further the strategic concept and related Peace and
Security Council decisions. He is working in close
coordination with the region and with international
partners, in particular the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Sahel, Mr. Romano Prodi.

Both ECOWAS and the AU are certainly mindful
of the complexity and multifaceted nature of the crisis
facing Mali. They are equally mindful of the need to
take into account the regional dimension in the broader
context of the challenges facing the Sahelo-Saharan
region. The strategic concept that I alluded to earlier
aims precisely at providing an overall framework that
can guide the efforts of the international community.

Our efforts revolve around three key components.
The first is dialogue with the Malian armed groups
willing to seek a peaceful response to any legitimate
grievance they may have, within the strict framework
of the principles articulated by ECOWAS, the AU and
the United Nations, namely, respect for the unity and
territorial integrity of Mali - which are not up for
debate - the rejection of armed rebellion to further
political claims, and the repudiation of terrorism and
criminal activities. Second is the development by the
Malian stakeholders of an inclusive road map to achieve
the transition objectives, and third is the deployment
of the international support mission to help the Malian
authorities restore the country's unity and territorial
integrity and dismantle the terrorist and other criminal
networks active in the northern part of the country,
including the strengthened capacity of the Malian
defence and security forces.

Clearly, the deployment of the international support
mission is a key component of the strategic concept.
We strongly believe that the urgent establishment of the
mission will go a long way in furthering our overall
objective of facilitating the creation of the conditions
necessary for a stable and democratic Malian State that
responds to the needs of all its citizens, fully exercising
its authority over its national territory, and effectively
assuming its responsibilities in addressing regional
security and other challenges.

In that respect, the AU notes that the report
submitted by the Secretary-General stresses the need
for further planning and preparation, while recognizing
nonetheless that the concept of operations developed
with the support of the United Nations provides a
useful basis for considering the AU request to the
Security Council, acting under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations, to authorize AU member
States to establish the international support mission for
an initial period of one year, and to take all measures
necessary to assist the Malian authorities in recovering
the occupied regions of the north, in order to restore
the unity and territorial integrity of Mali and reduce
the threats posed by terrorists and affiliated groups,
including transnational organized criminal networks.
It is therefore our hope that the Security Council
will authorize the deployment of the African-led
international support mission in Mali without delay.

We view the political track regarding the transition
in Mali, the negotiations with the Malian armed
groups, and the deployment of the international support
mission as mutually reinforcing. Any perception of a
lack of decisiveness on any of those tracks may send the
wrong message to the terrorist and criminal networks,
as well as to the armed groups that are not committed
to a negotiated solution, while prolonging the suffering
of the civilian population and increasing the threat to
regional and international peace and security.

The deployment and operations of the international
support mission would require strong United Nations
support. Experience in the Darfur region of the Sudan
with the African Union Mission in the Sudan, and
currently in Somalia with the African Union Mission
in Somalia, has clearly shown the limitations of and
constraints linked to support provided on a voluntary
basis.

I would like therefore to echo the call made by the
AU Peace and Security Council, in its communique
of 13 November, for the establishment of a United
Nations support package, funded through assessed
contributions, to ensure sustained and predictable
support to the mission. Equally important is the need to
extend the required support to the Malian defence and
security forces through the establishment of a dedicated
trust fund.

Mali is at a crossroads. Time is of the essence. We
need to act fast and send a clear and strong message
on the resolve of the international community and
its support for the African-led efforts. In particular,
and in line with the Peace and Security Council
communique of 13 November, we call on this body to
take the following steps: first, to extend full support to
the strategic concept in all its components and to the
efforts under way to ensure its effective and speedy
implementation; secondly, to authorize the deployment
of the international support mission as provided for in
the harmonized concept of operations endorsed by the
Peace and Security Council, it being understood that
ECOWAS and the AU will continue, with the support
of the United Nations and in collaboration with all
stakeholders, to work on outstanding planning and
operational issues; thirdly, to put in place a United
Nations support package for the international support
mission funded through assessed contributions; and
fourthly and finally, to establish a trust fund to support
the Malian defence and security forces, especially in
view of the lead role expected of them in addressing the
security challenges in their country.

The AU is committed to building a strong
partnership with the United Nations and Mali. Indeed,
it is only through joint efforts that we will be able to
effectively support the Malian people and authorities as
they strive to overcome the very difficult circumstances
facing their country, and contribute to the promotion of
lasting security, stability and development in the entire
Sahel region.

At the AU, we have no doubt that, as in the past,
we can count on the Security Council's commitment
and continued support to Africa's efforts in Mali and
elsewhere on the continent.

