Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
you, Sir, for convening this meeting and Mr. De
Mistura for his briefing. We are grateful for his tireless
and important efforts.

We agree that the continuation of the conflict
and the regrettable humanitarian situation in Syria
undermines the prospects of making political
progress. The unpunished lack of compliance with
international law, international humanitarian law and
Security Council resolutions erode the needed trust for
sustainable peacebuilding. While we express our deep
sympathy and solidarity with the victims, we would
like at the same time to indicate our concern over the
impact of the Syrian conflict on regional stability, the
Council's credibility and the functioning of an rules-
based international system.

More specifically, the international community
is awaiting an immediate ceasefire throughout Syria,
full access to the needed humanitarian assistance, the
attainment of a political agreement that could bring
about sustainable peace in Syria, and accountability
for the heinous crimes committed, including the use of
chemical weapons. There can be no more excuses and no
more delays. The humanitarian ceasefire, as stipulated
in resolution 2401 (2018), must be implemented
immediately in eastern Ghouta, Idlib, Afrin, Raqqa,
Rukban and throughout Syria.

All parties should commit to resolving the conflict
peacefully, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015)
and the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex). That
will require the constructive participation of the Syrian
Government and the opposition groups in establishing
a constitutional committee, as agreed in Sochi. We
believe that a new constitution must be drafted to lay the
political and institutional groundwork for sustainable
peace in Syria.

The Syrian Government and all parties to the
conflict must rise to the occasion in confronting the
gravity of the situation, prevent its further deterioration
and escalation, and fulfil their obligations and
responsibilities. The Astana guarantors must also meet
expectations in terms of the special responsibility
entailed by their influence and involvement on the
ground. Yesterday's meeting in Astana and the meeting
to be held in Istanbul in early April must yield concrete
outcomes, including in the matter of those detained
and missing.

As a member of the Council, Peru believes that its
own responsibility vis-a-vis the tragic humanitarian
situation in Syria entails requiring all parties involved
in the conflict, especially those with greater ability
to influence events on the ground, to comply with
international law and international humanitarian law.
Peru places priority on the protection of civilians,
in particular women and children, and stresses the
importance of maintaining the unity of the Council
concerning this and all other conflicts and humanitarian
crises, wherever they might arise.

In conclusion, we convey our support for Mr. De
Mistura's work to encourage dialogue among the Syrian
opposition groups that have expressed their willingness
to comply with the ceasefire and expel terrorists from
eastern Ghouta and other parties to the Syrian conflict.

