Scientific meteorological data, our own observations from the field in the countries of our diplomatic presence, especially in Africa and the Middle East, and reflection on our humanitarian interventions in the world make us very well aware of the ever-increasing effects of climate change on the lives of millions of people around the globe, with potential, or already existent, security implications, especially if combined with a context of fragility. This is the reason that the Czech Republic joined the United Nations Group of Friends of Climate and Security in May and pledged to actively participate in its work to contribute to the development of tools for the systematic management of climate-related security risks at the global level. The Czech Republic strongly supports the inclusion of debates related to the implications of climate change for international peace and security on the regular agenda of the Security Council. Many Council resolutions already acknowledge the link between climate change and a specific conflict. The close attention of the Security Council to the impacts of climate change on international peace and security would surely enhance global resilience to climate change. It would add to the effectiveness of international development cooperation efforts and to successful climate action. The Czech Republic thanks Germany, Belgium, the Dominican Republic, Estonia, France, the Niger, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Tunisia, the United Kingdom and Viet Nam for organizing this open debate in order to contribute to the development of a United Nations system that is more effective in tackling the impact of climate change on international peace and security. We are persuaded that the periodic presentation of a global climate risk assessment report by the Secretary-General to the Security Council, based on scientific analysis and predictions and with recommendations for further action, would be another milestone in the building of a United Nations system that effectively responds to the security impacts of climate change. The United Nations system needs to further strengthen its capacities in relation to climate and security at all levels and across the whole United Nations system. Attention to capacity-building on climate and security and on climatology expertise at the local and regional levels in the framework of development cooperation is nevertheless important. It would enhance our ability to integrate climate-related security risk analysis through the inclusion of local partners. It would also strengthen ownership of climate-related risk management at the local and regional levels.
