At the outset, I would like to express our sincere appreciation to the German presidency of the Security Council for organizing this important open debate. I would also like to thank the Assistant Secretary-General for his insightful reflections. We thank all the briefers. Climate change is one of the greatest threats of our time. Its multidimensional impacts are already upon us. Climate change-induced hazards, such as flooding, cyclones, strong winds, heavy rains, persistent drought and locust infestations, are decimating ecosystems on which millions of people depend for sustenance. The disruptive nature of these threats will affect not only human security but also our very existence. Extreme weather events are exacerbating existing communal tensions, intensifying inequality and diminishing the availability of and access to life-giving resources. The very existence of entire communities and hard-won development gains are under threat. Millions already rely on annual emergency humanitarian assistance due to climate change-induced disasters. The trend is projected to worsen in the coming decades. Indeed, failure to adapt to the risks associated with climate change-driven extreme weather events jeopardizes the achievement of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Our ability to end hunger and poverty, ensure access to sanitation and sustainable energy and guarantee decent work for everyone is dependent on concerted global actions against the impacts of climate change. Although the causality between climate change and security is still being debated, its centrality to socioeconomic development is indisputable. Climate change- induced stresses are inextricably linked to overpopulation, rapid urbanization, industrialization and environmental degradation. As such, managing climate and security risks entails addressing the root causes of underdevelopment, competition over increasingly scarce resources and the degradation of ecosystems, which often lead to communal tensions or conflicts. Among pastoralist and farming communities, the threat of tensions over grazing land and water points turning into recurring violence is ever-present. Reducing these tensions and the security impacts of climate change requires taking concrete actions to enhance community resilience and redoubling multilateral efforts to meet our commitments under the 2030 Agenda, Agenda 2063: The Africa We Want and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, as well as the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030. The effects of climate change are not bound by national borders or the wealth of nations. All countries, large and small, rich and poor, are vulnerable to the adverse impacts of climate change. In fact, although their contribution is negligible, the least developed countries suffer disproportionately. It is a global phenomenon that requires an urgent and concerted global response anchored in the promotion of inclusive and sustainable development. The transboundary nature of the impacts of climate-related disasters compels us to cooperate across borders and coordinate our adaptation strategies for natural resource utilization and management. In this regard, we are glad that the United Nations, in recent years, has given due attention to this issue. This is an area where, we believe, the whole United Nations system should continue to strengthen its capacity. Different countries face specific climate change-related risks. The least developed countries, while vulnerable to severe risks, also lack the necessary tools for forecasting and early warning, as well as risk assessment and adaptation. The United Nations can help fill the gap by strengthening efforts to build common understanding and improve context-specific resilience, and by bolstering regional and national capacity to develop and implement climate change-adaptation and disaster risk-reduction strategies. It is not a sheer coincidence that eight out of the 10 largest multilateral peace operations are deployed in countries with high exposure to climate change. Hence, United Nations in-country resources, including peace operations and special political missions, are areas where the Council could play a key role in strengthening the capacity for adaptation and mitigation. The Council, in collaboration with relevant regional and subregional organizations, could also incorporate building resilience, managing climate change-induced security risks and supporting national adaptation strategies into peacekeeping and peacebuilding mandates. Africa is one of the most vulnerable continents to climate change-driven security risks. The Council could, for example, partner with the African Union (AU), the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the Economic Community of West African States and other subregional organizations to conduct a comprehensive study on the climate change-security nexus and recommend an action plan on how to address associated conflict risks. Furthermore, as it develops a systematic approach to climate-related security risks, we hope that the Security Council will enhance support for AU-led efforts to tackle the effects of climate change in Africa by building on the existing AU-United Nations partnership on peace and security. The need for an integrated global approach and better coordination at national, regional and international levels in planning and responding to the impacts of climate change is critical. Ethiopia is experiencing the effects of climate change. Besides its direct effects, such as an increase in average temperature and a change in rainfall patterns, climate change presents the necessity and opportunity to switch to a sustainable development model. In this regard, our 10-year national development plan emphasizes the importance of building a climate-resilient green economy. As part of that plan, this week, the above-average inflow of the seasonal rainfall in the Blue Nile made possible the impoundment of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam, a monumental national project with enormous potential for regional integration. We are confident that we will soon reach an agreement with Egypt and the Sudan on its filling and annual operation, as an enduring symbol of cooperation and mutual interdependence. To mitigate and adapt to the adverse impacts of climate change and the deterioration of ecosystems, our development plan promotes climate-resilient green agriculture. We are also undertaking natural resource-conservation and -management activities, such as forestry development, and soil and water preservation. Last year, Ethiopia launched an ambitious afforestation programme, with a view to combating environmental degradation, deforestation and other effects of the climate crisis. Ethiopians from all walks of life responded enthusiastically, planting a record 350 million tree seedlings in a single day. The second planting season is under way in earnest, even despite the coronavirus disease pandemic. In conclusion, I wish to reiterate Ethiopia's full commitment to accelerating the implementation of our international and regional commitments relating to the effects of climate change.
