Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I would like to begin by congratulating
you, Madam President, on the Republic of Korea's
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of May. I would also like to thank the
Korean delegation for having organized this important
meeting. Your initiative in organizing this public debate
is of particular importance at the present time.

Ten years ago, when the Security Council adopted
resolution 1540 (2004), it was unanimous in its
awareness of the need to strengthen efforts to maintain
international peace and security and to limit emerging
threats - in other words, the potential by terrorist
groups and non-State actors to acquire weapons of
mass destruction and/or their means of production
and delivery. Efforts have been made on the national,
regional and international levels to implement the
resolution. Relatively speaking, those efforts have borne
fruit by bridging the gaps that had created openings for
terrorists or transnational organized crime groups to
acquire and trade in weapons of mass destruction. That
also limited the phenomenon of the black market and
made it easier to exercise control over such sensitive
materials.

However, despite all those efforts, we deplore the
fact that there are still major gaps that are being used
by terrorists to acquire weapons of mass destruction
to be used for criminal purposes. Even worse, we see
the involvement of certain Member States in providing
chemical weapons and chemical ingredients to terrorist
groups. We see some States, some members of the
Security Council, remain silent in the face of those
violations, which pose a threat to global security. Those
extremely serious events are a reality, and we greatly
deplore them. We have seen them emerge in Syria with
armed terrorist groups using chemical weapons more
than once against civilians and the military, with the
support of the States of the region and the complicity of
the intelligence services of influential States members
of the Council.

The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic has
issued warnings, through hundreds of official messages
to the Council, the Secretary-General and the Chair
of the Security Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), alerting them that certain States
were facilitating the acquisition by terrorist groups
active in Syria of chemical weapons. In that regard,
we presented to the Council and the 1540 Committee a
letter dated 8 December 2012, and we continue to send
correspondence, including a letter dated 8 April 2014.
That last piece of correspondence contained detailed
information with regard to the manufacture and testing of
chemical weapons by Al-Qaida elements in a laboratory
in the city of Gaziantep, Turkey, in preparation to use
themagainst civilians in Syria. We warned of attempts
to use civilian flights originating in Libya against the
Syrian Government. We also submitted to the Council
audio and video recordings that showed armed groups
in possession of chemical weapons and intending to use
them. Members and non-members of the Council chose
to ignore our messages calling for compliance with
resolution 1540 (2004), which calls on Member States
to refrain from providing any support whatsoever to
terrorist groups that attempt to use nuclear, biological or
chemical weapons and their means of delivery. Again,
our efforts to inform the Council of those attempted
violations went ignored.

Although terrorist groups have attempted to
illegally smuggle chemical weapons, especially sarin
gas, through Turkish territory and into Syria, and in
spite of our detailed reports on the support provided
by certain States in connection with acts of aggression
that took place within reach of Damascus on 21 August
2013, the Security Council has done nothing. Influential
States have prevented the Council from doing its duty
in the face of a threat of terrorist action to which Syria
was subject, action that also threatened international
peace and security and the entire world. However, those
States did not hold the Governments of Member States
that support terrorism accountable. Once again, we ask
ourselves what point is there for the Security Council to
adopt resolutions ifthey are not implemented, or ifthey
are implemented only in a selective and self-interested
fashion?

The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
reaffirms its support for international instruments
and decisions, as well as for measures to promote
cooperation, coordination and information exchange, in
order to respond to the threat posed by the acquisition
by terrorist groups of weapons of mass destruction.
Syria is strengthening its relevant procedures in that
regard, and we have submitted five national reports to
the 1540 Committee.

The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
calls on the Security Council once again to fulfil
its responsibility to ensure that the terrorist groups
active in Syria are unable to acquire weapons of mass
destruction, to take action against groups that are
perpetrating terrorist actions on the territory of my
country against my people and to uphold international
peace and security.

