Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French): I
wish at the outset to welcome you personally, Sir, to
the Security Council on the occasion of this important
debate and to thank Norway and Ambassador Ole Peter
Kolby for having led and organized the recent mission
of members of the Security Council to Ethiopia and
Eritrea at a particularly timely moment in the
completion of the peace process between those two
countries.

The Ambassador will shortly make a statement on
behalf of the European Union with which France quite
clearly associates itself. I would just like to make four
comments in my national capacity.

First, the Security Council carried out the mission
it set itself by sending a clear message to the two
parties. Ethiopia and Eritrea are both fully committed
to respecting the forthcoming decision of the Boundary
Commission, and we welcome that commitment. They
are thus bound to implement all parts of the decision to
be announced in late March, in close cooperation with
the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea
(UNMEE) and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General.

Secondly, my country supports the Security
Council's resolve to assist both parties in applying the
decision of the Boundary Commission, the practical
implementation of which we would wish to see as soon
as possible. We strongly urge the parties to refrain from
taking any unilateral action that could have
destabilizing effects in the regions concerned and
encourage them to open a dialogue forthwith.

Thirdly, the mission observed on the ground the
humanitarian consequences of the conflict for the
populations of both countries. France hopes that the
new phase of the peace process to begin with the
Boundary Commission's decision will permit the
lasting reintegration of displaced persons and the
ongoing release of all prisoners of war and civilian
detainees.

Fourthly, the mission noted the efforts being
made by the leaders of religious communities in both
countries to develop ties with civil society. France
welcomes those initiatives and hopes that they will be
followed by other confidence-building measures aimed
at reconciling the two countries in all spheres.

Since the signing of the Algiers Agreement on
Cessation of Hostilities, Ethiopia and Eritrea have had
the wisdom to respect the ceasefire and security
measures imposed in the Temporary Security Zone.
The implementation of the decision of the Boundary
Commission will open a new phase leading to the final
completion of the peace process between the two
parties.

France ardently hopes that Ethiopia and Eritrea
will be able to seize this opportunity for their peoples,
who aspire to lasting peace and the continuation of
reconstruction and economic development programmes
conducted by the international agencies, the importance
of which the Council was able fully to assess on its
mission to the region.

France will make its contribution to the efforts to
be undertaken by the Security Council in coming
weeks to draft a resolution defining the role that
UNMEE will continue to play in the demarcation
process, aimed at implementing the mission's
recommendations, which we fully endorse.

