Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the holding of this meeting ahead
of the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT). We commend Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, Under-
Secretary-General and High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, and Mr. Yukiya Amano, Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA), for their excellent briefings.

In four weeks, the final session of the Preparatory
Committee for the 2020 Review Conference of the
NPT, which entered into force in 1970, will be held here
in New York. That session will be the last opportunity
for the States parties to the Treaty to reach consensus
on the points on which they disagree with regard to
the implementation of the NPT. It will be held in an
international security environment that is constantly
changing, in which there is an increasing need to
prevent the risks related to the acquisition of weapons
of mass destruction by non-State actors, especially
terrorist groups.

In that regard, my country is particularly concerned
about the lack of progress achieved in the nuclear
disarmament process and the recurrent obstacles
faced by its main mechanisms. As a State party to the
NPT, Cote d'Ivoire, which remains fully committed
to safeguarding and strengthening the international
non-proliferation architecture, also signed the Treaty
on the Prohibition ofNuclear Weapons on 20 September
2017, the date on which it was opened for signature. For
my country, the total elimination of nuclear weapons
remains the only guarantee to transform our common
desire to maintain international peace and security
into a reality in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations.

As my country is convinced that the NPT - the core
of the international non-proliferation regime - must
be preserved, regardless of differences in interpretation
among States parties, C6te d'Ivoire fervently hopes that
the 2020 Review Conference will achieve the expected
progress, particularly in the implementation of the
three pillars of the NPT, namely, nuclear disarmament,
nuclear non-proliferation and the use of nuclear energy
for peaceful purposes.

C6te d'Ivoire also stresses the need to apply
article IV of the Treaty so that States lacking nuclear
technology may further benefit from civil nuclear
energy in the specific areas of agriculture and medicine.
In that regard, my country welcomes the constructive
cooperation it has enjoyed with the International
Atomic Energy Agency, which led to the construction
ofthe Lamto Geophysical Station and the opening of my
country's first radiotherapy centre for the treatment of
cancer in Abidjan. Cote d'Ivoire intends to pursue such
cooperation and step up its investments in that area with
the goal of opening its first nuclear medicine centre.

My country believes that non-nuclear States can
legitimately pursue adequate security guarantees
through a universal legally binding instrument that
protects them from possible actions by nuclear-weapon
States. Such security guarantees must be accompanied
by verification measures to enhance transparency and
trust among States parties in accordance with article
VI of the NPT and the Action Plan agreed at the 2010

Review Conference. States parties will therefore be able
to work constructively to promote nuclear disarmament
in their respective regions through the establishment of
nuclear-weapon-free zones, following the established
models in Africa, Latin America and the Caribbean and
Central Asia.

In that regard, my country urges the States of the
Middle East region to pursue negotiations with a View
to concluding a similar agreement. We also urgently call
on all countries that have yet do so to sign and ratify the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. Although the
Treaty was signed by 184 States and ratified by 168 of
them, it has yet to enter into force, as it has not been
ratified by 44 annex 2 States.

Similarly, my delegation calls for the early
conclusion of a treaty banning the production of fissile
material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive
devices, which should unambiguously serve the cause
of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation.

Although the North Korean-United States Hanoi
summit failed to achieve the outcome hoped for by
the international community, my country nevertheless
welcomes the choice of dialogue as a means of seeking
lasting solutions to the current situation on the Korean
peninsula. Cote d'Ivoire also expresses its support for,
and encouragement to, the IAEA for its outstanding
work in connection with the Iranian nuclear agreement.

In conclusion, cote d'Ivoire is convinced that the
nuclear threat is not a matter of fate but of decisions by
men and women, who have the urgent duty to eliminate
it permanently in order to build a safer world.

