Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
the President and the entire mission of Chad for their
leadership during this busy month of December. To our
Chilean colleagues, we wish the very best for January.
They can count on our support.

Today I would like to share our delegation's views
on some areas where the Security Council has been
productive, while also looking ahead to what we will
need to continue to focus on in January and beyond into
the new year.

Although I joined my country's delegation to the
United Nations very recently, I understand from my
team and from discussions with predecessors that this
has been a singularly demanding year in the Security
Council. This year the Council has deliberated on
continuing crises, such as in Syria; nascent or mounting
situations as in Mali and the Central African Republic;
deteriorating security across North Africa, including
acts of violence and terror committed by Boko Haram
and other groups; tensions in the Middle East and Gaza,
the emergent threat of Islamic State of Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) and the risk of foreign terrorist fighters,
to name just a few.

That comes on top of the already significant work
required to mandate and oversee 16 peacekeeping
operations, 11 political and peacebuilding missions
and 15 sanctions committees. With this significant
workload, we know how difficult it can be to maintain
perspective and identify and focus on priority tasks.
As we examine what we have done over the month, we
must do so while looking forward.

The Al-Assad regime's brutal tactics remain the root
cause of Syria's problems today, including 12.2 million
people in need, nearly 5 million displaced and the rise
of ISIL. The humanitarian situation remains grim, with

nearly 10 million people food-insecure and 11 million
in need of clean water and sanitation. Meanwhile,
ISIL's terror in northern Syria continues to reduce
humanitarian access to 2.7 million Syrians in need of
aid. We and our coalition partners will continue our
efforts to degrade ISIL forces in Syria and Iraq.

We support Special Envoy De Mistura's efforts to
help reduce violence and alleviate the suffering of the
Syrian people. The United States supports any ceasefire
that would provide relief to Syrian civilians and is
consistent with humanitarian principles, but ultimately
there can be no genuine and long-term stability so long
as President Al-Assad remains in power.

This year we saw the illegal annexation of Crimea
and the deaths of 298 people in the shoot-down of
Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 in Ukraine. We have held 27
meetings in the Security Council this year on Ukraine,
and while the situation has indeed evolved over the
year, the root of the problem remains the same. We
are similarly concerned about the situation in Georgia,
and we will need to watch carefully the ramifications
of Russia's treaty with the Abkhaz region. The United
States supports the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Georgia.

Over the past 12 months, in South Sudan the Council
has witnessed tragic, deplorable and heartbreaking
events caused by the country's political and military
leaders. The young nation has plunged into a man-
made political, security and humanitarian catastrophe.
The international community has responded with a
united voice, strong regional leadership through the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
the African Union, hundreds of millions of dollars
in humanitarian assistance, and a United Nations
peacekeeping mission - the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan - made up of 68 troop-contributing
countries, resulting in thousands of lives being saved
and famine averted in 2014. But the coming weeks
and months will be critical. In the absence of the
establishment and implementation of a credible peace
agreement, the risks of famine, State failure and the
regionalization of the conflict are all too real. It will be
incumbent on all of us to make peace in South Sudan a
top international priority in 2015.

On the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
will need to pursue operations against the Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda (FDLR) once
the 2 January deadline passes. We understand that
MONUSCO will be in a difficult position in the months
ahead as the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo has pushed for a significant reduction in the
Mission's troop strength, while simultaneously needing
significant logistical support from the Mission to assist
in elections and to combat the Allied Democratic Forces
and the FDLR. Any coming changes to MONUSCO's
size should be based on a military assessment, and not
on political considerations.

We also urge Council members to continue to
support the Government of Yemen in its efforts to restore
the country's stability. The peaceful participation ofthe
Houthis, and that of all of Yemen's diverse communities,
is important to the ongoing political process, but the
Houthis must engage with the Government in good
faith. The use of violence by any party to achieve
political objectives is unacceptable. This month, the
Council sent a strong message that the international
community is serious about the implementation of
sanctions against those obstructing Yemen's political
transition. We will continue to identify individuals who
fuel violence and interfere with the transition, and will
impose further targeted sanctions on them.

We also strongly condemn last week's bomb
attack in Rada, Yemen, which killed dozens of people,
including at least 15 girls riding a school bus. The
Yemeni people have lived with senseless violence for
too long. Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula remains
the gravest threat to Yemen's security, and we remain
committed to our partnership with Yemen to counter
the shared threat posed by Al-Qaida in the Arabian
Peninsula.

Unfortunately, the vicious attack last week in
Yemen was not the only senseless, large-scale act of
brutal violence perpetrated against children. We were
all horrified by the attacks on the school in Peshawar,
Pakistan, last week that took the lives of so many
innocent children. We condemn in the strongest
possible terms this horrific attack. By targeting students
and teachers, those terrorists have once again shown
their depravity. We stand with the people of Pakistan
and reiterate the commitment of the United States to
supporting the Government Pakistan in its efforts to
combat terrorism and extremism and to promote peace
and stability in the region.

Despite these and other crises faced over the past
year, my delegation continues to believe that through
our collective efforts, we can achieve success in
overcoming these challenges. I would like to thank
Argentina, Australia, Luxembourg, the Republic
of Korea and Rwanda for their service to the United
Nations and the international community over the past
two years. My delegation truly appreciates the spirit of
cooperation and professionalism which they and their
Council teams have all exhibited. We wish them well
in the New Year and hope that long vacations for all are
in order.

To our incoming Council colleagues from Angola,
Malaysia, New Zealand, Spain and Venezuela, we say
"welcome". We have much work to do together. I wish
everyone happy holidays and a happy new year.

