Mr. Takasu (Japan): Japan strongly condemns
the recent attacks on President Jose Ramos-Horta and
Prime Minister Xanana Gusmao, which sought to
obstruct Timor-Leste's nation-building processes
through violence. Resorting to Violence is
unacceptable. We wish President Ramos-Horta a
speedy recovery. I also take this opportunity to thank
Special Representative Mr. Atul Khare and his team in
the field for their dedication in the difficult conditions.
Since the Security Council extended the mandate
of the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-
Leste (UNMIT) last year, Timor-Leste conducted two

elections successfully and the parliament completed its
first budgetary process through constructive dialogue
among all parties. It was gratifying to observe the
country recovering from the setback of the 2006 crisis
and moving steadily towards democratic governance.

Therefore, that makes it all the more regrettable
to witness the unlawful attacks on the democratically
elected leaders of the Government. At the same time, it
is highly commendable that the Government responded
promptly to the emerging situation in an effective
manner, in accordance with the constitution, and that
the people remained calm and maintained public order.
This is clear evidence that the efforts for nation-
building have made solid progress.

The report of the Secretary-General points out
that there are areas for improvement in order to realize
sustainable stability. And, as last Monday's incidents
indicate, the situation in Timor-Leste is still fragile.
Timor-Leste requires continued support on the part of
the international community, and UNMIT plays the
primary and indispensable role in this. Therefore,
Japan supports a decision by the Security Council to
extend the mandate of UNMIT for another 12 months.

Rebuilding a professional national police force is
an essential step towards restoring confidence in the
Government. We are pleased that UNMIT has
successfully completed the screening process for all
registered officers. The Government and UNMIT have
begun discussing the possibility of a phased transfer of
police responsibility to the National Police Force of
Timor-Leste (PNTL).

We commend the readiness of the PNTL to
assume more responsibility for the security of their
own country. The transfer of responsibility, of course,
has to be carried out after careful evaluation of the
PNTL's level of capability and of the trust of the
people and the community. We welcome the Secretary-
General's intention to send an expert mission to
UNMIT to assess the requirements of the PNTL and
possible necessary adjustments to the composition of
UNMIT.

Japan is committed to supporting every effort for
peacebuilding and development in Timor-Leste. Japan
attaches great importance to advancing international
efforts to support peacebuilding activities in post-
conflict countries. This commitment was reaffirmed in
the recent statement by Prime Minister Fukuda and by
the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Koumura. They
both emphasized that Japan must play a responsible
role in the international community as a peace-
fostering nation, and expressed the hope that Japan will
become a focal point for the world to gather knowledge
and experience in peacebuilding and to train
peacebuilding professionals.

It is for this reason that Japan is extending
support for peacebuilding efforts around the world and
has launched a pilot programme to train peacebuilding
experts in Japan and other Asian countries. Japan will
continue to make the utmost efforts in fulfilling its
responsibility as the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission.

The consolidation of peace entails steady
economic recovery and development. Peacebuilding
challenges should be tackled in a holistic manner.
While we support the extension of the UNMIT
mandate, it is essential to always keep in mind the
importance of the peacebuilding element in Timor-
Leste.

In order for Timor-Leste's recovery to be more
successful, the donor base will have to be broadened so
that the country can benefit from a wide range of
international support. In particular, we should put high
priority on creating job opportunities for young people
and on promoting the economic activities of the private
sector.

Japan has stood by the Government and the
people of Timor-Leste and will continue to do so and to
demonstrate solidarity and support for the country's
efforts.

