Mr. Vaverka (Sweden): I would like to join others
in welcoming Special Envoy Kafando back to the
Chamber today and to thank him for his update this
morning. While welcoming the positive developments
that the Special Envoy has reported on, we must not
underestimate the frailty of the security situation in
Burundi and the precarious nature of the political,
economic and humanitarian situation, as well as
continued reported grave human rights violations.
There is clearly a need for the Security Council's
continued engagement and support, especially for
regional mediation efforts.

The Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement
continues to be the fundament for peace, security
and stability for Burundi and the region. An inclusive
political resolution of the current conflict through
dialogue must be found. Sweden fully supports the
efforts led by the East African Community to revitalize
an inclusive inter-Burundian dialogue. We expect the
Government and all relevant actors to commit fully
to this process. In order to stabilize the political,
security and human rights situation, there needs to be a
conclusion of this dialogue.

A consensus-based road map towards free, fair and
inclusive elections in 2020 is important. It is crucial that
the United Nations and the international community
follow and support the process. I would also like to
firmly underscore that ensuring women's full and equal
participation is essential for credible elections. The
announcement by President Nkurunziza that he will
not seek another term in 2020 was an important step
towards a constructive political process.
We reiterate our full support for the efforts of the
Peacebuilding Commission's Burundi configuration,
under the chairmanship of Ambassador Lauber. The
Commission remains a unique platform for discussing
the situation in the country with Burundi and brings a
holistic understanding of the socioeconomic situation
and the urgent peacebuilding needs.

Finally, we are deeply concerned about the
continued lack of progress in addressing human rights
violations and abuses in Burundi. Upholding and
respecting human rights and ensuring accountability
is critical for trust, dialogue and human dignity and
to prevent further escalation of the conflict. It is
thus of great importance that the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights be allowed to work
in the country and enjoy our full support in this regard.

