Mr. Le Hoai Trung (Viet Nam): I have the honour
to deliver this statement on behalf of the 10 States
members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN): Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia,
the Lao People's Democratic Republic, Malaysia,
Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and
Viet Nam. At the outset, allow me to congratulate
you, Madam President, and the Argentine Republic
on assuming the functions of President of the Security
Council for the month of August. We wish Argentina
all the best of success.

In the past few years, we have witnessed enormous
changes, and new paradigms in international peace and
security have emerged. Hence, it is critical to strengthen
regional-global cooperation and coordination. Indeed,
from Europe to Asia, from Africa to the Americas,
regional organizations have displayed a more active role
in the maintenance ofpeace and security. In our region,
10 South-East Asian countries are building an ASEAN
community as envisioned in the ASEAN Charter. Over
the years, ASEAN has increasingly become a central
component of the regional architecture. Important
regional arrangements, with ASEAN at the core, in
particular the East Asia Summit, the ASEAN Regional
Forum and the ASEAN Defence Ministers Meeting-
Plus, have proven to be effective forums for dialogue
and consultation on regional security and beyond.

In its efforts to promote peace and stability in the
region and beyond, ASEAN attaches great importance
to cooperation with the United Nations. Since the
previous Council debate on this topic in January 2012
(see S/PV.6702), that cooperation has been improved in
a comprehensive manner.
First, ASEAN-United Nations cooperation has
been institutionalized with the adoption of a Joint
Declaration on Comprehensive Partnership between
ASEAN and the United Nations. Under that framework,
periodic ASEAN-United Nations interactions have
been established at various levels, including at high
levels, through ASEAN-United Nations summits
and annual meetings between the Foreign Ministers
of ASEAN, the President of the General Assembly
and the Secretary-General. The Comprehensive
Partnership has also established priority areas of
cooperation, which include mediation and good offices,
non-traditional security issues, counter-terrorism, the
peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention
and resolution, peacekeeping, peacebuilding, food and
energy security, climate change, ASEAN connectivity,
culture and education. In addition, a resolution on
ASEAN-United Nations cooperation has been adopted
biennially by consensus in the General Assembly, of
which the latest was resolution 67/110, which stresses
the need for continued and increased coordination for
the concrete realization of elements of cooperation
contained therein.

Secondly, ASEAN member States have actively and
constructively contributed to the work of the United
Nations in the field of peace and security. Individually
and collectively, ASEAN States have initiated or
have taken part in negotiations of important General
Assembly resolutions on peace and security. They have
become members and have chaired groups within the
framework of the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations of the
General Assembly. As of June 2013, ASEAN member
States had contributed nearly 4,000 peacekeepers to 13
out of 16 United Nations peacekeeping missions, and
more are expected with the recent announcement by
Viet Nam, my country, of its intention to participate in
United Nations peacekeeping operations in early 2014.

Thirdly, ASEAN and the Secretariat have
expanded activities in the implementation of the
comprehensive partnership. The Secretariat and other
United Nations bodies have provided expertise and
cooperated closely with ASEAN and other partners
in organizing workshops and training courses and in
bilateral exchanges on peacebuilding and security-
related issues. Notable instances include workshops
with various United Nations organizations, including
those that have been established by the Council.

The growing ASEAN-United Nations cooperation
has been beneficial to international peace and security,
as well as to peace and security in the region. Through
increased interaction and the expertise and niche
capacity of each side, we have been able to complement
each other.

For its part, ASEAN continues to be a net
contributor to international peace and security. The
ASEAN way of incremental interaction, consultation
and dialogue could be part of the solution to conflicts
and crises elsewhere. Most importantly, such dialogue
is crucial to cultivating a culture ofpeace that promotes
restraint, preventive diplomacy and mutual respect, as
well as a strong commitment to international law, the
Charter of the United Nations, including the principle
of the peaceful settlement of disputes.

It is our hope to benefit from continued United
Nations support and facilitation for the central role
of ASEAN in addressing regional peace and security
issues, as well as the ASEAN contribution to the
work of the United Nations. Emerging issues, such as
climate change, energy security and maritime security,
would be better dealt with by increased and diversified
cooperation between ASEAN and the United Nations,
including United Nations specialised agencies. I take
this opportunity to express the sincere thanks of
ASEAN countries to the Secretary-General, United
Nations bodies and the specialized agencies and their
leaders for their valuable support and assistance.

In conclusion, ASEAN reiterates its strong
commitment to further broadening and deepening
cooperation between ASEAN and the United Nations,
especially in the maintenance of international peace
and security.

