Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola) (spoke in Portuguese; interpretation provided by the delegation):
I address the Security Council on behalf of the member

countries of the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries (CPLP): Brazil, Cape Verde, Guinea-Bissau,
Mozambique, Portugal, Sao Tome and Principe, Timor-
Leste and my country, Angola, which is the current
President of the Community.

I would like to pay tribute to Her Excellency
Helena Embalo, Minister of Economy, Planning and
Regional Integration of Guinea-Bissau.

It is with great satisfaction that we participate in
this important meeting of the Security Council, which
has Brazil and Portugal as non-permanent members.
The meeting focuses on the report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS)
(S/201l/655), which has been presented by our friend
and Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Joseph Mutaboba.

I wish to highlight the issues related to security
sector reform. Guinea-Bissau faces challenges in
several areas, such as the need to subordinate military
power to the civil authorities, the demobilization and
reintegration of members of the armed forces and the
struggle against impunity and drug trafficking. We
should recognize the progress made in those areas in
recent months and encourage the Government of
Guinea-Bissau to intensify its efforts towards stability
and development.

The security sector reform road map for Guinea-
Bissau developed by the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) and the CPLP is an
indispensable contribution to the response to the
various challenges facing the country. As demonstrated
in the recent summit in Luanda, the CPLP is committed
to the effective implementation of the road map,
including the operationalization of the pension fund for
retired armed forces and police personnel. However,
the operationalization of that fund is conditioned on the
availability of financing from the other partners to the
stabilization process in Guinea-Bissau.

We welcome the decision of the Government of
Guinea-Bissau to deposit $200,000 into the pension
fund, despite the country's known financial limitations.
That deposit will be followed by another contribution
of $300,000 by the end of 2011, which will create
conditions for the effective establishment of the
pension fund. That is an essential condition for the
success of the demobilization and reintegration of the
armed forces of Guinea-Bissau. In that context, the
CPLP also encourages the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF)
to make available $3 million to accelerate
establishment of the pension fund in Guinea-Bissau.

Implementation of the ECOWAS-CPLP road map
will not be possible without the understanding of the
international and bilateral partners with respect to the
need to mobilize additional funds to contribute to the
success of the process. We consider that to be an
essential element in ensuring the sustainability and
irreversibility of the peacebuilding and political
stabilization processes in Guinea-Bissau. The lack of
financial resources and sometimes the excessive
politicization of the assistance required by Guinea-
Bissau have been a negative influence in the dynamic
of that process.

Faced with that reality, the technical, material and
financial contributions made available by CPLP and
ECOWAS, and bilaterally by the Republic of Angola
and other CPLP members, are examples to be followed
as to how the principle of solidarity and international
cooperation should be applied. Each member of the
CPLP has its own experiences and lessons learned with
respect to peacebuilding. The CPLP considers that
complementarity between the various aspects of peace
and security, economic recovery, and the rule of law is
fundamental in the process of political stabilization and
national reconciliation.

The rule of law and the struggle against drug
trafficking are some of the elements of the
peacebuilding process. Therefore, international
mobilization of additional resources that may
contribute to the implementation of the national
poverty reduction strategy cannot be put in second
place. Also in this area, the PBF contribution to various
socio-economic projects could serve as an example for
other partners to follow.

The CPLP welcomes the visit by the delegation
from the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
and the United Nations Office for West Africa to assess
the negative impact of drugs on Guinea-Bissau and the
West Africa subregion. At the same time, the CPLP
congratulates and supports the recent commitment of
ECOWAS authorities to mobilize the West African
countries in the combat against transnational organized
crime. Close collaboration with the High-Level Policy
Committee of the West Africa Coast Initiative (WACI)
is fundamental. WACI offers a response that is
appropriate to the transnational nature of drug
trafficking through the establishment of transnational
crime units in the countries that join the Initiative. It is
urgent that the international community supports the
operationalization of those units in Guinea Bissau.

To conclude, the CPLP is convinced that the
international community must remain engaged in the
11-57874
stabilization process in Guinea Bissau. We hope that
the United Nations can continue to play a central role
in that process.

