The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Germany.

First, I would like to associate myself with the
statement that will be made by Ambassador Ryan of
Ireland, on behalf of the European Union, at a later
stage of the meeting.
Germany is very concerned about the current
situation and about the possibility of a further, new
spiral of violence that might take the lives of many
people on both sides. We urge both sides to break the
cycle of terror and violence. There is a real danger that
the situation could dramatically escalate at a moment
when there is new momentum in the political process
and a necessity for both sides to talk to one another as
soon as possible. A stable, lasting and just peace can be
reached only at the negotiating table. Germany remains
committed to a negotiated two-State solution resulting
in a Palestinian State existing side by side in peace
with Israel, living within recognized and secure
borders. We therefore call on both sides to resume
negotiations on the peace process without further delay.

While recognizing Israel's legitimate right to self-
defence in the face of terrorist attacks against its
citizens, Germany, as well as the European Union, have
never accepted extrajudicial killings, which are
contrary to international law. Time and again, Germany
and the European Union have urged the Government of
Israel to put a halt to the practice of extrajudicial
killings. The continuation of those practices endangers
the successful implementation of any disengagement
plan in Gaza or elsewhere. At the same time, we urge
the Palestinians to resume talks on a ceasefire
embracing all parties and groups. Furthermore, we
expect the Palestinian Authority to demonstrate its
determination in the fight against extremist violence
and to confront individuals and groups conducting and
planning terrorist attacks.

We welcome any Israeli withdrawal from
settlements as long as it takes place in the context of
the implementation of the road map. Only a
disengagement from Gaza and other areas in the West
Bank that is coordinated between the two conflict
parties will guarantee a proper handling of the whole
issue and avoid chaos and a dangerous power vacuum.

Only a negotiated settlement on Gaza will receive
the necessary international support for the maintenance
of security and rehabilitation and reconstruction. In
addition, it is worth noting that final status issues in
general are a matter for negotiation and agreement
between the parties themselves and must not be
prejudged.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I want to announce that, as another measure to
optimize the use of our time in order to allow as many
delegations as possible to take the floor, I will not
invite speakers individually to take seats at the table or
to resume their seats at the side of the Chamber.

I now call on the representative of Egypt.

