Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan): I have the pleasure
to deliver the following statement on behalf of the
members of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC), in my country's capacity as Chair of the
57-member OIC group.

At the outset, I should like to express to Turkey
our sympathy and deepest condolences over the
devastating earthquake that struck the country on
Sunday, killing residents and causing widespread
damage. Let me also extend our shared sorrow to the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia over the demise of His Royal
Highness Crown Prince Sultan Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud,
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Defence and
Aviation. He was known not only for his outstanding
service to his nation, but equally for his remarkable
role in supporting the progress of Islamic solidarity.

The Palestinian question remains a defining issue
of global justice and a pressing challenge for the
international community, and the Security Council in
particular. It is upsetting and painful to watch the
Palestinian people as they continue to await the
transformation of the long-standing political
commitments and resolutions of the Security Council
into actual practice, which would inspire hope and
confidence in support for rightful causes and in
defence of the values and principles for which the
United Nations Organization was found.
Our debate today is of extraordinary importance,
given that it coincides with world awareness of and
attention focused on the Security Council's expected
decision on the Palestinian bid for membership of the
United Nations. At such a defining time in history as
the Palestinian bid is being considered, we cannot fail
to take this opportunity to appeal to this forum to reach
the constructive and positive decision we are hoping
for. Such a decision, once made, will be a secure
foundation thereafter for the preservation of peace,
security and justice, and enhance the opportunity for a
just, lasting and comprehensive settlement of the
conflict in the Middle East, based on the two-State
solution.

It has become very clear that Palestine's resort to
the United Nations to gain its rights as a recognized
State does not negate the Palestinians' firm
commitment to resolving the conflict through peaceful
means. Rather, it confirms the principled peaceful
approach that has been repeatedly and clearly
emphasized by the Palestinian President, including at
his most recent speech to the General Assembly (see A/66/PV.19).

The OIC group aspires to justice and equality in
respect of the rightful cause of Palestine. It also
remains firm in its conviction that the Security Council
must actively contribute to, proclaim and materialize
the Palestinians' inalienable rights, including the rights
of return and self-determination, as well as their
legitimate national aspirations to freedom, prosperity,
peace and justice in their independent, sovereign State
of Palestine based on pre-1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital.

The OIC also joins the international community
position in reaffirming that all measures and actions
taken by Israel to alter the legal and demographic
status of the occupied Syrian Golan, and to impose
jurisdiction and administration there, have no legal
basis. The OIC reiterates its demand that Israel abide
fully and immediately by resolution 497 (1981) and
withdraw fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to the
lines of 4 June 1967, as also reflected in resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

Amidst the efforts undertaken by international
actors to revive a credible political process, Israel, the
occupying Power, continues to commit violations,
undertake unilateral actions and impose unlawful
policies in the West Bank. Likewise, the OIC remains
deeply concerned over the situation in East Jerusalem,
where Israel persists in intensifying a systematic
process of altering the historical Arab-Islamic identity
of the holy city and changing its demographic
composition. Such violations seek to completely
change the realities on the ground and eventually
isolate occupied East Jerusalem from its Palestinian
surroundings.

Both in the West Bank and in East Jerusalem,
Israel continues to construct new settlement units,
destroying houses, displacing and detaining
Palestinians, confiscating lands and properties,
building the apartheid wall, and carrying out
excavations underneath the blessed Al-Aqsa Mosque. If
left unchecked, those violations will certainly pose a
threat to stability and security, heighten tensions,
undermine the viability of the two-State solution and
have far-reaching negative consequences on the life of
the Palestinians. In that regard, the Security Council
has a vital role to play in compelling Israel to abide by,
and end its flagrant breaches of, international law.

The illegal Israeli blockade of the Gaza Strip
remains in force, despite Security Council resolution
1860 (2009) of 8 January 2009. Bearing that in mind,
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) cannot
accept any report that would either whitewash attacks
on humanitarian convoys or condone the illegal
blockade against Palestinian civilians. Accordingly, we
call on the Security Council to take responsibility for
putting an end to this illegal blockade on Gaza, for
protecting justice and humanity and for preventing
further human rights violations.

The imprisonment of thousands of Palestinians,
who are being held in 22 Israeli prisons and detention
facilities and who launched a general hunger strike on
27 September, remind the world of one of the many
injustices against the Palestinian people. In that regard,
we demand that the Security Council shoulder its
responsibilities in addressing the practices of the Israeli
Government, which contradict the principles and laws
of the international community, and in pressuring Israel
to release Palestinian political prisoners without any
preconditions. In that context, I would like to welcome
the recent prisoner exchange.

The time has come to acknowledge and adopt a
rightful and historic resolution that recognizes the
independent State of Palestine on the basis of the 1967
borders, an action that would provide the cornerstone

ll-56143
for the establishment of stability, prosperity, peace and
security for Palestine, Israel and other neighbouring
countries of the region. We hope that the Quartet will
succeed in implementing the Road Map in accordance
with the agreed terms of reference, as reflected in the
relevant Security Council resolutions, the Madrid
principles and the Arab Peace Initiative.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm the full
support and solidarity of OIC with the Palestinian
people in their endeavours to regain their legitimate
and inalienable national rights, including the right of
return, the right to self-determination and the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State with
East Jerusalem as its capital.

