The Secretary-General: Like no other conflict,
the Arab-Israeli conflict carries a powerful symbolic
and emotional charge for people throughout the world.
The narratives of the two sides - dispossession,
prolonged occupation and denial of statehood on one
side, terrorism and existential threats on the other -
stir the fears and passions of people of many nations.
And our continued failure to resolve this conflict calls
into question the legitimacy and the effectiveness of
the Security Council itself.

The events of this summer have reminded us all
how dangerous it is to leave the broader Arab-Israeli
conflict unresolved and how interconnected the
region's problems are. At the same time, the role of the
Security Council in bringing about the cessation of
hostilities between Israel and Hizbollah and charting
the way towards a sustainable ceasefire through
resolution 1701 (2006) showed that it can play a vital
role in the search for peace in the region. Resolution
1701 (2006) rightly stressed the need to achieve a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East, based on all the Council's earlier relevant
resolutions. To do this, we must make progress on the
issue at the heart of the conflict, which is the problem
of Israel and Palestine.

Large majorities of both Israelis and Palestinians
desire peace. What they desperately need is a bridge to
enable them to reach peace from their present sad state
of conflict. The bridge to peace must be wide enough
to accommodate all who have a legitimate stake in the
process, long enough to span the enormous gulf of
mistrust that separates the parties and strong enough to
withstand the efforts that will inevitably be made to
sabotage it.

Yesterday, I stressed to my Quartet partners that
the existing bridge to peace is badly in need of repair.
Its foundations seem weak, since both parties have
failed to take the concrete actions needed to meet their
existing obligations. And the destination on the far
side - an end to the occupation that began in 1967 and
a secure Israel at peace with all its neighbours,
06-52982
including a new Palestinian State - remains distant,
ill-defined and, for many, almost unimaginable.

Today we are dealing with a difficult situation in
Gaza, where we see closures and a Palestinian
Authority that is starved of resources. Palestinian
schools, ministries and other institutions are now in
sharp decline. Palestinian society is rapidly becoming
poorer. If this were to continue and the Palestinian
Authority were to collapse, the consequent
fragmentation and radicalization of Palestinian society
would be a terrible, perhaps irreversible, strategic
setback.

Today, Palestinians in Gaza and in the West Bank
living under occupation have neither a State nor a
functioning government. Is it any wonder that they
look to the international community for protection, for
help and for hope? And if this is not forthcoming, the
young people of Palestine will, sadly, be attracted by
the false promises of those who advocate violence.

For their part, Israelis rightly demand an end to
rocket attacks against the towns and kibbutzim of
southern Israel, the return of the soldier captured on 25
June and a Palestinian Authority that accepts basic
principles of peace and takes credible action to prevent
attacks against Israel. Yet in the absence of a political
process, which is the only way of bringing about
lasting peace, Israelis naturally look to their own
military to deal with security threats.

It would be easy for the international community
to declare that the parties are not ready for dialogue
and that until they are there is little that can be done.
But that would be deeply disappointing. It would also
be unfair to the parties themselves.

Poll after poll shows that people on both sides
understand that there is no military solution to the
conflict. These same polls show that people understand
that a two-State solution cannot be achieved through
unilateral actions by either side. I am convinced that
both the Israeli Prime Minister, Mr. Olmert, and the
Palestinian President, Mr. Abbas, understand these
realities and are searching for a way forward. I send
both of them my strong support, as the Quartet did
yesterday.

The Quartet also encouraged efforts to form a
Palestinian national unity government, in the hope that
the programme of such a government will reflect
Quartet principles and facilitate early engagement by
06-52982
the international community. President Abbas's
wisdom in pursuing this path must be recognized. So
must the efforts of Palestinian Prime Minister Haniyeh.

During the meeting, I also reminded my Quartet
partners that the Quartet itself must be more active and
effective if confidence in the peace process is to be
restored. I am glad to say the Quartet agreed that
greater engagement is crucial - on the ground, with
the parties and in the region.

But the test will be action. The parties must now
rise to their responsibilities; so must the Quartet and
our partners in the region; and so must the Security
Council. With all the tools at our disposal, let us work
together to put in place a credible political process
based on dialogue, parallel implementation of
obligations, monitoring of performance and clarity as
to the end goal. The time has come to rebuild the
shattered bridge to peace.

