Mr. Atlassi (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
country's assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of January. I would also like to
thank you for convening today's open debate on the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question, reaffirming your country's willingness to
continue to lend support to the Palestinian question in
the light of the status quo.

I would like to congratulate the newly elected
members of the Council: Sweden, Bolivia, Italy,
Ethiopia and Kazakhstan. I would also like to thank the
Special Coordinator of the Middle East Peace Process
and Personal Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Mladenov, for his valuable briefing on this issue.

We have bid farewell to 2016 - a year in which
developments occurred quickly, especially in the
Middle East. Those developments overshadowed the
region's main cause, namely, the Palestinian question. It
is a question that continues to linger in the background.
It has worsened due to the stalemate in the negotiations
in 2014, which led to the escalation and expansion of
the policies of Judaization and settlement-building in
occupied Palestinian territory since 4 June 1967.

There have been successive calls for the cessation of
Israeli settlement-building in the occupied territories,
as well as successive efforts through the Arab
Ministerial Committee for the Arab Peace Initiative
comprising of Morocco, Egypt, Jordan and Palestine
to end to the Israeli occupation, international efforts
and initiatives to save the two-State solution, and the
international Quartet and its recommendations to end
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, in accordance with
international legitimacy. All these efforts have been
aimed at salvaging the two-State solution, which is
the only way to restore peace and security between the
Israelis and Palestinians.

The adoption by the Security Council of resolution
2334 (2016), of23 December, stresses the need to put an
end to settlements as the main impediment to the two-
State solution. Therefore, Morocco has consistently
called for an end to be put to settlements and has
reiterated that they undermine all efforts towards peace
and that the only solution is the two-State one.

However, the road ahead is still long and arduous.
As we have said in previous statements, the resolution
of the situation in the Middle East is conditional on
finding a solution to the Palestinian question, which
is the central and pivotal question of the Middle East.
This should be translated into a Palestinian state, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, otherwise, the situation
will deteriorate.

The Kingdom of Morocco, led by his Majesty King
Mohammed VI, heads the Jerusalem Committee. This
is of great importance to Muslims, as this is the first of
the two Meccas and the third sacred shrine. Anything
other than the two-State solution will eventually cause
more violence. The continued deterioration of the
Palestinian situation due to Judaization, settlements
and the displacement of peoples will eventually fuel
additional violence. It has therefore become imperative
for the international community to shoulder its
responsibility to find a way out of the stalemate that has
characterized the situation since the negotiations halted
between the Palestinians and Israel, as this caused the
situation to deteriorate even further and resulted in
violence. However, negotiations should not be held just
for negotiations' sake, but should aim to achieve the
two-State solution, with East Jerusalem as the capital.

That is why Morocco has been keen to support all
initiatives that aim to find a solution to the situation
and to give impetus to the peace process in the Middle
East, so as to make it possible to devise a settlement
that will eventually enable the Palestinians to establish
their own State, with East Jerusalem as its capital. In
this regard, Morocco has all along supported the French
initiative and also participated in the Middle East Peace
Conference, which was held in Paris two days ago, and
we also welcome the joint declaration of the Conference.

Morocco firmly believes that the only way to
resolve the Palestinian question is for both parties to
go back to the negotiating table in good faith and to
work within a very specific time frame, based on the
principles of international legitimacy underlying the
solution oftwo States coexisting peacefully, in harmony
and with cooperation.

Morocco will sustain its principled position as
regards the conflict, based on the Arab Peace Initiative
and the principle of creating an independent State
of Palestine. Morocco has always been and remains
ready to engage actively and effectively in any and all
initiatives aimed at giving impetus to the peace process,
in order to reach a settlement that will eventually create
security, stability and peace in the region.

