Mr. El Othmani (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic):
First of all, I thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Germany for his initiative in organizing this open
debate on the issue of peace and security in the Middle
East and cooperation between the United Nations and
the League of Arab States.

We commend the efforts of the Secretary-General
of the United Nations and the Secretary General of the
League of Arab States towards achieving objectives
common to both organizations. We reiterate to them the
confidence and support of the Kingdom of Morocco in
their efforts. In that respect, the Middle East region has,
over the centuries, been the cradle of civilization that
enriched the heritage of man. It was also the stage for
a number of clashes that degenerated into fully-fledged
conflicts and from which the peoples of the region have
suffered and continue to suffer today.

The ongoing crisis of the Palestinian people lies
at the very heart of the problem of achieving peace
and security in the Middle East region and holds back
the present and future of entire generations. That is
why urgent action to resolve the conflict is necessary.
Despite ongoing efforts over the past few years, the
current conflict remains unresolved, owing to Israel's
intransigence. At the same time, movements recently
seen in the region aimed at achieving the legitimate
aspirations of peoples for democracy and freedom
necessitate an understanding of such aspirations.

My country welcomes the cooperation between
the United Nations and the League of Arab States and
considers the bolstering of such cooperation as more
necessary than ever today. That is because we have
seen developments in the actions of the League of Arab
States and a renewed determination to strengthen the
role of the League in serving the peoples of the region.
As we have seen in the case of the crisis in Syria,
the League of Arab States has proven that it can act
effectively.

We highly appreciate the German presidency's
initiative to issue a presidential statement calling for
tangible measures to promote such cooperation. I
commend the measures highlighted by the Secretary
General ofthe League ofArab States on the importance
of the Arab Peace Initiative.

We must spend a few minutes considering the
Palestinian question, which, today more than ever,
deserves particular attention. It is unfortunate that
Israel has continued its systematic defiance of United
Nations resolutions. In that respect, we must take
note of the settlement construction policy, as it is a
flagrant violation of international law and the Geneva
Conventions. That policy has become a major obstacle
to the peace process. It reflects disdain for international
agreements and even undermines the peace process.
Moreover, we must consider the acts of violence
committed by Israeli settlers against Palestinian
citizens. It is unfortunate that the response of the
international community has fallen far short of justice
for those people.

Let us also not forget the suffering ofthe thousands
of Palestinian prisoners, some of whom have been
detained or imprisoned since before the signing of the
Oslo Agreements in 1993. In spite of all of that, the
issue remains as yet unresolved.

There are also Israel's attempts to alter the
demographic and cultural nature of the city of
Jerusalem. In spite of the efforts of the international
community, the settlement construction has continued
in East Jerusalem, including ongoing work on the
Al-Aqsa mosque compound. In spite of all of the
appeals, Israel has continued its operations to destroy
other sites that hold particular importance for the three
monotheistic religions.

Facing all of those challenges, the King of
Morocco, His Majesty Mohammed VI, presides over
the Jerusalem Committee. The Kingdom of Morocco
therefore calls for a halt to all of the construction work,
which continues to destroy important sites, as well
as all activities against the Islamic nature of the city.
In addition, we urge the international community to
take urgent action to protect the cultural heritage of
Jerusalem.

Certain ongoing Israeli policies consist of
imposing sanctions against the Palestinian people and
thus reflect disdain for all international instruments
and international law. The closure policy carried out
in the occupied Palestinian territories and the ongoing
inhuman blockades conducted in the Gaza Strip since
2006 have all led to a humanitarian crisis ofintolerable
suffering that worsens each day.

Speaking in this forum and based upon our
profound conviction of the importance of establishing
peace and security in the region, we note the fact that
our goal requires Israel's acknowledgment of the law
and renunciation of its hostile policies against the
defenceless Palestinian people, which seek to impose
a logic of force as well as a fait accompli. We call on
the international community to urge Israel to respect
international agreements and those reached between
the parties concerned.
We cannot omit to mention the suffering of our
brothers the Syrian people. In that regard, we wish
to express our indignation at and condemnation of
the violence inflicted by the Syrian regime against
civilians. We must reaffirm the necessity of bringing
an immediate end to those acts of violence, in order to
launch a political process that involves every sector of
Syrian society and thus to achieve the Syrian people's
aspirations to a politically democratic, pluralist regime
based on a framework of the national unity, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Syria, with no foreign
military intervention.

In that regard, I would like to reaffirm the
importance of international and Arab efforts to find
a settlement for the Syrian crisis, including through
the mission of the Joint Special Representative,
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi. Indeed, we commend all the
efforts being made to resolve this crisis. Morocco will
host the fourth meeting of the Group of the Friends of
Syria at the end of this month, and we hope that the
meeting will help to mitigate the terrifying nightmare
of the Syrian people.

The Middle East faces many challenges today that

the Security Council is required to attempt to resolve, by
virtue of its responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security, in order to help foster an atmosphere
of peace and prosperity in the region. There is no doubt
that acts that insult Islam, and any kind of disdain or
attack on its Prophet or religion or incitement to hatred,
all take us further away from the principle of tolerance
and the essential virtues of dialogue and respect. We
repudiate such acts of provocation, just as we repudiate
any act of violence targeting innocent victims or
property. I would like to recall that the Kingdom of
Morocco, at the highest levels, condemned the attack
on the American Consulate in Benghazi that led to the
deaths of the United States Ambassador to Libya and
three of the consular staff. We also call for respect for
holy sites and property.

Once again, we reiterate that the cooperation
between the League of Arab States and the United
Nations is vital, and we hope that it will grow deeper.

