Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): Permit
me at the outset to join others in thanking Lord
Ashdown and in welcoming the presence of Mr. Colak,
Minister of Security of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
listened very attentively and with great interest to their
statements.

I associate myself with the statement to be made
by the Permanent Representative of Luxembourg on
behalf of the European Union presidency. I would like
to perhaps supplement his remarks with three brief
comments.

First, I believe that we have reasons to be pleased
about the remarkable progress made in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. I would cite in particular the economic
reforms carried out with the support of the European
Union, particularly the establishment of the value-
added tax; the judicial system, including the court
charged with prosecuting war crimes; and the reform of
the defence sector.

In that regard, I should like once again to express
our thanks to Lord Ashdown for his activities on the
Council's behalf in the country and to reaffirm to him
France's support. We support his objective of moving
from the era of Dayton to the era of Brussels - that is,
to the full normalization of the country. The High
Representative, who is also the Special Representative
of the European Union, resolutely supports the Bosnian
authorities in the gradual establishment of a structured
and ultimately functional central State. The progress
made in that area strengthens the chances for Bosnia
and Herzegovina to begin to negotiate a stabilization
and association agreement with the European Union.
We can only encourage such a development.

Secondly, I would like to reaffirm once again that
we fully support the cooperation of all of the country's
authorities with the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). We note - and we are
pleased - that concrete results are beginning to
materialize. Here too, Lord Ashdown's activities and
the pressure exerted by the international community
are decisive. Positive developments are under way;
they must continue.

Thirdly, we hope that the sense of responsibility
on the part of Bosnia and Herzegovina's leaders will
continue to increase. International action must serve as
a supplement to - and less and less as a replacement
for - decisions that fall to local officials. A
relationship is beginning to be established between the
local leaders and European forums. We are confident
that that relationship will make it possible to
strengthen the sense of responsibility of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's leaders.

