Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate your country,
Mr. President, on its presidency of the Security Council
and to welcome the participation this morning of His
Excellency Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian, Minister for
Europe and Foreign Affairs of France. I would like also
to thank Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-Secretary-
General, United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism;
Mr. Marshall Billingslea, President of the Financial
Action Task Force (FATF); and Ms. Mercy Buku for
their valuable participation.

Combating the financing ofterrorism is an essential
part of the comprehensive approach to combating
the scourge of terrorism. It requires concerted and
collective efforts within relevant international and
regional arrangements. It also requires defining and
combating the various ways used by terrorist groups to
finance their activities, such as transnational organized
crime, trafficking in cultural property, kidnapping,
extortion and drug trafficking. Attention must also be
paid to the evolving methods of financing, including
cryptocurrencies and online gambling.

Human trafficking is one of the methods used by
terrorist groups to fund their terrorist activities. In that
connection, I would like to note the study conducted
by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate with regard to the links between human
trafficking and the financing of terrorism, the results of
which were presented on 6 February. The State of Qatar
supported that study as it is aware of the importance of
such studies in determining the most effective counter-
terrorism policies.

The State of Qatar has played an effective role as
part of the collective efforts of the global coalition
to defeat Da'esh. Those efforts recently succeeded in
pushing Da'esh out of its last stronghold in Syria. That
is part of our firm position against terrorism in all
its forms and in support of the Syrian people in their
fight against terrorism - be it the terrorism of Da'esh
or the terrorism of the Syrian regime, whose policies
were behind the emergence of that terrorist group in
the first place.

The State of Qatar seeks to comply fully with all
international commitments on combating the financing
of terrorism, including the major Security Council
resolutions. The State of Qatar joined the International
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism of 1999 and other international conventions
related to counter-terrorism. We have also stepped
up our cooperation with regional and international
partners, including the signing of bilateral and regional
agreements on combating the financing ofterrorism and
the signing of a memorandum of understanding with
the United States in 2017, which is the first of its kind
in the region. The memorandum of understanding was
implemented as a reflection of our commitment to joint
action and the exchange of information and expertise.

The State of Qatar also participated in the high-
level International Conference on Combating the
Financing of Da'esh and Al-Qaida, held in Paris last
year on the theme "No money for terror", which resulted
in important decisions and measures with regard to
identifying funding sources, information exchange,
combating suspicious transactions and the misuse of
new financial instruments.

The State of Qatar actively participates in regional
and international arrangements related to combating the
financing ofterrorism, including the FATF, and seeks to
implement the 40 recommendations issued by it. We are
one of the founding members of the FATF in the Middle
East and North Africa region, as well as a member of
the centre for combating terrorist financing. We are
also cooperating with the International Monetary Fund
and other United Nations specialized agencies.

In order to strengthen our partnership with the
United Nations in fighting terrorism and to support
the priorities of the Secretary-General in that regard,
we have signed an agreement with the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism to support strategic
initiatives aimed at combating the scourge of terrorism
and strengthening the mandate of the Office. The
State of Qatar will support the budget of the Office by
providing $75 million over the next five years, namely,
more than 70 per cent of its extra-budgetary resources.

At the national level, the State of Qatar continues to
strengthen the necessary legislation to combat terrorism
and terrorism financing. The 2010 law on combating
money-laundering and terrorism financing is the first
of its kind in the region whose standards are a model
to follow. We improved the law in 2018 to bring it in
line with recent developments. In 2014 we issued Law
No. 14 on combating cybercrimes and Law No. 15 on
establishing charitable organizations. We established
a national anti-money-laundering and terrorism
financing committee, which includes representatives
from law enforcement agencies, oversight agencies
and other governmental institutions. The committee
has adopted the national strategy to combat money-
laundering and terrorism financing. It monitors
relevant international developments and coordinates
national training programmes. We also established
an agency to organize charity work. Relevant State
authorities seek international advisory expertise to
develop national capacities.

In conclusion, we stress the need to take advantage
of international expertise of governmental and
private sectors. We pay full attention in my country
to this issue. The national anti-money-laundering and
terrorism financing committee has taken advantage
of international expertise in order to include the
most prominent international standards for achieving
financial integrity.

