Mr. Ward (Jamaica): This meeting of the
Security Council is of great importance to the process
of peace in the Horn of Africa, and particularly in the
countries that are our focus today, Eritrea and Ethiopia.
It is a timely response to the commitments made by
those two countries in signing the Agreement on
Cessation of Hostilities, in Algiers on 18 June 2000.
Our discussion in open forum today provides us with
an opportunity to give expression to the political will
of the international community in support of the peace
process that is currently under way. It also provides us
with an opportunity to speak openly to both parties and
to impress upon them the importance of their own
commitments to peace and to reducing the human
suffering visited upon their peoples by natural disaster
and by the conflict between them, which we believe
could have been avoided. It further gives us an
opportunity to hear directly from them.

We join in thanking Mr. Bernard Miyet, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
for introducing the Secretary-General's report
(S/2000/785) and for updating us on the issues before
us. My delegation also wishes to state how pleased it is
by the Secretary-General's report, not only for its
important update on political and humanitarian
developments but also because it sets out in specific
detail the framework for the United Nations Mission in
Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE). This is especially
important for the Security Council when considering
the Secretary-General's recommendations, and it will
guide us in our decision-making process.

My delegation commends President Abdelaziz
Bouteflika and the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) for their determined and sustained efforts in
negotiating the Agreement, and we fully support the
OAU's continued role in seeking to achieve a
comprehensive and lasting peace for both countries.

Jamaica is extremely concerned about the chronic
humanitarian situation in both Ethiopia and Eritrea.
The future of the peoples of both countries is tied to a
comprehensive resolution of the dispute between them.
The abatement and ultimate elimination of the human
suffering, which has been exacerbated by the conflict,
require the cooperation of all concerned, and the
international community must respond to ameliorate
the effects of this human tragedy.

The Secretary-General's report sets out in great
detail the humanitarian situation and what needs to be
done. My delegation supports his recommendations and
calls upon the international community to respond
accordingly.
My delegation is pleased at the deployment of
United Nations military observers, which has begun,
pursuant to resolution 1312 (2000), which we adopted
on 31 July, authorizing the establishment of UNMEE.
My delegation will examine the nine specific elements
of the Secretary-General's recommendations on the
expanded mandate of UNMEE for its full deployment
under phase three. It cannot be overemphasized how
important it is for the Security Council to get it right.
The lives and future of millions of Ethiopians and
Eritreans are dependent on this.

The message that goes out from this Chamber
today must be clear and unequivocal. The international
community is prepared to fully support the peace
process between Ethiopia and Eritrea. The cooperation
of both parties is vitally important in all phases of the
process. As stated in paragraph 51 of the Secretary-
General's report, in the end it is only the parties -
Eritrea and Ethiopia - themselves who can bring
lasting peace to their countries. In order to do this they
must commit themselves to continue pursuing the
negotiations they have started on the outstanding
issues, under the auspices of the OAU, in order to
reach a final settlement on the modalities for the
delimitation and demarcation of their common borders
and on other outstanding issues.

The future of their countries and of their peoples
depends on this.

