The President (spoke in French): Considering
the lateness of the hour and the constraints of the
calendar of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Zimbabwe, we will invite him to make his statement
once members of the Council have finished their
interventions.

I will now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of Mali.

My delegation welcomes the remarkable work
accomplished by the Panel of Experts on the Illegal
Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other Forms of
Wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
would like to join in paying tribute to Ambassador
Kassem and his team for preparing the addendum to
the final report.

This addendum, which is before the Council
today, establishes clearly the linkage between the
illegal exploitation of the natural resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
continuation of the conflict in the country. I would like
to recall Mali's position of principle in this regard,
which condemns strongly all illegal exploitation of
natural resources and other forms of wealth of an
independent and sovereign State.

Now that it is established that exploitation of the
natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo feeds the continuation of the conflict, the
question arises: what is to be done? My delegation is of
the View that an extension of the mandate of the Panel
of Experts for six months is necessary so that the
Security Council can be better and more widely
informed about this issue and reflect more on what
measures to take to put an end to this situation.

My delegation also endorses the recommendation
that a moratorium be imposed on the importation of
certain resources, particularly coltan. We believe this
measure is an innovation that would widen the array of
instruments at the disposal of the Security Council.
However, my delegation shares the view expressed by
many delegations on this issue, that the Panel of
Experts should study the matter in greater depth to
discern the possible impact of such a measure on the
population and economy of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Finally, we think it is essential to preserve
the momentum of the Lusaka peace process, with full
respect for the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and of other
States in the region, thus contributing to the definitive
return of peace and stability to the Great Lakes region
that we all hope for.

Sll'V.4437

 

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now invite the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Zimbabwe to take a seat at the Council table and make
his statement.
