Mr. Mansour (Palestine): Mr. President, thank
you for your efforts to convene this urgent meeting of
the Security Council to address the current crisis. In
congratulating you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March, we assure you of our full confidence in your
ability to guide the important work of the Council. We
also wish to thank the Permanent Representative of
Panama for his outstanding leadership of the Council
last month. I would also like to thank the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya for its request to convene this evening's
meeting, in the light of the escalation of violence and
the dramatic deterioration of the situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory in recent days.

Before proceeding, I also wish to thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing and for the attention
given by him and by all Council members and other
3
concerned Member States to the critical situation that
we are facing.

We come to the Security Council once again to
appeal to the Council - to plead with the Council -
to uphold international law, to uphold its own
resolutions and to uphold its Charter responsibilities
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
The silence of the international community, due to the
ongoing paralysis of the Security Council, is wholly
unjustifiable and unacceptable. The lack of action and
lack of accountability have only led, time after time, to
the perpetration of even more war crimes with
impunity against innocent civilians, as evidenced by
the tragic and violent events of today and the past
week.

The Palestinian death toll in the occupied
Palestinian territory, particularly in the besieged Gaza
Strip, is rising rapidly as a result of the brutal military
assaults being carried out by Israel, the occupying
Power, against the civilian population under its
occupation. The situation on the ground is deteriorating
dramatically as the violence escalates, the number of
dead and injured mounts and fear and panic spread
throughout the Palestinian civilian population in the
Gaza Strip, which has already endured so much
suffering and is barely surviving under conditions of
severe duress resulting from Israel's ongoing and
unlawful closure of all of the territory's border
crossings, its obstruction of vital humanitarian
supplies, including food, medicines and other
necessary and basic goods and materials, its reduction
of fuel and electricity supplies and its incessant lethal
military campaign.

In deliberate and flagrant breach of article 33 of
the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilians in Time of War, Israel continues
to collectively punish the Palestinian civilian
population in the Gaza Strip by means of the sealing
and closure of the territory and the obstruction of the
movement of persons and goods, including
humanitarian access, as well as by means of military
reprisals against persons and property and by acts of
terror and intimidation. Such actions are clearly
prohibited by international law and are being
committed by the occupying Power on a scale and
scope amounting to war crimes. The humanitarian
calamity in the Gaza Strip continues to deepen as a
result, and the carnage and destruction are perpetuating
a vicious and bloody cycle of violence that threatens to
completely destabilize the situation and derail the
fragile peace process.

Despite our repeated warnings and appeals to the
Council, no action has been taken to stem this cycle of
violence, and Israel continues its deadly rampage
throughout the Gaza Strip. In just one month's time -
from the start of February until today - Israel, the
occupying Power, has killed more than 126
Palestinians, including 19 innocent children and
several women and many members of the same
families. The children killed have included infant
babies, aged two days old and five months old; three
young boys, brothers from the same family, ages 8, 11
and 14; and several other innocent children who were
at play or in their homes when death cruelly struck
them - as well as an entire family, including a mother,
father and their three young children, who were killed
in their home in Al-Bureij refugee camp in a missile
strike two weeks ago. Palestinian families are being
devastated and their homes, communities and lives
destroyed before everyone's eyes. There is no
justification whatsoever for the killing of innocent
civilians. There is no justification whatsoever for
killing babies, for killing children, for killing women,
for killing older people - for killing innocent
civilians.

When the slaughter of innocent children has
become acceptable or is somehow justified under the
pretext of promoting security or "counter-terror", we
know that we have completely sunken into the dark
abyss where there is a total absence of the law, absence
of logic or reason, absence of morality, absence of
conscience and absence of humanity. When we reach
this point, we bitterly begin to realize that the
standards of the law and human rights are not equally
applicable to all humans, not even to children and
women or to the elderly or disabled. This perception
looms dangerously among the Palestinian people, who
have endured the killing of more than 1,000 children
by the occupying forces since the year 2000. Living in
a world surrounded by death, destruction, misery and
hardship, Palestinian children, especially in the Gaza
Strip, are traumatized and plagued by the ever-present
fear and question, "Will I be next?", as the missiles and
shells continue to rain down on their homes and
neighbourhoods.

Today alone, at least 60 Palestinians have been
killed by the Israeli military attacks in the northern
Gaza Strip, including at least five children and three
women. In addition, it is being reported that more than
150 Palestinians have been wounded by the Israeli
occupying forces in this latest round of attacks. The
hospitals in Gaza, which are already facing critical
shortages of medical supplies and decaying equipment
as a result of the ongoing Israeli siege of Gaza, are
exerting all efforts possible under such circumstances
to treat those who have been wounded in these attacks.
Additionally, the Israeli occupying forces continue to
target medical rescue teams and forbid ambulances
from evacuating the wounded. Meanwhile, the rest of
the population in the area, gripped by panic and fear
and already suffering humanitarian hardship, are
reported to be hiding in their homes, where even there
they know they are not safe from the military strikes of
the occupying Power.

At the same time, it must be pointed out that
many of the Palestinians killed and wounded have been
the casualties of extrajudicial executions illegally
committed by the Israeli occupying forces Via missile
air strikes by warplanes and helicopters, launched at
targets in heavily populated civilian areas. Such
extrajudicial executions also continue to be carried out
by the occupying Power in the West Bank, in addition
to constant raids and arrest campaigns and other illegal
practices and actions. Just this week in the Balata
refugee camp in Nablus, in the West Bank, Israeli
undercover units killed three Palestinian men. Such
actions are clearly intended to undermine the efforts by
Palestinian security forces to establish calm and
security and promote law and order in the area, and
they threaten the truce agreement reached there.

Even a cursory review of the timeline of events
will reveal clearly that these killings of Palestinian
civilians by Israel, the occupying Power, did not begin
with the killing of an Israeli in Sderot by rocket fire
from the Gaza Strip - which the Palestinian Authority
has repeatedly rejected and of which it has called for
the immediate cessation. And, on this point, we must
once again recall that, in any and all circumstances,
reprisals against the civilian population are strictly
prohibited under international law. Rather, what has
been occurring in the occupied Palestinian territory has
been a constant and ongoing lethal and indiscriminate
Israeli military campaign being waged against the
defenceless Palestinian civilian population.

What we are witnessing now is the horrific
materialization of the repeated threats made over time,
which have intensified in recent weeks and days - and

made in the past few days by several Israeli officials,
who have threatened to launch large-scale military
attacks against the Palestinian people under their
occupation in the Gaza Strip. In this regard, we
highlight the recent threat by the Deputy Defence
Minister of Israel to inflict a "holocaust" among the
Palestinian people in Gaza. Such threats, combined
with the actual killing of civilians and destruction
being perpetrated by Israel, the occupying Power, must
be viewed with the utmost seriousness; they must be
vehemently condemned, and they require immediate
action by the international community, including the
Security Council.

Civilians under foreign occupation are entitled to
protection of their person and of their dignity under
international humanitarian law. There can be no doubt
that the acts of aggression committed by Israel in
recent days are flagrant violations of these relevant
provisions of international humanitarian law.
Moreover, such wilful killing of civilians and wanton
destruction of property constitute grave breaches -
that is, war crimes. Real and immediate measures must
be taken to avert the killing of even more innocent
souls and avert the uncontrollable spiral of the
situation to irreversible depths, wherein the vicious,
depraved and deadly cycle of violence will consume
everything in its path as well as extinguish all hopes.

Clearly, these unlawful actions are not actions
that in any way whatsoever can promote calm and
stability and serve the peace process. They are
inflammatory, provocative and dangerous and serve
only to fully ignite the cycle of violence, death and
destruction and to undermine any progress made in the
peace process. That is an indisputable fact. The peace
process is not divorced from the situation on the
ground. Just as positive developments and progress in
the peace process can beneficially impact the situation
on the ground, such negative developments and illegal
actions very detrimentally impact not only the situation
on the ground but the peace process itself and the
stability of the entire region. The continuation of this
sick pattern and vicious cycle will only bring more
suffering and loss for both the Palestinian and Israeli
peoples and will take us farther away from the
realization of peace. This must be a matter of concern
for the Council.

We are at a juncture where the international
community is in clear concurrence about what is
needed to advance the process towards the attainment
of a just, lasting and comprehensive peace. Moreover,
we are at a juncture where two high-level United
Nations officials, including the Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process and Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Robert
Serry, and the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Mr. John Holmes, have just this past week
briefed the Security Council (see S/PV.5846) on the
critical and absolutely untenable situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory, with its grave
consequences for the security, well-being and human
dignity of Palestinian civilians, and have clearly
stressed the urgency of bridging the huge gap between
the situation on the ground and the peace process
between the Palestinian and Israeli sides, including via
a new strategy vis-a-vis the Gaza Strip by the
concerned parties, in order to avert the fatal
undermining of that process and the sabotaging of all
hopes for peace. This requires immediate and real
action by the international community.

The Security Council cannot continue to be
sidelined as this crisis continues to escalate. It must
uphold international law and its Charter responsibilities
and act to bring an end to this cycle of violence and
counter-violence. It must demand respect for the
sanctity of civilian life and demand utmost respect for
the provisions of international humanitarian law that
are supposed to provide innocent civilians with
protection in situations of foreign occupation. It must
condemn the killing of civilians and condemn the
violence that is causing only more suffering and loss
for both peoples and taking us further away from the
vision of peace we have been striving so desperately to
realize - to no avail, as all efforts have been
constantly undermined by such illegal actions.

We therefore reiterate our call on the Security
Council and on the international community as whole
to shoulder their legal and moral obligations and
provide the defenceless Palestinian civilians with
urgently needed and effective protection. Additionally,
an immediate ceasefire in the occupied Palestinian
territory and tangible action are required to bring an
end to the violence, the killing of civilians, the
destruction and the obstruction of provision of
humanitarian assistance.

The Security Council must be a player to help the
parties break this deadly cycle of violence and help
them to advance the new strategy that has been called

for to bring an immediate halt to the violence and
resolve the current crisis, ameliorate the terrible
situation on the ground and create calm and an
environment conducive to the advancement of serious
peace negotiations in good faith. Continued silence
will only bring more death and destruction and the
further dangerous destabilization of the situation to the
detriment of all concerned, which must be avoided at
all costs.

