Mr. Casimir (Haiti) (spoke in French): On behalf
of the Government of Haiti, allow me, first of all, to
congratulate you, Madam President, for taking the
initiative to convene this debate on such an important
issue, that is, cooperation between the United Nations,
regional and subregional organizations in maintaining
international peace.

Cooperation between the United Nation and regional
organizations in maintaining peace is longstanding.
The principle underpinning it is enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations, specifically in Chapter
VIII, Articles 53 and 54.

The United Nations not only recognizes regional
organizations as fully fledged actors in peaceful conflict
resolution but also stipulates that the Security Council,
without renouncing its monopoly to authorizing the
use of force, except in the event of legitimate defence,
can confer upon a regional organization the mandate
for applying enforcement measures taken under its
authority.

The past two decades have seen a significant growth
in the role of regional and subregional organizations
in peacekeeping organizations, especially in Africa,
Europe and the Americas. The proliferation of regional
conflicts, accompanied all too often by their ensuring
tragedies and atrocities, has made cooperation between
the United Nations and regional institutions a mainstay
of international relations. To see that, one need look no
further than a number ofpeacebuilding or peacekeeping
operations carried out in recent years on virtually every
continent and in a large number of countries dealing
with the scourge of war, conflicts of all kinds, political
upheavals and civil war.

My own country, the Republic of Haiti, has
undergone a terrible and extreme political upheaval,
making its own descent into hell, from which,
fortunately, it is now emerging with the assistance of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti. In
that regard, I would like to thank the Community of
Latin American and Caribbean States, the Common
Market of the South, the Union of South American
Nations, the Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of
Our America, the Caribbean Community and the
Latin American and Caribbean Economic System for
their constant attention and interest in Haiti. I would
like to recall that during the past 25 years, my country
of Haiti has been subject to several interventions by
our multilateral Organization and by regional and
subregional organizations, and sometimes both together.
I have in mind the joint Organization of American
States/ United Nations mission to which the Secretary-
General referred in his statement this morning. While
commending such international solidarity, we must
nevertheless recognize, as the representative of Cuba
emphasized in his statement, that missions must align
themselves with the priorities defined by the Haitian
Government so that we will not have to go down the
same road, for the same reasons, in a few years' time.
It is thus Haiti's fervent wish that the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, which is currently
deployed in our country, should achieve the goals it was
created for. To that end, it can count on the assistance
of the Haitian Government in furthering the welfare of
the people of Haiti and achieving peace and security in
the region.

However, we are compelled to conclude that, despite
the inarguably spectacular development and success
of the cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations, when it comes to maintaining
peace it still falls well short of the level that its potential
might lead one to hope for, and that the international
community has the right to expect. And despite its
successes, there are still many challenges, particularly
regional organizations' lack of resources. The Republic
of Haiti is one of many that believe that - given the
maturity that regional organizations have acquired
over time, the configuration of the world today and
the constantly evolving international situation - a
new model is needed for relations between the United
Nations and regional organizations in the area of the
maintenance of peace.

We should recall that as far back as 20 years, ago
the Secretary-General was already calling for a model
based on decentralization and delegation of authority
in An Agenda for Peace (S/24111). Yes, various
coordination and consultation mechanisms exist, and
the record of cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations is far from negligible. Haiti
is happy to bear witness to that. But as was recently
emphasized again in Security Council resolution 2033
(2012), there is a feeling today that it is essential, in
the spirit of Chapter VIII of the Charter, to combine
the international legitimacy and legality of the United
Nations with the advantages of regionalism.

It is therefore incumbent on the international
community today to bridge that gap, as the Security
Council has called on us to do. We must effectively
reforge and renew the essential partnership between
the United Nations and regional organizations, basing
it on well-defined principles and endowing it with a
precise legal framework and the resources necessary
to allow those regional organizations to fully play
their due role alongside the United Nations in a spirit
of complementarity and in every area where their
cooperation is desirable. The Secretary-General of the
Organization of American States would not disagree
with this, whether the issue is one ofconflict prevention,
peacebuilding, electoral assistance, humanitarian
action or monitoring respect for human rights.

In that spirit, the Republic of Haiti will continue to
work with all who believe that the role and involvement
of regional organizations in maintaining international
peace is now more essential than ever and should
continue to grow in the future. In welcoming the
initiative taken to institute this dialogue, I trust that it
will open new lines of thought and for concrete action
aimed at continued cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations.

