Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We have listened attentively to the assessment
of Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process and Personal Representative
of the Secretary-General, of the announcement made in
Washington, DC, recognizing Jerusalem as the capital
of Israel.

Washington's decision on Jerusalem was received
with criticism by the Palestinian side and the Arab-
Muslim world. President Abbas of Palestine emphasized
that the move undoes all the international community's
efforts to resolve the Middle East issue. At the same
time, Palestinian factions, including the Palestinian
Liberation Organization and Hamas, have called for
strikes and protest marches in the Palestinian territories
of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.

In Moscow, the decisions announced in Washington,
DC. were received with grave concern. We believe that
a fair and sustainable settlement of the long-standing
Palestinian-Israeli conflict must be achieved on a basis
of commonly accepted international law, including
the relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions, which provides for the settlement of all
aspects of the final status of the Palestinian territories,
including an issue as sensitive as that of Jerusalem,
through direct Palestinian-Israeli negotiations. It is an
alarming fact that the newly declared position of the
United States on Jerusalem risks further complicating
the situation in Palestinian-Israeli relations and in
the region as a whole. We therefore call on all the
parties involved to exercise restraint and refrain from
actions that could have dangerous and uncontrollable
consequences. Particular attention should be paid to
ensuring that all worshippers have freedom of access to
Jerusalem's holy sites.

Russia's principled position on this issue is
unchanged. It calls for facilitating a lasting Palestinian-
Israeli settlement that ensures Israel's peaceful and
secure existence within internationally recognized
borders and fulfils the Palestinian people's aspirations
to establish their own independent State, in which East
Jerusalem becomes the future capital of Palestine and
West Jerusalem, the capital of the State of Israel. As
a permanent member of the Security Council and an
active participant and mediator in the Middle East
Quartet, Russia will continue to actively assist the
Palestinians and Israelis in achieving the relevant
agreements. We reiterate our firm position that there
can be no alternative to a two-State solution. Everyone
should have an interest in resolving the Palestinian-
Israeli and Arab-Israeli conflicts, and all efforts to
achieve that goal deserve support. However, a decision
that fails to consider the interests of all of the parties in
the Middle East peace process cannot succeed.

We welcome the steps that have been taken to
solidify the unity of the Palestinian people with the
help of Egypt. We support regional stakeholders'
active involvement in the Middle East peace process,
especially that of Cairo and Amman. Russia's proposal
for convening a summit in Russia for the leaders
of Palestine and Israel is still on the table. We await
the long-promised United States proposals to the
international community for settling the Palestinian-
Israeli conflict.

We have already asked the United States to explain
the rationale for its decision to eventually transfer
the United States Embassy in Israel from Tel Aviv to
Jerusalem and what effect it imagines that it will have
on the international mediation efforts of the Quartet
being conducted under the auspices of the United
Nations. We have pointed to the apprehensions voiced
by Arab and Muslim countries in general, as well as
the League of Arab States and the Organization of the
Islamic Conference, about how it could undermine or
even put a stake through the heart of the negotiations
for a two-State solution, in which the States of Israel
and Palestine can live fully, side by side and in security,
in accordance with the relevant General Assembly and
Security Council decisions.

Given the present circumstances, it is more
important than ever to relaunch a sensible political
process aimed at achieving a lasting and sustainable
Palestinian-Israeli settlement based on a two-State
solution. In that regard, the Quartet remains a unique
international mediation mechanism.

