Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have the
honour to address the Security Council at this meeting
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM). I wish
to convey the Movement's appreciation for Rwanda's
presidency of the Security Council for having convened
this open debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine.

The situation in the occupied Palestinian territory
regrettably continues to deteriorate owing to the
oppressive, violent practices that Israel, the occupying
Power, continues to inflict on the Palestinian people in
violation of international law, including humanitarian
and human rights law. Regrettably, since the last
open debate (see S/PV.6906), despite regional and
international peace efforts, Israel, the occupying Power,
has continued its colonization of Palestinian land, its
blockade of the Gaza Strip, its military raids and arrest
campaign, and all forms of collective punishment ofthe
Palestinian civilian population under its occupation.

As stressed in the recent meeting of a delegation
led by the NAM. Chair with Secretary-General Mr. Ban
Ki-moon and the March President of the Security
Council, the deteriorating situation of the thousands of
Palestinian prisoners and detainees, which are being
unlawfully held by Israel, the occupying Power, is a
matter of grave concern to the Movement. Furthermore,
Israel's violent suppression of non-violent civilian
protests against the occupation, particularly against the
abuse of thousands of Palestinians in Israeli prisons,
including the recent torture and killing ofa Palestinian
detainee and in solidarity with prisoners on hunger
strike, as well as against Israel's settlement, wall and
colonization of Palestinian land, has caused extensive
casualties and further destabilized the situation and is a
matter that preoccupies the Movement.

We, the Non-Aligned Movement, condemn the
continued unlawful detention and imprisonment of
thousands of Palestinians, including children, women
and numerous elected officials, who continue to be
held under harsh, inhumane conditions and subject to
physical and mental ill-treatment. In that regard, the
Movement condemns, inter alia, Israel's use of torture
and all other forms of physical and psychological
mistreatment and deprivation of Palestinian prisoners.
The Non-Aligned Movement calls for the release of all
Palestinian political prisoners.

The Movement condemns ongoing Israeli
settlement activities, which constitute grave breaches
of international law and violate numerous United
Nations resolutions, including resolutions of the
Security Council, as well as other illegal practices in the
occupied Palestinian territories. Israel, the occupying
Power, continues to defy international law and the will
and demands of the international community with that
destructive, provocative and illegal practice, which
is threatening the realization of a just and peaceful
solution.

Thousands of Palestinians have been displaced
from their lands in the Jordan Valley, where thousands
more are at risk of displacement due to Israel's illegal
colonization, as well as in and around occupied East
Jerusalem, where the occupying Power continues
to pursue measures aimed at the quiet transfer or
depopulation of the indigenous Palestinian inhabitants
and at ensuring a Jewish majority in the city. Violence
and terror also continue to be waged by extremist Israeli
settlers against the Palestinian civilian population and
at Muslim and Christian holy places, including in
Jerusalem.

The Non-Aligned Movement calls for a complete
end to all Israeli settlement activities, the construction
of the wall, home demolitions, residency revocations,
excavations, including near Al-Haram Al-Sharif,
the closure of Palestinian institutions in the city, a
cessation of the transfer of Israeli settlers to Palestinian
land and an end to their lawlessness. The Non-Aligned
Movement also calls for the complete lifting of the
blockade of Gaza and for international attention to the
severe humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip.

The Non-Aligned Movement stresses the urgent
need for action by the international community to
redress the unjust and critical situation endured by
the Palestinian people under Israel's almost half a
century of military occupation. The relevant United
Nations resolutions and international law must be
implemented. The responsibilities of the Security
Council, which is mandated to maintain international
peace and security, are clear. It is high time that those
responsibilities were upheld. The Security Council
cannot remain on the sidelines. It must act to advance
efforts to resolve the prolonged and tragic conflict as
a result of which the Palestinian people have too long
been denied their inalienable human rights, including
to self-determination and to return, and the freedom of
an independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem
as its capital.

Turning to Lebanon, the Movement condemns
Israel's ongoing violations of Lebanon's sovereignty.
It calls on all parties concerned to fully implement
resolution 1701 (2006) in order to end the current
fragility and to avoid a resurgence of hostilities.
Such actions also constitute a threat to international
peace and security and are a continuation of Israel's
aggression against Lebanon.

Concerning the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Movement is concerned about the recent violation
of the 1974 Agreement on Disengagement between
Israeli and Syrian Forces, which brings the risk of
tension, escalation and confrontation in the area. The
Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms that all measures
and actions taken or to be taken by Israel, the occupying
Power, to alter the legal, physical and demographic
status of the occupied Syrian Golan, as well as
Israeli measures to impose its own jurisdiction and
administration in that area, are null and void and have
no legal effect. The Non-Aligned Movement demands
that Israel abide by resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw
fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders
of 4 June 1967, in implementation of resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973).

The States members of the Non-Aligned Movement
reiterate their continuous calls on the Security Council
to act urgently in order to send a clear message to Israel,
the occupying Power, that all those illegal actions must
be fully halted forthwith and that it must comply with
international law.

Let me now speak in my national capacity. I
would like to refer to the present political and security
situations in the Middle East region, which is becoming
increasingly fragile and precarious. That is particularly
true with regard to the situation in Syria.

The Islamic Republic of Iran believes that any
foreign military involvement against Syria would only
exacerbate the crisis and extend the insecurity to other
countries in the region. Therefore, Iran is of the view
that the way out of the present crisis in Syria lies in
strengthening a comprehensive and peaceful political
process aimed at establishing, first and foremost,
a cessation of violence between the parties and the
holding of a national dialogue between the opposition
and the Syrian Government for a peaceful political
process. The regional countries should cooperate with
one another to facilitate such dialogue and national
reconciliation. To that end, the Islamic Republic of
Iran has actively participated in talks with regional
countries, in particular Egypt and Turkey. It seems that
there is no alternative if we want to restore peace and
stability to Syria and to the region.

Turning now to what was said against my country by
the representative of the Israeli regime in the Chamber,
it is not my delegation's intention to comment in detail.
I would like to point out only that the Islamic Republic
of Iran has officially declared its commitment to the
fundamental principles of the Charter to refrain from
the threat or use of force against any member of the
United Nations. The Israeli regime, with a dark history
of terrorist activities, possessing hundreds of nuclear
warheads and known as an illegal force in the world,
would do better to keep quiet and to stop threatening
other countries. At the very least, the Council should
demand that the Israeli regime abandon its policy of
flouting international law and the Charter of the United
Nations and immediately desist from resorting to the
threat or use of force.

