Mr. J agne (Gambia): My delegation extends to you,
Sir, a very warm welcome to New York and thanks you
for organizing this open debate on such an important
issue. We are honoured to see you presiding over this
meeting of the Security Council, Mr. Minister.

In the discharge of its mandate for the maintenance
of international peace and security, the Security Council
is nowadays faced with very complex conflict situations.
These conflicts are mostly within the borders of one
State, but have international implications. Some of them
involve large numbers of factions, militias and armed
groups over which Governments often have little or no
control. The massive flow of small arms also adds to the
complexity of the conflicts, which in turn require a great
deal of investment in terms of resources in the search for
a lasting solution. Besides, these efforts can be extremely
time-consuming. Therefore, in the search for a durable
peace in any conflict situation, one fundamental objective
is to avoid a recurrence of the conflict. This is why the
issues of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
of ex-combatants are so crucial.

There are instances where fighting continues
notwithstanding the presence of a United Nations
peacekeeping or peace-building mission on the ground. In
order to avoid such situations, it is important that the
warring parties are disarmed at the outset. This, however,

 

depends to a large measure, on the one hand, on the
political will of the parties to end the conflict, and on their
commitment to surrender their weapons, on the other hand.

There are instances where combatants tend to hold on
to their weapons as trophies symbolizing their participation
in what they may View as a noble cause. In other instances,
because of security concerns or other hidden motives, the
incentives for surrendering weapons are very small. Acts of
banditry are common examples.
The international community must, however, find ways
to ensure that in peacekeeping or peace-building operations,
combatants are effectively disarmed to avoid a recurrence
of the conflict. This objective could be achieved by first,
incorporating clear terms for disarmament in peace
agreements and giving a clear and comprehensive mandate
to the peacekeeping or peace-building operation; and
second, by devising an appropriate and workable scheme of
incentives to induce voluntary handover of weapons. A
scheme of incentives would, however, require the financial
support of the international community.

Demobilization of ex-combatants is also an important
aspect in the quest for a lasting settlement of a conflict. As
clearly indicated by the Deputy Secretary-General in her
statement this morning, this process includes the
registration, medical examination of combatants, and the
provision of their immediate basic needs, such as
transportation to their communities, or even their absorption
into a unified force. In this connection, the situation in
Sierra Leone could very well constitute a real test case, as
flagged by the United Kingdom delegation, especially as
regards child soldiers.

We agree that demobilization is a necessary
complement of disarmament. It is the next stage in the
sequence of events. It is, however, often regarded as the
responsibility of humanitarian and development agencies.
As such, funds are not usually available for this purpose
under a peacekeeping mandate. Our delegation is of the
view that, while there is merit in the sharing of
responsibilities, adequate funding arrangements should be
made to avoid citing the lack of funds as the reason for the
premature termination of such an important process with all
its attendant negative consequences.

The next stage in the sequence is reintegration, which
also suffers the same fate. With the exception of the
perpetrators of war crimes, who should be pursued and
brought to justice, it is an open secret that the integration
of ex-combatants into society is not only desirable but also
necessary. Failure to do so properly often leads to a rise
in banditry and other violent crimes. In countries where
there are serious economic hardships, programmes to
assist ex-combatants to adapt successfully into productive
civilian life is fundamental. Without such programmes, a
fragile peace could be easily derailed.

We recognize that a reintegration programme for
ex-combatants is a long-term socio-economic goal.
Peacekeeping plans should take this fact into
consideration and make provision for the continuation of
the process even after the conclusion of a peacekeeping
operation.
In this connection, it is equally important to bear in
mind the special needs of vulnerable groups in society
such as women, the elderly and, in particular, children.
They should be given special attention. We therefore
reiterate our support for the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict and encourage him to continue to
advocate for the special needs of former child soldiers.

Before I conclude, I would like to touch on the
related issue of the massive flow of small arms in many
conflict situations, particularly in Africa. It is estimated
that over 500,000 small arms are in circulation in the
continent. The availability of such arms fuels existing
conflicts and sparks new ones. The adoption of a
moratorium on the import and export of such arms to
regions in conflict is becoming a compelling necessity.
Other mechanisms to deal with this situation should also
be explored.

Like other delegations, we feel that the Security
Council should continue its engagement in the discussion
of the important issues of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of ex-combatants in a peacekeeping
environment. We therefore support the idea of the
Secretary-General submitting a report to the Council on
his observations and recommendations on principles and
guidelines on the subject and lessons learned to facilitate
further the consideration of this matter.

