Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
wish to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting, and Mr. Mladenov for his important briefing
and dedicated efforts.

Wemustexpress ourdeep concernaboutthe situation
described regarding the continued deterioration of the
political and humanitarian conditions underpinning
the question of Palestine and the acute risks that that
represents for a particularly unstable region and the
maintenance of international peace and security. We
note with dismay the complex humanitarian situation
in the Gaza Strip, which has been exacerbated by
recurrent episodes of violence and cuts in funding to
assistance programmes. It is evident that the situation
favours those actors interested in promoting violence
and extremism.

We must continue to condemn the recurrence of
indiscriminate attacks against the civilian population
and terrorist attacks by Hamas and other radical
Palestinian actors, the imbalanced Israeli responses and
the confrontational rhetoric of its respective authorities,
which fuel ongoing hostile dynamics. We reiterate that
settlement practices, the demolition of buildings and
evictions in the Palestinian territories occupied since
1967 undermine the possibility of reaching a two-
State solution and openly violate international law and
resolution 2334 (2016). We underline the need for the
Israeli authorities to stop and reverse those practices,
and we note with particular alarm the political and
social impact that would be caused by the demolition
of a set of structures in the town of Khan Al-Ahmar.

There is a clear need for political gestures to
build a climate favourable to detente, dialogue and
negotiation between the parties, with the support of
the international community and the Council. In that
regard, we have taken note of the information provided
by the United States Ambassador on the peace plan that
her country is preparing. We look forward to further
details on that.
We believe that all possibilities of resuming
negotiations aimed at reaching a two-State solution
with secure and internationally recognized borders
must be explored. In line with that objective, we
underline the urgency of alleviating the humanitarian
situation in Gaza and moving forward the process of
intra-Palestinian reconciliation. With regard to the
latter, we would like to highlight the efforts made by
Egypt and the importance that the Council closely
follow them, while providing the necessary support.

I would like to conclude by noting, as other
delegations have done, that we continue to expect a
written report on compliance with resolution 2334
(2016) by the Secretary-General, which was requested
by 10 members of the Council, as that would provide
greater transparency and allow for a deeper discussion
on this sensitive topic. We hope that that practice will
be resumed in the coming quarters.

