Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): We commend
the Venezuelan presidency and Ms. Delcy Eloina
Rodriguez Gomez, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, for convening
today's high-level open debate on the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, which
govern international relations among Member States.

Kazakhstan reaffirms its commitment to upholding
the Charter of the United Nations. The principles of
Kazakhstan's peaceful and harmonious multisector
foreign policy are inspired by those enshrined in the
Charter. It is the single, internationally recognized
document that provides the architecture for the work
of the United Nations and the Council. The principles
of sovereignty, the settlement of disputes by peaceful
means, refraining from the threat or use of force against
the territorial integrity or political independence of
any State and non-interference in the domestic affairs
of other States, as enshrined in the Charter, are all
fundamental and should be respected by all States
Members of the United Nations.

Kazakhstan is seriously concerned about violations
of those fundamental principles and strongly believes
in the need for all Member States to be guided by them.
As we have observed in recent years, such purposes and
principles have not been respected or adhered to fully,
which has lead to the conflicts and human tragedies
that we witness today. In that connection, we refer to
the Security Council's recent record in not being able
to address the many issues facing us today. That is why
President Nursultan Nazarbayev, at the general debate of
the General Assembly at its seventieth session, proposed
to convene in 2016 a high-level United Nations event
to pledge adherence to the basic tenets of international
law (see A/70/PV.13). In that connection, Kazakhstan
fully supported the adoption of the declaration on the
occasion of the seventieth anniversary of the United
Nations last September.

The security challenges that we face currently
are far more complex, multifaceted and increasingly
transnational. Kazakhstan therefore attaches the
utmost importance to the security of civilians in
conflict situations, as is evident in its engagement in
United Nations peacekeeping operations in Western
Sahara and Cote d'Ivoire. The protection of civilians
has always been a priority for my country, which has
supported Governments in our region and beyond with
assistance aimed at conflict prevention and resolution
and humanitarian assistance, thus making a significant
contribution to regional peace and security. My
delegation is currently active in the gender entity of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
and encourages countries to implement resolution 1325
(2000) in particular. Kazakhstan, as a Member State,
has acceded to the code of conduct regarding Security
Council action against genocide and crimes against
humanity or war crimes.

The role of regional organizations has been greatly
enhancwinig to the escalation of the potential for
conflict seen in various regions. Kazakhstan therefore
encourages more vigorous and active cooperation
on the part of the United Nations and its Member
States with regional and subregional organizations in
settling conflicts, as set out in the Charter. My country
has therefore supported activities of United Nations
regional offices, which serve as platforms for preventive
diplomacy. We have proposed the establishment of a
United Nations regional hub for sustainable development
and humanitarian assistance in Almaty. The hub would
complement the work of the United Nations Regional
Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia in the
vast territory of the Eurasian region and would focus
on early warning, prevention, dialogue, mediation and
post-conflict resolution.

While sanctions play a role in preventing conflicts
and preserving peace, they should only be imposed by
the Security Council with proper assessment of their
impact and should not be imposed unilaterally. The
national interests of Member States must be balanced
with greater objectivity and global perspectives.

According to the Charter, the General Assembly
and the Security Council are paramount bodies of equal
standing. That original intent needs to be restored by the
Security Council, while allowing greater importance
for the General Assembly and learning from the
collective wisdom of Member States. We therefore
encourage closer collaboration among the Presidents
of the Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council, so as to create a new
global development strategy for peace. We stand ready
to work with the Council and Member States to uphold
the Charter of the United Nations nationally, regionally
and globally.

