I thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to address the Council. I am grateful to the presidency of Indonesia and Minister Marsudi for holding this meeting on this issue of growing concern to the international community. As the Security Council has recognized, linkages between terrorism and organized crime are complex and multifaceted, posing a serious threat to international peace and security. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis poses a host of new challenges to national authorities. Organized criminal groups and terrorists may seek to capitalize on and exploit new vulnerabilities, and transit patterns are shifting in view of travel restrictions and lockdown measures, adding further challenges for border security. Comprehensive and cooperative responses are needed now more than ever. In view of the broad criminal justice mandates of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) that address terrorism and organized crime, building the capacities to deal with those threats represents a key priority of our support to Member States, and I welcome the chance to discuss these issues with members today. It is an honour to join my colleague, Under-Secretary-General Voronkov, to present the findings of the report of the Secretary-General on action taken by Member States and United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact entities to address linkages between terrorism and organized crime (S/2020/754). The report was prepared by UNODC and the Office of Counter-Terrorism in response to the request contained in resolution 2482 (2019). It reflects the contributions of 50 Member States and 15 United Nations Global Compact entities and benefited from valuable United Nations system inputs, including from the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team. The report provides a valuable overview of measures taken by Member States and United Nations entities to address linkages between terrorism and organized crime, as well as recommendations for action going forward. In their contributions, Member States highlighted a range of linkages between terrorism and organized crime, often in connection with the financing of terrorism. Challenges vary by region and some States could not confirm the existence of links, citing limited terrorist activity in their countries or constraints with investigative capacities. Linkages between terrorism and organized crime may be opportunistic, based upon shared territory or other mutual interest. Alliances may also draw on personal connections, possibly developed in prisons in cases where terrorists have prior criminal backgrounds. Many States reported that terrorists benefit from organized crime, including trafficking in persons and migrant smuggling, trafficking in drugs, firearms, cultural property and other goods, kidnapping for ransom, robbery and other illicit acts. In some cases, returning foreign terrorist fighters have taken part in organized criminal activities, while in other States organized criminal groups have been involved in transporting terrorists across borders. However, some Member States also observed that criminal organizations are increasingly disinterested in cooperating with terrorist groups, potentially to avoid additional scrutiny from national authorities. Actions reported by Member States to counter these threats show that many Governments have taken steps to adopt the legislative, policy and operational responses identified in resolution 2482 (2019). In their contributions, Member States emphasized the following measures: ratifying relevant legal instruments, including the global counter-terrorism instruments, the Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the international drug control conventions; fighting money- laundering, terrorist financing and corruption by strengthening financial intelligence units (FIUs), complying with the relevant United Nations instruments and resolutions and Financial Action Task Force recommendations, as well as building public- private partnerships; strengthening border security and international coordination, for example by collecting and analysing advance passenger information/passenger name record data; implementing comprehensive responses to drug demand and illicit drug trafficking; improving prison management to prevent radicalization to violence and recidivism; and developing strategies that incorporate whole-of-society approaches to prevent and counter violent extremism. States highlighted inter-agency and international cooperation as key enablers for success across all these areas. Building links between FIUs and counter-terrorism investigators was cited as a particular priority. The importance of joint task forces, operations centres and other coordination mechanisms among intelligence, border and criminal justice practitioners to detect and counter crimes in an integrated manner was also highlighted. Member States further emphasized the need for cross-border cooperation to address the transnational nature of crime and terrorism threats, including through regional platforms, bilateral information-sharing agreements, the exchange of law enforcement liaison officers, INTERPOL and regional organization databases and tools, and mutual legal assistance treaties. The report also identified several areas for intensified action to fully respond to resolution 2482 (2019) and to further develop and disseminate the good practices reported by Member States. National legal frameworks could be updated to include precise definitions of terrorism and organized crime offences and the criminalization of facilitation acts. More resources could be directed towards reinforcing national intelligence and criminal justice coordination and capacity through the establishment of specialized units and inter-agency mechanisms, as well as through a greater focus on intelligence-led policing and evidence collection and preservation, including for electronic evidence. Targeting entire organized criminal or terrorist networks when building criminal cases should also be a priority. Further necessary steps include strengthening land, air and sea border security through data collection tools, control systems and enhanced coordination and continuing efforts to deepen regional and international cooperation. The report also highlights the importance of measures targeting specific links between terrorism and organized crime, for example between drug trafficking and terrorism financing, or to stop the illicit exploitation and trafficking of natural resources, small arms, wildlife and other goods. More support is needed to comprehensively address all forms of trafficking in persons, including when such crimes are committed by terrorist groups. Member States could also be encouraged and provided with support to bring all measures in line with relevant international legal frameworks, including international humanitarian, human rights and refugee laws. These observations correspond with the strategies and good practices that UNODC has noted in its years of working at the field level to counter organized crime and terrorism and that the Office promotes in capacity-building assistance to Member States. Finally, the report highlights the need for more research to better understand the nature of linkages between terrorism and organized crime and the vulnerabilities of different sectors to exploitation. My colleague Under-Secretary-General Voronkov will brief the Council on the efforts of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact entities to support Member States in addressing these complex and evolving challenges. As part of the Global Compact, UNODC remains committed to leveraging its experience and expertise on organized crime and terrorism. UNODC is uniquely placed to support Member States in addressing these linkages, as our Office serves as the custodian of the United Nations conventions on transnational organized crime and corruption, and supports the implementation of the international drug control conventions, the United Nations standards and norms in crime prevention and criminal justice and the international instruments against terrorism. In collaboration with the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, the Global Compact and other partners, UNODC looks forward to putting this knowledge to use in working with States to deliver technical assistance and engage with communities, parliamentarians, civil society, the private sector, youth, women and all stakeholders in promoting comprehensive, integrated and victim-centred responses to linkages between organized crime and terrorism. I thank you once again, Sir, for this opportunity to brief the Council. UNODC stands ready to support you.
