Mr. Wlosowicz (Poland): It gives me great pleasure
indeed to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of April.
We are confident that your well-known diplomatic skills
and devotion will greatly contribute to the work of the
Council.

I would also like to ask Ambassador Legwaila to
accept the assurances of my delegation's highest
appreciation for the remarkable manner in which he
presided over the Council in March.

We are very grateful to you, Mr. President, for
convening today's debate on Afghanistan. It is indeed a
timely decision. We are glad that non-members of the
Security Council will have a chance to present their views,
too.

The situation in Afghanistan constitutes a serious
threat to international security, and especially to stability
in the whole region of Central Asia. Without
normalization of the situation in that country, it will not
be possible to defuse tensions which persist around its
perimeter.

As a result of the long-lasting military confrontation,
millions of people were forced to flee the country;
hundreds of thousands were displaced internally.

The war had disastrous consequences for the
country's infrastructure: schools, hospitals and highways
were massively destroyed. A total of 1.5 million children
died from malnutrition and lack of health care. Tens of
thousands of persons were handicapped because of the
war.

According to the International Committee of the Red
Cross Afghanistan is one of the most mine-infested
countries in the world. All factions and parties involved
in the Afghan conflict have resorted to mine warfare. It
is indeed alarming that in 1995 alone 4,000 people were
killed or injured by these deadly devices.

It is appalling that, despite the efforts of the
Government in Kabul, Afghanistan remains a significant
source of narcotics which rapidly spread all over the
world. Under the conditions of ongoing internal conflict
in the country, the war waged against narcotics cannot be
successful.

The legacy of war continues to haunt the faction-
ridden people of Afghanistan, who remain deeply divided.
The warring parties have not renounced armed hostilities,
and the situation continues to be extremely volatile,
especially in the area of Kabul.

In December 1995, the General Assembly adopted
a resolution on the situation in Afghanistan. On 15
February 1996, the President of the Security Council was
authorized to make a statement on behalf of the Council
concerning the situation in Afghanistan. The statement, as
well as the resolution, called for bringing to a halt the
shelling of Kabul and for ending the blockade of access
roads to the city through which humanitarian aid could be
delivered to its inhabitants.

Since the issuance of that statement, the fighting has
escalated, and reports on the intensification of hostilities
have kept coming from Afghanistan. There has been an
increase in civilian casualties. Three of the four roadways

 

leading to the city have been open only sporadically for
humanitarian convoys. This situation arouses our concern.
It is our conviction that only dialogue and political
negotiations could enable the Afghans to overcome their
problems. Hence, we call upon the warring parties to
renounce violence and to end the civil war ravaging the
country.

We are against any political or military interference by
outside forces in the internal affairs of Afghanistan. We
believe that only genuine national reconciliation and respect
for the interests of all the ethnic and religious population
groups of Afghanistan, as well as for the centuries-long
tradition of Afghan statehood, can provide the real basis for
a peaceful settlement of the conflict.

We hold the view that Afghanistan is the common
heritage of all Afghans and that the participation of all
ethnic and cultural groups in the affairs of the country
could only enhance the development and reconstruction of
the nation. This would help solve problems the country is
faced with and lead to a democratic society.

We believe that the international community can
actively assist the Afghan people to achieve these goals,
and we are willing to participate in the efforts aimed at the
reconstruction of Afghanistan. We find the idea of an
international conference devoted to Afghanistan appealing
and certainly worth exploring.

Since the polyethnic, multinational country of
Afghanistan needs the cessation of the civil war and
national reconciliation, Poland supports international
efforts - including those made within the framework of
the United Nations - to achieve these goals.

We greatly value and respect Ambassador Mahmoud
Mestiri's efforts as Head of the Special Mission to facilitate
national rapprochement and the reconstruction of
Afghanistan, in particular by promoting broad-based
political dialogue.

There is also a great role to be played in this process
by regional organizations, such as the Organization of the
Islamic Conference and the Non-Aligned Movement. We
hope that despite the enormous difficulties, such diplomatic
efforts will bring the desired results.

