Mr. Vrailas: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States.
The candidate countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia;
the countries of the Stabilization and Association
Process and potential candidates Albania and Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia align themselves with this
declaration.

Let me first congratulate you, Madam President, on
assuming this month's presidency ofthe Security Council
and welcome Argentina's choice of the important topic
of cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations for its opening debate.
I also thank the Secretary-General for his statement
and the representatives of the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States, the African Union, the
Union of South American Nations and the League of
Arab States, for their briefings.

In the light of the many challenges to peace and
security, it is clear that the United Nations cannot
address these alone, but that regional organizations
often have an essential role to play. They can contribute
their understanding of local and regional conflicts and
their root causes, as well as their capacity to respond.
Their capacity to contribute is, in itself, important.
Enhanced regional capabilities for peacekeeping and
conflict prevention are a prerequisite for strengthening
regional ownership and responsibility for crisis
management.

Those capabilities require support, also among
regions. As Council members know, the European
Union and its member States provide substantial support
for the capacity-building of regional organizations,
both political and financial. For example, the EU is an
important donor to the African Union African peace
and security architecture and supports early warning
and crisis response activities of the League of Arab
States.

As the Secretary-General stressed in his statement
today, cooperation between the United Nations and the
European Union is both geographically and substantially
wide-ranging. Allow me to briefly address some of the
areas of cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations that we deem of
particular importance in that context, and to share our
own experiences in that regard.

First is peacekeeping. The European Union and its
member States welcome the increased attention given
to the role of regional organizations in peacekeeping.
The challenges oftoday's United Nations peacekeeping
operations - including the ever-increasing demands
for their deployment * highlight the need for increased
cooperation with and capacity-building of regional
organizations.

Over the years, the EU has, in many locations,
provided operational, financial and political support to
United Nations peacekeeping efforts. The 12 completed
and 16 ongoing Common Security and Defence Policy
operations of the European Union - both military and
civilian, on several continents - bear testimony to that
support.

The EU will continue to look for ways to enhance
its direct support to United Nations peacekeeping based
on an action plan that we adopted last year. Those
actions range from hybrid, parallel and sequential
deployment to logistics support relationships and joint
training activities.

Such cooperation cannot start early enough. A joint
EU-United Nations assessment team recently visited
Mali to assess the support requirements of the Mali
police and in the area of counter-terrorism.

Similarly, in crisis management, as well as early
peacebuilding, regional organizations can develop
a mutually supportive relationship with the United
Nations. In those areas, the EU has over the years
developed a close relationship with the United Nations,
including through cooperation between our respective
missions. In 2003, we agreed to a joint declaration on
United Nations-EU cooperation in crisis management,
which was complemented and reinforced by a further
joint statement in June 2007.

As an example, we were able to provide timely
support for the rapid setting up of the United Nations
Supervision Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic.
Similarly, our ongoing dialogue and cooperation
regarding Mali illustrates how we can establish
mutually supportive solutions in crisis management
and early peacebuilding.

Also in terms of conflict prevention, longer-term
peacebuilding and mediation-strengthening cooperation
between the United Nations and the relevant regional
and subregional organizations can bear fruit.

For the EU, the United Nations remains a key partner
in all of those areas. To that end, a mechanism has
been established to allow regular policy-level contacts
between EU and United Nations services. Moreover,
the EU continues to support specific activities in those
areas where the United Nations may be best placed to
take matters forward in the field. That support also
translates into substantial funding.

Finally, we want to emphasize the overall
importance of the exchange of best practices and
lessons learned, both between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations as well as
among regional organizations themselves.

Regional organizations can learn a lot from the
experience of the United Nations. For the EU, for
example, our cooperation with the United Nations in
the area of conflict prevention has a strong element of
experience-sharing. To further promote such exchanges,
we are exploring several possibilities for the better
linking up of our work in the field. We also hope that
we can bring our experience in conflict prevention to
other regional organizations, including on preventing
conflict over resources such as water and energy-
related challenges through subregional strategies and
institutions.

To conclude, every regional organization has an
inherent historical background, distinct objectives and
a diverse membership. The concept paper (S/2013/446, annex) shared by the Argentine presidency rightly
points out that differences in capacity, vision, mandates
and objectives pose a clear challenge to elaborating an
overarching framework.

In formulating strategies for cooperation, we should
therefore approach our efforts to strengthen global
and regional cooperation in a results-oriented and
pragmatic manner. There is no one size fits all. But we
can and should learn from one another's experiences.
That is why today's discussions are so valuable, so we
can jointly grow the important partnership between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations.

