Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): I
will say a word, I hope with your permission,
Mr. President, at the end of this debate about some of
the general issues that have arisen of interest to the
Committee, but let me pick up one or two particular
points and questions.

Ireland and Bulgaria both asked about regional
cooperation. They know that the Committee is very
interested in taking forward the regional dimension of
our action against terrorism. I think we have got two
things particularly in mind. One is that the regions are
normally composed of States with similar systems,
traditions and cultures, and there are lessons to be
learned within those traditions and cultures about what
is the best practice in terms of legislation or machinery
to deal with multinational crime, including terrorism,
where some members of the region can learn from
others in terms of the models to follow. That can,
perhaps, be of more practical use than people realize.
The Committee wants to tap those sources of mutual
assistance between Member States. We will be in touch
in due course with representatives of regional groups to
try to take that forward. We are also conscious of the
work that other international institutions can do to help
groups at the regional level.

The other important aspect is more political. It
involves mutual encouragement between members of
the same region to take effective action against
terrorism for a very understandable and self-interested
reason. This whole fight against terrorism has to be
collective because terrorists choose their route. If one's
neighbour has not met the standards that resolution
1373 (2001) is setting, is that a danger to one?
Therefore peer pressure within regions is extremely
important. It may be that the Committee will debate
and agree that if there are gaps in the capacity to
counter terrorism within a region, then there needs to
be regional encouragement for those gaps to be filled.
This might have just as much influence on a State in
question as the activity of the United Nations.

There were some interesting comments and
suggestions particularly from the Permanent
Representative of India, for which I would like to
express gratitude. He showed his interest in specific
cases and the reaction of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee to specific cases. We are agreed at this
stage that we will not get into specific cases, for two
reasons. First, our job is to cooperate with Member
States in raising global capacity, and we want to do that
first. The second reason is that resolution 1373 (2001)
makes it clear- and we are very clear - that the
obligation for specific action rests with Member States.
It is for a Member State to take action where there is
clear evidence of a terrorist act within its area of
jurisdiction. We want that obligation to remain and for
no Member State to feel that the United Nations is
taking on an obligation that it must accept itself in the
first instance, even if we come later to specific cases
where a certain amount of further encouragement is
necessary.
A number of Member States have referred to
human rights, but I want to make it clear now that their
interventions speak for themselves. I am not going to
make any further comment beyond what I have said in
my original introduction.

Finally, there has been at least one reference this
morning to State terrorism. I want to make it clear that
the Committee has so far gone to considerable trouble
to proceed by consensus and to keep subjective
political input to a minimum. The mentor and the guide
for the Committee is, of course, resolution 1373
(2001), but we also have to be conscious of the content
of the 12 conventions on various aspects of terrorism.
None of these seminal texts refer to State terrorism,
which is not an international legal concept. We must be
careful not to get caught up in the rhetoric of political
conflict. If States abuse their power, they should be
judged against the international conventions and other
instruments dealing with war crimes, crimes against
humanity and international human rights and
humanitarian law. Let us not muddy the exceptional
and important work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee by confusing these processes.

