Mr. Nebenzia (Russia) (spoke in Russian): Today,
before our very eyes, the Security Council forfeited
consensus on yet another extremely important topic
in the work of our Organization, resulting from an
unconstructive, irresponsible tactic by a number of
States designed to force us to hold a meeting to discuss
the report of the independent international fact-finding
mission on Myanmar established by the Human Rights
Council (A/HRC/39/64). As we already noted in our
statement on the reasons for the procedural vote, we see
absolutely no added value in a briefing to the Security
Council on the subject.

We have been made to discuss a very strange
report, whose legitimacy has given rise to serious
doubts. It has already been widely criticized within the
Human Rights Council by many delegations, including
ours, which testifies to its confrontational nature and
which in itself devalues any discussion of the document
that has been dumped on the Security Council. We
are all aware that Myanmar is not cooperating with
the fact-finding mission, and its representatives have
never visited the country. It is therefore hardly possible
to consider evidence collected outside the country
concerned to be objective or exhaustive. That also fully
applies to the so-called findings and conclusions based
on that evidence.

Those who pushed for today's discussion of the
report in the Security Council are doing all they can
to reduce the significance of the Myanmar authorities'
establishment on 30 July of an independent commission
of inquiry, whose leaders and staff include reputable
foreign representatives. Rather than blackmailing
and intimidating Naypyidaw, it would be helpful to
give the commission our whole-hearted multilateral
support. After today's meeting, no one should be left
with any illusions about the fact that its instigators
have absolutely no interest in resolving the problems
of the Rohingya. They are merely an excuse for putting
shameless pressure on the authorities of a sovereign
State and forcing it to do what its former colonizer and
its allies want. The logical next step in that direction
would be pressure for anti-Myanmar sanctions and
corresponding Security Council resolutions, a course
of action that we categorically refuse to support.

I say that because it is hard to avoid noticing that
Naypyidaw is trying to solve the refugee problem. Since
the Security Council's visit to Myanmar at the end of
April and beginning of May, we have seen a number of
positive changes. The Myanmar leadership is working
systematically to implement the recommendations of the
Advisory Commission on Rakhine State with a view to
achieving a comprehensive settlement of the crisis, and
81 of the 88 recommendations have been implemented
so far. The authorities have repeatedly confirmed at the
official level their willingness to ensure the gradual
return of all the displaced, including from Bangladesh.
To date, Myanmar has verified the identity of more
than 8,000 refugees. The steps taken to establish the
infrastructure in Rakhine state needed for receiving
and resettling returnees deserve high praise.Another
positive example is the close cooperation of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the United Nations Development Programme with
the Government of Myanmar on implementing the
tripartite memorandum of understanding signed on
6 June. We support the work of Christine Schraner
Burgener, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on
Myanmar, who has already visited the country three
times, most recently from 10 to 20 October, and we note
the positive response of the Myanmar authorities to her
proposal for opening an office in Naypyidaw.

For our part, we have consistently supported
a balanced and non-confrontational approach in
discussing the situation in Myanmar and finding ways
to normalize the humanitarian situation in Rakhine,
including resolving the issue of the Rohingya. We
should keep in mind that the underlying problems in
Rakhine are multifaceted and complex, and can be
resolved only through peaceful political and diplomatic
efforts establishing a dialogue between the authorities
in Naypyidaw and Dhaka and representatives of all
ethnic and religious groups. The agreed legal basis for
negotiations between Myanmar and Bangladesh and
the functioning coordination mechanisms will make it
possible to take practical steps in that direction. The
tactic ofpostponing the start ofthe repatriation process,
which is increasingly being used by outside forces to put
additional pressure on Myanmar, is counterproductive.
At this stage, we believe that the priority is ensuring
international cooperation with a view to tackling the
worst humanitarian consequences of the crisis. We
believe it is essential to provide assistance to both
Bangladesh and Myanmar, and that it is also the role
of the international community to help Naypyidaw and
Dhaka implement their existing agreements.

We see the Rakhine issue as part of a wider
context of the broad challenges and tasks facing the
democratically elected leadership in Myanmar. We do
not support attempts to saddle Naypyidaw or specific
groups in Myanmar with the entire responsibility for
resolving the crisis, while ignoring the need to combat
terrorist groups, above all the Arakan Rohingya
Salvation Army, whose attacks launched by that group
did a great deal to provoke the situation in Rakhine
state. Such actions only make the prospects for a solid
inter-ethnic peace in Myanmar and for its effective
cooperation with the international community more
distant. We believe that assistance to the Governments
of Myanmar and Bangladesh in resolving the situation
related to Rakhine state should be provided in a spirit
of equality and mutual respect. Unfortunately, today's
meeting contributes absolutely nothing to that.

