Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to begin, Sir, by applauding your initiative in
organizing this debate, which has been very interesting
and, indeed, unique in many ways. It is not the kind of
discussion, at least, that we are accustomed to having
had in the Council over the last few years. My
delegation welcomes the presence of the Ministers of
the Republic of the Congo, Gabon, Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and, I
would like in particular to mention, the Minister of
Equatorial Guinea, who is the representative of our
Spanish language on the African continent. I also wish
to welcome the contribution of the Economic and
Social Council, through its President, and the other
bodies and agencies that have made a significant
contribution here.

During our term on the Council, we have been
struck by the contrast between the magnitude of the
conflicts that we see in the Central African region,
particularly in Angola and in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, and in the subregion's institutional
capacity to engage in conflict prevention and
resolution, as well as the promotion of regional peace
and security. For this reason, we are gratified to note
the efforts that the United Nations has been making to
promote confidence-building measures among the
countries of the Central African region, as provided for
in General Assembly resolution 46/37, adopted in
1991. It is thanks to this resolution that we now have a
United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa. The joint meeting
that this Standing Committee will be holding tomorrow
with the members of the Economic Community of
Central African States should help to tighten the
relationship between the United Nations and the
region.

We recognize that there has been no lack of
initiatives to strengthen regional security. The Non-
Aggression Pact has been mentioned, as well as has the
Council for Peace and Security in Central Africa, along
with the initiative to set up an early warning system.

But if there is one thing that appears clear from
all our endeavours to establish collective security
mechanisms anywhere in the world, it is the need to
have the resolute political support of the States
participating in such institutional arrangements.
Without this factor, we cannot make the move from the
academic to the political level, from theory to practice,
or from imagination to reality. This is the most
fundamental element if the United Nations or any other
agent external to the region is to associate itself with
subregional peace and security endeavours.

In this connection, I would like to mention some
elements of comparable importance that were presented
at a seminar on the regional approach to conflicts in
Africa, held in August of last year as a separate event
during the Colombia presidency of the Security
Council. First and foremost, as was noted there, it is
necessary to arrive at a definition of the scope or extent
of the region itself, so that its members may identify
with it. This will make it possible to build links in
many spheres of regional life, including the economic
and cultural ones, and ultimately forge a community
united for the purposes of security; or, as Anglo-Saxon
political scientists call them, "security communities".

Secondly, regional actors need to have a positive
perception of the external actors with which they wish
to associate themselves in order to establish a regional
security order. External actors may be other countries
or international bodies that are interested in the region.

Thirdly, there might be a need for a regional actor
that could generate and maintain cohesiveness in the
region as well as provide the leadership required by
circumstances.
Fourthly, it is necessary that the interests of the
major and most influential participants in a regional
security mechanism not run counter to the development
of the regional approach.

Finally, we reaffirm that it is the members of a
region themselves that must identify their own needs
and the partners with which they wish to work in order
to create or strengthen their peace and security
mechanisms. In the case of the Central African region,
we believe that the United Nations is in a good position
to contribute to ensuring peace. Its presence in the
Great Lakes region, in Angola and in the Central
African Republic, as well as the work of the Standing
Advisory Committee for Security Questions in Central
Africa, are paving the way for beneficial cooperation in
the future.

