Mr. Vohidov (Uzbekistan) (spoke in Russian):
Recent events have provided irrefutable proof of the
link between international terrorism and the drug trade
that fuels it. The activities of the narco-mafia are
closely connected to arms smuggling, trafficking in
humans and money-laundering, all of which not only
represent an economic and social threat, but are also a
direct challenge to the security of States.

The issue of illicit drug trafficking is of concern
to all - both to countries on drug-supply routes and to
those where the drugs are primarily consumed. We
have repeatedly drawn attention to the fact that transit
through Central Asian countries is growing day by day
and that this increases drug abuse not only in Central
Asia, but also far beyond it.

With respect to drug transit through the territories
of the countries of Central Asia, we must recognize the
incontrovertible connection of this scourge to the
problem of opiate culture and production in
neighbouring Afghanistan. Unfortunately, we must note
that the flow of narcotics from Afghanistan is not
ebbing. Moreover, in the northern regions of
Afghanistan, major new underground heroin
laboratories are being created with the support of
international drug groups. All of this demonstrates the
serious intentions of the narco-businessmen who have
chosen to send their products through Central Asian
countries.

We therefore firmly support the notion that the
problem of drug production and trafficking in
Afghanistan, in particular through the territory of
Central Asian countries, must remain a priority item on
the agenda of the international community and that the
success of international efforts to enhance stability and
security in Afghanistan will depend to a critical degree
on the success of the war on drugs.

In this connection, I am pleased to emphasize the
contribution of the Government of Afghanistan in
combating the production and trafficking of narcotics.
We welcome the establishment of the Counter-
Narcotics Department of the Afghan National Security
Council. In emphasizing the great significance of the
measures undertaken by the Government of
Afghanistan, we would draw particular attention to the
critical importance of the international community's
assistance to the Afghan Administration and the newly
created Afghan structures to combat narcotics.

As a positive step towards resolving the
challenges of and countering the drug trade, I note the
launching of a new project to provide urgent assistance
to Uzbekistan in reopening operations at the Termez-
Hayraton checkpoint on the Uzbek-Afghan border. As
members of the Council know, Hayraton is a key point
along the international arterial trade route linking
Afghanistan to Central Asia. It is very actively used by
criminal drug groups for the illicit transit of most drug
supplies from Afghanistan.

In the past few years, the law enforcement
agencies of the Republic of Uzbekistan have seized
more than 50 tons of narcotic substances in transit,
predominantly transported by car or train. In the other
direction, into Afghanistan, they have seized 72 tons of
the illicit precursor acetic anhydride. We are convinced
that assistance in supplying the checkpoints along the
156-kilometre Uzbek-Afghan border with state-of-the
art equipment will enhance the effectiveness of
monitoring freight entering and leaving Afghanistan.
This will be of benefit not only to the countries of
Central Asia, but also to any State where there is an
inflow of illicit drugs from that country.

In combating drugs, Uzbekistan has enjoyed
positive cooperation from international organizations,
including the United Nations, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, the World
Customs Organization and Interpol. I wish to express
my deep gratitude for the work carried out by the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and its
regional offices. Uzbekistan attaches great significance
to programmes carried out by these and other
organizations, such as the Organization of Central
Asian Cooperation, the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization and the Commonwealth of Independent
States.

Unfortunately, however, we must note that the
many programmes that have been implemented under
the auspices of various international organizations and
those measures that we can take to counter the drug
threat in the Central Asian region are poorly
coordinated and inadequately resourced, financially
and logistically. We believe that we need, in the place
of these patchwork programmes, one centralized, clear,
strong, well-planned system of preventive and pre-
emptive measures aimed at eliminating, first and
foremost, the very sources of this terrible threat.

In that connection, I take this opportunity once
again to raise the issue of establishing a Tashkent
regional clearing house to combat transborder crime,
one of the major priorities of which would be
combating drugs. This initiative was first put
forwarded by President Karimov of the Republic of
Uzbekistan during Secretary-General Annan's visit to
Uzbekistan in October 2002. We hope for the support
of the United Nations and donor countries in
implementing that initiative.

We are hopeful that today's meeting will promote
invigoration of the fight against illegal drugs and
consolidate the efforts of all countries in halting and
eradicating this scourge. Narco-violence, one of the
dangerous challenges to humankind, can be stopped
only if we coordinate our efforts throughout the
international community.

