Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom):
Continuing where Ambassador Negroponte left off, I
would now like to brief the Council on the main points
relating to the provision of basic services, economic
and reconstruction issues and human rights and justice.
I will circulate separately a note that sets outs the
details. I will therefore confine myself to the headlines.

Following the fall of the Saddam regime, the
Coalition Provisional Authority (CPA) has worked to
ensure the rapid restoration of distribution networks
and basic services. By August, food distribution
systems were fully restored and the CPA's efforts -
in partnership with Iraqis and humanitarian
organizations - focused on increasing water supply,
electricity generation and oil production.

With regard to water and sanitation, projects
across the country are providing more and cleaner
water to over 14.5 million Iraqis. In Baghdad over
1,700 critical breaks in the water networks have been
repaired, 90 waste-pumping stations have been

SANA-869

 

rehabilitated and city-wide rubbish collection has
begun. Work is also under way outside Baghdad.

With regard to electricity, work to improve power
generation has lead to a peak in supply of over 4,400
megawatts, above the pre-conflict level. The goal is to
reach an output of 6,000 megawatts by the summer of
2004, and 9,000 megawatts - which is 2,000
megawatts in excess of estimated demand - during
the spring of 2005.

With regard to fuel, there has been a steady
upturn in the quantities of oil produced and exported
from Iraq, rising most recently to some 2.2 million
barrels per day, of which about 1.3 million were
exported.

In the transport sector, Baghdad International
Airport is being repaired and refurbished as part of a
$17.5 million contract. The port of Umm Qasr is
functioning at a much higher capacity than it had for
many years, with its grain-receiving facility completely
renovated. Work has also taken place on some critical
road and rail infrastructure.

With regard to communications, work is under
way to restore damaged switches and to rebuild Iraq's
fibre-optic backbone, permitting inter-city calling and
the operation of communications networks for major
utilities. Three mobile phone networks are expected to
be functioning by January. The goal is to increase the
number of Internet connections from 4,500 under
Saddam to 50,000 by January, with further increases
thereafter.

In the health sector, which is a critical area,
nearly all the 240 hospitals in Iraq are now functioning,
and no longer is access to health care being used as a
political tool. With the help of UNICEF, over 30
million vaccines have been procured and distributed by
the Ministry of Health. An estimated 3 million Iraqi
children under the age of 5 have been vaccinated,
while over 100,000 pregnant women, nursing women
and malnourished children have received
supplementary high-protein food rations.

In the education sector, most schools had opened
by the end of June, with nearly 5.5 million children
taking exams in June and July. The Coalition, together
with the good work of non-governmental organizations
(NGOs), has rehabilitated 1,595 schools, with work on
a further 200 ongoing - a programme employing more
than 35,000 Iraqis. Iraq's higher education institutes

have received 97,000 applications for the 2003-2004
academic year, an increase of more than 50 per cent
from previous year. All 22 universities have reopened,
as have 43 technical schools.

Turning to economic management, the Minister
of Finance announced details of Iraq's 2004 budget on
13 October. For the first time in many decades, Iraq's
resources are being used to pay for the needs of the
Iraqi people, rather than to finance war mongering,
oppression and decadence. Details of the budget, as
well as of the status of the Development Fund for Iraq,
are transparently available on the Coalition Provisional
Authority web site.

A new set of bank notes is replacing the two Iraqi
currencies currently in circulation. The exchange,
which involves handling more than 2,000 tonnes of
new notes, began on 15 October and is proceeding
well. The central bank of Iraq is now independent.
Unemployment remains a major challenge in
Iraq. New public works have given jobs to many
hundreds of thousands, while employment creation
programmes have also been introduced. Nonetheless,
high unemployment will only be sustainably reduced
with the successful transition from a centralized State-
dominated economy to a liberalized market-based
economy. A credit facility for small- and medium-sized
enterprises has been established to foster the growth of
indigenous industry. Rules on foreign direct investment
have been introduced to bring in new capital. And a
new pro-trade tariff regime has been passed by the
Governing Council.

These actions, carried out in close consultation
with the international financial institutions, should help
give both the Iraqi people and the international
community new confidence in the public finances and
economic management of Iraq.

Ambassador Negroponte mentioned how the
international community has been coming together to
assist Iraq's reconstruction, as clearly demonstrated at
Madrid last month. The needs assessments produced by
the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and
the United Nations Development Group and the $33
billion pledged in response will significantly assist the
creation of a prosperous, free and democratic Iraq.

To further help in building their country, it is
crucial that Member States rapidly fulfil the obligation
under resolution 1483 (2003) to transfer funds of the

Sll'V.4869

 

former regime to the Development Fund for Iraq. Many
Member States are holding considerable assets frozen
since 1990. Those funds should not remain idle.

In addition, the international community will
need to agree on a fair and sustainable solution to
Iraq's external debt problems. The sooner that is done,
the sooner Iraq can restore its creditworthiness and
access to international capital markets to help finance
reconstruction and development. The Paris Club has
published an assessment of its members' claims on
Iraq, while the International Monetary Fund has
requested data from other official creditors. Creditors
should now cooperate in order to speed a fair and
sustainable solution to Iraq's debt problems.

I want to turn now to human rights, including
gender, and the issue of justice. The extent to which
human rights were disregarded by the previous regime
is illustrated by estimates that as many as 300,000
people are buried in mass graves throughout the
country. Investigation of those graves represents an
extraordinarily difficult challenge which will take
many years.

As part of creating a human rights culture in post-
Saddam Iraq, the Coalition Provisional Authority has
enacted legislation prohibiting torture and cruel,
degrading or inhumane treatment; outlawing
discrimination by those holding public office; and
ensuring secure and humane prison conditions. The
Coalition Provisional Authority and the United States
and United Kingdom Governments are also facilitating
efforts to strengthen civil society and human rights
education - disseminating information and training
and supporting the work of local non-governmental
organizations.

The newly formed Ministry of Human Rights is a
clear signal that there is no place for oppression. We
believe that those responsible for atrocities committed
in the past should now be brought before an Iraqi-led
process. Supported by the Coalition Provisional
Authority, a Governing Council committee is drafting
the statute and rules of procedure for a special Iraqi
tribunal.

On the issue of women, we are actively
encouraging the broadest participation in the
reconstruction of Iraq, in line with resolution 1325
(2000). We hope Iraqi leaders will view this as an
important and crucial part of introducing democracy.
The presence of at least three figures now on the
Governing Council has given women a base from
which to work. However, much more needs to be done
to ensure a sustained and powerful voice, especially in
the Transitional National Assembly and the Interim
National Government.

The restoration of law and order rests, in part, on
the development of a fully functioning and effective
justice system. A central criminal court of Iraq is now
up and running, with jurisdiction over serious crimes
committed since 19 March 2003. Separately, more than
600 Iraqi judges preside over some 500 Iraqi courts.
Some 300 cases have already been tried. Supervision
of Iraq's judicial system is carried out by the re-
established Council of Judges, abolished by the
previous regime in 1979. The penal code has been
amended to include new rights: the right to counsel; the
right against self-incrimination; the right to be
informed of basic rights; and the absolute exclusion of
evidence obtained through torture.

In conclusion, Iraq is a country which has just
come out of several brutal decades. It is almost
impossible to comprehend the depth of human
suffering that has occurred and the damage done by
Saddam. It will take decades for the country to come to
terms with that suffering.
While this report has understandably focused on
areas of progress, no one should underestimate the
massive scale of the task ahead or how much more
needs to be done. The needs assessments produced in
the run-up to the Madrid Conference highlight the
enormous challenges. The serious security situation -
which we are tackling determinedly - continues to
impact on our efforts. And action will also continue to
be needed to tackle the legacy of years of
underinvestment and misappropriated resources, the
legacy of sanctions and the huge level of
unemployment. We will need to continue to react and
adjust to the inevitable problems and challenges that
will arise on the ground.

But in spite of this, Iraq's potential is now
immense. Already, working with the talented and
creative people of Iraq as well as the United Nations
and humanitarian organizations, we have begun to
make a difference.

Most crucially of all, we now have a timetable for
constitutional reform and elections that will see the
country's future squarely where it belongs: in the hands
of the Iraqi people. To succeed, they will need the

SANA-869

 

continuing commitment and support of the
international community, as well as the assistance - as
circumstances permit - of the United Nations. In that
regard, the pledges at the Madrid Conference
demonstrated the increasing international unity in
providing Iraq with a new start. Recent terrible and
desperate attacks, including those against the very
organizations that are helping Iraq to rebuild, cannot be
allowed to succeed.

The more we can do to make rebuilding Iraq a
collective enterprise, the more quickly the Iraqi people
will achieve the bright future which they deserve. The
regeneration of a free and stable Iraq is in all our
interests.

