Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The Russian delegation confirms with the utmost
clarity its strong, unwavering rejection of the evil of
international terrorism in all its manifestations. In the
struggle against this new and extremely dangerous threat to
global peace and security, our country is ready, at a solid
and practical level, to cooperate constructively with all
international and regional organizations and States.

The Russian Federation strongly condemned the
attempted assassination of the President of Egypt,
Mr. Mubarak, in Addis Ababa on 26 June last year. We
strongly urge that an objective investigation of this crime,
to establish the facts, be carried out fully and be completed,
and that those involved be brought to justice.

This position underlay, and still underlies, our
approach in seeking an effective and fair way for the
Security Council to take action, including taking account
of the regional context. We believe that the task can be
successfully carried out only through close cooperation
between all interested parties, including within the context
of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and other
regional mechanisms, and also on a bilateral level. It is
this approach that offers a real hope for unravelling this
web of complications. It is this approach that provides a
real chance of finding the suspects and of unravelling this
web of confusion with regard to Sudan, and strengthening
stability in this rather volatile region of Africa. And it is
this approach that we have consistently advocated
throughout consideration of the matter in the Security
Council, and in making specific proposals on the draft
resolution. Unfortunately, as events of the last few months
have shown, our views were not taken duly into
consideration.

One cannot avoid feeling that the draft resolution
was used not so much to speed up the search for the
suspects as to isolate Sudan internationally. It is a pity
that such an important organization as the OAU, with
such authority, was not able to counter that trend,
basically just distancing itself from implementing its own
decisions on the matter.

Really convincing evidence about the involvement of
Khartoum in the assassination attempt and in the
whereabouts of the suspects has not been given to the
Security Council or to the Secretary-General. Incidentally,
the co-sponsors of the draft resolution were forced to
acknowledge this when they indicated that the Secretary-
General of the United Nations should be asked to
establish the facts. The situation becomes even more
complicated in view of recent reports that the suspects, or
at least one of them, are not in Sudan. Of course, the
information needs to be checked very thoroughly, but, if
it turns out to be true, other practical steps will have to be
taken.

The draft resolution before us, with all of the proper
and correct provisions it contains, basically in other parts
disregards the points which I have just made. Moreover,
the draft creates an extremely serious problem which is
totally unrelated to the situation of Sudan. I am referring
to the overall approach to the use of an instrument such
as international sanctions. The members of the Security
Council and other Members of the United Nations have
on several occasions come to realize that the arbitrary
application of sanctions is essentially flawed when there

 

are no clearly formulated criteria and conditions governing
their imposition and their lifting. This is a problem which
is very relevant today, and it is specifically being
considered in the General Assembly's Working Group on
the Supplement to the Agenda for Peace, where the
problem is being given special attention.

However, despite the growing understanding which
has now taken root in the United Nations about the need for
clear criteria on sanctions matters, in this case apart from
the understandable demand for the extradition of the three
suspects, if, of course, they are still in the Sudan -
abstract demands are being made of Khartoum along the
lines of living in friendly relations with its neighbours and
complying with the Charter of the United Nations and with
the Charter of the OAU.

I believe that all representatives, including the
co-sponsors, understand full well that objective criteria for
checking implementation of such vague demands simply do
not exist. That means that, if desired, Sudan can be kept
under sanctions indefinitely. Apparently there are some who
would be willing to do this, and then we would have a
repetition of what we are already seeing in other
situations - namely, the introduction of economic
sanctions with no time-frame, the suffering of broad sectors
of the population, an unavoidable humanitarian crisis, and
the search for ways of dealing with that crisis, including,
probably, the adoption of a resolution along the lines of
resolution 986 (1995), and then it would go on and on in
that already rather well-known Vicious circle.

I believe that many colleagues in this Chamber
understand the situation. The fact that it is known in
advance that this kind of demand cannot be met, along with
the logic contained in paragraph 8 of the resolution,
predetermines in a way the inevitability of a further
escalation of sanctions against Sudan, and this could lead
the Security Council in the very near future into a
stalemate, with no simple way out.

I want to be sure that I am correctly understood. We
are absolutely in favour of involving the Security Council
in a real - I emphasize "a rea " - struggle against
international terrorism, but we are against attempts to make
use of this in order to punish certain regimes or in order to
attain other political goals of one or more Member States.
Such an approach, as far as we are concerned, is
unacceptable, for it is not only destructive for the people of
the Sudan and for the peoples of the countries in the region,
but it also creates a very dangerous precedent which could
do real damage to the authority of the Security Council and
could create the impression that the Council is not able to
draw conclusions from the lessons of very recent history.

Accordingly, despite the rumours last night, the
Russian delegation cannot support the draft resolution. We
have found it possible not to prevent its adoption simply
because implementation of the measures contained therein
relating to diplomatic pressure on Sudan will depend on
the Members of the United Nations themselves. At the
same time, we trust that what we have said - which is
the position of principle of Russia - has been heard and
understood in all of its details, including what we have
said about future consideration of this matter in the
Security Council in two months' time.

We remain convinced that the problem of bringing
the suspects to justice can and must be resolved urgently.
We hope that the Government of the Sudan, in the spirit
of the proposals and promises that it has made, will - in
cooperation with the authorities of Ethiopia and Egypt -
take additional real steps in the interest of attaining this
goal.

