Mr. Serrano: I thank you very much, Sir, for
giving the floor to the European Union (EU). The
candidate countries Turkey, Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Iceland; the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia; as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Georgia align themselves
with this declaration.

Let me start by thanking the Foreign Minister of
Afghanistan for his important statement, and reiterate
the support of the European Union to the efforts of the
Afghan Government. I also wish to join others in
expressing our support for the Secretary-General's
report (S/2010/463) on the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), and thanking
Special Representative Staffan de Mistura for his
dedication and tireless efforts in Afghanistan. We value
very highly the cooperation between UNAMA and the
European Union.

The European Union commends Afghanistan on
the recent holding of its second parliamentary elections
since 2001. While it is too early to make a full
assessment of the polls, the European Union wishes to
highlight the thorough preparations, which were
largely ensured by Afghan institutions and have
incorporated some of the lessons from last year's
elections. Above all, we pay tribute to the millions of
Afghans who courageously exercised their democratic
rights under such challenging circumstances. The
European Union deplores the loss of life and condemns
all those who have sought to undermine the electoral
process, including through acts of violence.

We now look to the Independent Electoral
Commission and the Electoral Complaints Commission
to address irregularities and complaints in a
transparent, impartial and principled manner. This will
be the real test in the weeks ahead. We also trust that
all will be done to ensure that all women who have run
for office and won can take up their mandates.
Moreover, it will be necessary to reach out to areas in
which the turn-out was very low due to lack of security
so as to avoid the further disenfranchisement of parts
of the population. Beyond these elections, it remains
highly important to strengthen Afghanistan's electoral
framework. The European Union acknowledges the
Afghan Government's pledges made at the Kabul
Conference in this regard, and is committed to
supporting such electoral reforms in the future.

More generally, the European Union welcomes
the results of the Kabul Conference and regards its as a
success, in particular as it mobilized broad
international support for and Afghan buy-in to the
overall transition process. Our focus must now be on
making the concrete implementation plans a reality and
on assisting the fulfilment of the benchmarks which
were set. What is required more than ever is strong
political will on the part of the Afghan Government to
see necessary reforms through and the unwavering
strong support of the international community,
including for much needed capacity-building.

The European Union is acutely aware that
improving governance and development is a long-term
process and has therefore repeatedly committed itself
to a bold and long-term engagement in Afghanistan. As
Council members are aware, the European Union is
highly committed to helping not only to meet
humanitarian needs, but also with reconstruction and
stabilization in Afghanistan. During the period
2011-2013, we will increase assistance to some
€200 million per annum. The European Union as a
whole is investing nearly €1 billion every year,
focusing our assistance on the areas of the rule of law,
governance, rural development, agriculture and health.

Between 2002 and the end of 2009, the European
Commission's support to Afghanistan alone amounted
to 61.8 billion, including €282 million in humanitarian
assistance. Given the worsening humanitarian situation
in areas of the country, the European Union will
continue to focus resources on addressing the basic
needs of the population, and calls on other partners to
take a similar approach. More broadly, the Plan for
Strengthening EU Action in Afghanistan and Pakistan,
adopted in October 2009, provides the framework for
EU engagement across a range of sectors in the
country.

Much of the transition will hinge on the
Government's ability to ensure security and to obtain
the necessary support from the population. This will
require not only tangible results in terms of
socio-economic development, but also continued
institutional reform, including of the police and the
judicial system - two priority areas of EU assistance.
The EU Police Mission is in fact contributing to the
build-up of civilian policing, including the reform of
the Afghan Uniformed Police and the Afghan
Anti-Crime Police. Enhanced efforts are also necessary
to ensure transparency and tackle corruption and to
make progress in the field of reintegration and
reconciliation.

As we highlighted in this Chamber earlier this
year, this process needs to be Afghan-led, inclusive and
conducted in conformity with the Constitution and
Afghanistan's international commitments, including on
human rights. As we shall soon all commemorate the
tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325

(2000) on women, peace and security, the European
Union wishes in particular to highlight the importance
of respecting women's rights and their role in this
process. Despite some progress made regarding the
situation of women and girls, much more has to be
done in this respect.

Equally, the European Union continues to be
concerned by the reported increase of civilian
casualties, in particular affecting Afghan children and
women, with the Taliban and other extremist groups
being responsible for the escalation of the human cost
of the conflict.

The European Union also actively supports
dialogue between Afghanistan and its neighbours, as
well as practical regional cooperation, and welcomes
an enhanced role of the United Nations in that regard.

In closing the European Union wishes to thank
Special Representative De Mistura and his staff for
implementing an ambitious and refocused UNAMA
mandate under difficult circumstances. We also
commend the Afghan Government's commitment to
reform and its intensified efforts. We encourage
everyone to fully seize the opportunities of the current
mobilization of international attention and assistance in
support of progress towards security and prosperity for
Afghanistan.

