The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of Peru.

We too thank our briefers - Mr. Lacroix, Force
Commander Gyllensporre and Ms. Novosseloff- for
their in-depth analyses of the subject matter that brings
us together today, and we are glad to see the constructive
tone that the current discussion in this meeting has
taken. We also thank the troop-contributing countries
whose representatives are here among us this afternoon.

Peacekeeping, in particular peacekeeping
operations, is a tool that is constantly evolving and
adapting to address the increasingly complex and
multidimensional environments in which conflicts take
place. That has required deploying them with more
precise objectives, coherent strategies and innovative
responses. In that light, we decided to convene this debate
and provide a space for reflection to discuss an issue
that, in our opinion, has yet to reach its full potential,
namely, strengthening and better coordinating dialogue
and cooperation among the Security Council, the
Secretariat and troop-contributing countries. In recent
years, various reports and analyses by the Security
Council and its subsidiary bodies, such the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, independent
high-level groups and other bodies, have provided
us with lucid evaluations and valuable proposals to
that end. It is now our responsibility to translate the
theoretical into concrete actions.

Among the important ideas and concepts put
forward this afternoon, we believe that there are
meaningful possibilities that can be provided within
the context of formal consultations to increase the
effectiveness of peace operations and the robustness of
their respective mandates, provided that we are able to
make effective use of them. In that regard, we agree
that there is an urgent need to provide them with greater
interaction, which involves ensuring that those who
chair them - preferably Permanent Representatives
in close coordination with penholders - foster a more
direct and genuine exchange of ideas and experiences.
Ensuring the participation of other relevant actors,
such as Force Commanders, when mandates are up for
renewal, as well as a balanced participation between
political and military experts, would also be advisable.

Aiming for a more fluid exchange also entails
ensuring the adequate prior preparation of the parties,
especially the contributing countries, and convening
meetings with due advance notice and defined purposes,
within the framework of an established calendar and
with all relevant documentation circulated in a timely
manner, including conceptual notes and performance
measures of the peace operation concerned. We also
believe that we must complement those formal meetings
with other informal meetings to provide flexibility
for coordination among the parties, especially when
the Council's heavy agenda does not permit formal
triangular dialogue meetings to be held as often as
is necessary.

We welcome the efforts made in that regard by the
penholders in convening informal meetings to gather
reliable and relevant information that the contributing
countries are able to provide and to engage in in-depth
discussions on the texts of the resolutions. We also
underscore the central role of the Secretariat in those
meetings through deep analyses of the situations and
capacities required for each mission, but we stress the
need for such informal meetings to take place at the
various stages of peace operations, and not only for the
renewal of mandates. In particular, they ought to be held
in a periodic, systematic manner that does not depend
on the goodwill or willingness of a given penholder or
on isolated initiatives of non-permanent members.

That last point leads us to the main point of
our statement, which is concerns the need to make
concrete progress towards the institutionalization of
triangular cooperation so as to give more structure to
our exchanges. We believe that this is feasible on the
basis of the broad coincidences raised by many of the
approaches that we have heard today, which add to our
understanding a substantial basis for agreeing on a best-
practices document as soon as possible. We believe that
the Working Groups on Peacekeeping Operations and
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions,
ably chaired by Cote d'Ivoire and Kuwait, respectively,
could prepare such a document, if they saw fit, together
with members and non-members of the Council that
have long-standing participation and experience in
peace operations.

Peru, in its dual role as an elected member of the
Council and a troop-contributing country since 1958,
will resolutely support all efforts to institutionalize
triangular cooperation. We hope that this debate and the
summary document that we will prepare at the end of
our presidency will give greater visibility and renewed
ideas to an issue that is of interest to all, insofar as it
contributes to the credibility and efficiency of peace
operations and, by extension, to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of Ethiopia.

