Mr. Deng (South Sudan): Since this is the first
time that my delegation is addressing the Security
Council during your presidency, Madam, let me begin
by congratulating you on your assumption of this
important role and assuring you of the full support and
cooperation of our delegation and Government.

As we approach the second anniversary of our
independence, we remain deeply grateful for the
support we have received from the United Nations and
the international community for the overwhelming vote
of our people in our self-determination referendum, the
warmth with which our new State was welcomed to
the United Nations, and the generous support for our
new nation, as reflected in the creation of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) and the
report of the Secretary-General before us (S/2013/366).

I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
the Secretary-General and UNMISS, through the
Secretary-General's Special Representative in South
Sudan, Ms. Hilde Johnson, for the extensive work
undertaken, which is well reflected in the important
report on the situation in South Sudan.

As the Council is aware, tomorrow, 9 July, marks
our second anniversary as an independent nation. The
past two years have been very difficult for our young
nation, particularly with intra-communal violence in
the states of Jonglei, Lakes, Warrap, Unity, Upper Nile
and Western Bar El Ghazal, and, of course, the ongoing
tensions between ourselves and the Sudan. These
situations have severely constrained our ability as a
Government to improve our capacity for the delivery of
much-needed basic services, respect for human rights,
the protection of civilians, the general consolidation of
peace, and the provision of peace dividends.

The Secretary-General's report draws necessary
attention to the challenges facing the Government
of South Sudan. These challenges include the
constitutional review and the drafting of the new
constitution, preparations for the 2015 elections, and
the work of the National Bureau of Statistics towards
the pre-election census. These are indications that the
leadership of South Sudan is determined to develop the
necessary tools for democratic transformation in the
young nation. We are aware, however, that there is a gap
between our aspirations and our performances, largely
due to a lack of capacity. We are thankful to UNMISS,
the United Nations agencies and our international
development partners for their efforts in mobilizing
material and human resources to address these pressing
challenges.

The Government of the Republic of South Sudan
is genuinely concerned for the security and general
welfare of its citizens and of all those who live in
South Sudan. We take note of the deep concerns of the
Secretary-General, the United Nations in general and
the international community regarding the Security
of individuals, human rights protection, and respect
for the rule of law in general. We do not deny these
realities. However, we also realize that they are part
of the militarized legacy of the prolonged war that
devastated our society for over half a century. Without
taking this as an excuse, it is important that they not be
viewed as representing Government policy. The Sudan
People's Liberation Movement (SPLM) fought against
injustice and the marginalization of identity groups. An
SPLM-led Government could not, therefore, advance
a strategy against the safety and the rights of the
population for which it fought. We are determined to
address these challenges, even though we acknowledge
that it will not be easy, and that we need the support of
our friends and international partners to enhance our
capacity to achieve our desired objective.

The Government of South Sudan places great value
on the support of UNMISS, particularly in the states
of Jonglei, Upper Nile and the tri-state area of Lakes,
Warrap and Western Bahr El Ghazal. Inter-communal
violence and cattle-rustling pose a major challenge to
the limited capacity of our nascent State. We believe
that dialogue and reconciliation represent the only way
to promote peace, security and stability in our country.
Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes are essential, but we must continue to
foster a culture of peace, mutual understanding and
cooperation. We need to develop the capacity of our
people to silence the guns and promote socioeconomic
development and prosperity for all.

South Sudan continues to express its heartfelt
condolences for the UNMISS staff and other
humanitarian workers who lost their lives in South
Sudan on 21 December 2012 and 12 March and 9 April
2013, respectively. We regret that the investigations into
these incidences have been prolonged, but there should
be no doubt that the Government of South Sudan wants a
transparent and accountable allocation of responsibility.
I am pleased to report that these incidents will be the
subject of consideration by our Cabinet this week to
determine the appropriate response. It is certainly not
our intention to disappoint our partners and friends
in the international community, who provide us with
the support we need to ensure peacebuilding and
consolidation in our young nation. We therefore plead
for patience and understanding for the delays, which
are due not to our lack of the will to cooperate, but to
our capacity constraints.

As South Sudan enters its second year of
independence under very difficult political and
economic conditions, the issue of Abyei remains
unresolved, resulting in tragic suffering for the people
of the area. The recent assassination of the Ngok Dinka
Paramount Chief was a manifestation of that tragic
situation. We remain optimistic, however, that given
the recent efforts of the Governments of South Sudan
and the Sudan, respectively, especially reflected in the
consultations between their Vice-Presidents, positive
results towards the goal of two viable, prosperous and
peaceful States, living peacefully and cooperatively
side by side, are indeed achievable. We look to the
international community and to this Council to maintain
the necessary support to the parties to implement their
agreements in good faith.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our
appreciation to the Council for its continued attention
to the challenges facing South Sudan and its unfailing
support in addressing them through UNMISS. We
assure the Council of our Government's readiness
to work with all international partners towards the
promotion of peace in our country and in the region.

