Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation abstained in the vote just taken
because we have serious reservations about the
resolution adopted this evening. A few days ago the
Security Council adopted resolution 1590 (2005)
authorizing the deployment of a peacekeeping
operation in southern Sudan. That was a correct
decision, which will help ensure the comprehensive
implementation of the north-south Peace Agreement. It
will also help the Sudanese people to achieve peace
and stability at an early date.

Easing and defusing the current crisis in the
Darfur region in an appropriate way is an indispensable
part of the peace process throughout Sudan and is the
common wish of the international community. It is also

a solemn commitment made by the Sudanese
Government. The situation in this region touches the
hearts of all. It is our view that following the
unanimous adoption of resolution 1590 (2005), the
Security Council should seize this positive momentum
and urge the parties concerned to resume political
dialogue without conditions and as soon as possible
and to reach a political framework agreement under the
auspices of the African Union. In order to reach that
goal, it is necessary to keep appropriate pressure on the
parties.
However, just maintaining pressure without
regard for the complexity of the issue and the specific
circumstances of the Darfur crisis could end up further
complicating the situation and making it even more
difficult to resolve. That would not help the effort to
find a political solution to the Darfur issue. The
African Union has expressed a clear view on this,
which should be taken into full consideration by the
Security Council.

China has always taken a cautious approach to
the issue of sanctions and we abstained on both
resolutions 1556 (2004) and 1564 (2004). It has been
our consistent view that in dealing with the issue of
Darfur, the Security Council should first and foremost
have a sense of urgency. Secondly, it should play a
constructive role. And thirdly, it should support and
work with the African Union.

Thanks to the efforts of the international
community, the humanitarian crisis in the Darfur
region has gradually eased. However, to address the
root causes of the problem, all parties must have the
good will and resolve to undertake political
negotiations. There are many complex factors that
could explain why it is so difficult to resume the Abuja
political talks. One of these relates to the messages
sent by the Security Council. China has repeatedly
stressed that the Security Council should exercise the
greatest caution with respect to "measures" that could
make negotiations more difficult and have a negative
impact on the peace process.

Based on that consideration, we suggested that
major amendments be made to the text so that all sides
could reach consensus and speak with one voice.
However, our suggestion did not receive a positive
response. Because of this, the Chinese delegation was
obliged to abstain in the vote on the resolution.

