Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): It is
certainly right that we should be discussing this item at
this time. We and all of our partners in the European
Union have been shocked by the violence in Jerusalem,
elsewhere in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip and in
Israel in the past few days.

We deplore the catastrophic loss of life and are
horrified in particular by the deaths of innocent
children. It is alarming how quickly in this theatre of
tension the recourse to violence can get so out of hand.
Those who have been fuelling the violence of the last
few days are people who want to derail the peace
process, and they cannot be allowed to succeed.

These tragic events bring home the need for a
new urgency in resolving the outstanding issues in the
Middle East peace process. It is vital that the violence
come to an end so that peace talks can get under way
again. In that regard, we welcome the talks that the
United States Secretary of State will host in Paris
tomorrow between Prime Minister Barak and President
Yasser Arafat and those that President Mubarak of
Egypt will host in Cairo on Thursday, 5 October. There
needs to be a return to diplomacy and negotiation.

The Middle East region needs to achieve a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace to benefit all its
peoples. The region's future and its people's prosperity
will depend partly on trade and cooperation between
them.

Britain and the rest of the European Union have
made clear their commitment to assist the region to
develop in that way. But progress will be painfully
slow unless we have a peace agreement. Only a peace
agreement will enable the people of the region to
realize their potential. It is the duty of the region's
leaders to make sure that we turn away from violence
and conclude a negotiated peace. If they fail, they fail
their peoples. They must show the strength and wisdom
to overcome the immediate difficulties and to focus on
achieving peace as a priority, and so pave the way to a
brighter future.

So, the immediate task is to break this cycle of
violence and the use of force. We call for calm, and we
urge both parties to exercise the utmost restraint.

