Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Let me, in this open
meeting, formally congratulate you, Sir, on assuming
the presidency of the Council for this inaugural month
of 2003. I wish also to express our admiration for
Ambassador Valdivieso's skilful leadership of the
Council last month.

The Council's consideration of thematic issues
has proved to be a useful modality to address issues of
special concern - political and moral - in the context
of the promotion of peace and security. As we conduct
this fourth debate on children and armed conflict, the
Pakistan delegation wishes to express its appreciation
to the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2002/ 1299) and his thoughtful statement this
morning, as well as to his Special Representative,
Mr. Olara Otunnu, for his diligent work to raise
awareness and promote effective action to eliminate the
blight visited on children during aimed conflicts. This
was also reflected in the comprehensive statement
made by Mr. Olara Otunnu to the Council. My
delegation also welcomes the work being performed by
United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) for the
protection of children in armed conflicts, as outlined by
Ms. Bellamy in her statement this morning.

It is appalling that, over the past decade, 2
million children have been killed in conflicts, more
than 1 million orphaned, more than 6 million seriously
injured and tens of thousands, especially girls,
subjected to rape as a deliberate instrument of policy.
As one of the six initiators of the 1990 World Summit
for Children, Pakistan is committed to resolutely
eliminating the pervasive suffering imposed on
children in armed conflicts. We believe that we can
make an important contribution to that objective as a
member of the Security Council and as a major troop-
contributing country to United Nations peacekeeping
operations.

The Secretary-General's report has observed the

impressive gains made in codifying international norms
and standards for the protection of children. The
Convention on the Rights of the Child has been ratified
by 191 countries, and its Optional Protocol on children
in armed conflict came into operation on 21 January
2002. Those instruments categorically prohibit the
direct participation in hostilities, compulsory
recruitment or use in any non-governmental armed
group of children under 18. World leaders gathered at
last year's special session of the General Assembly on
children resolved to protect children from the impact of
armed conflict and to ensure compliance with
international humanitarian law and human rights. They
also committed themselves to end the recruitment of
children and to ensure their demobilization, effective
disarmament, rehabilitation and social reintegration.

Unfortunately, progress in setting norms and
undertaking commitments has not yet translated into
significant amelioration of the tragedies afflicting
children in armed conflicts. According to the
Secretary-General's report, about 300,000 children,
some as young as 8, are still being used to fight in 33
contemporary conflicts in various parts of the world.
More than 20 million children have been displaced by
conflicts. More than 10 million suffer serious
psychological trauma.

The Security Council must respond to this
challenge. It must make an important contribution to
ameliorating the suffering of children in armed
conflicts. It must, first and foremost, seek to exercise
more effectively its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
Council can do much more in preventing the outbreak
of conflicts in the first place. We are convinced that the
Council has yet to fully explore and exploit the vast
potential for conflict prevention and conflict resolution
offered to it by the provisions of the Charter, especially
Chapter VI, relating to the pacific settlement of
disputes. In this context, it is essential to emphasize the
central responsibility of the Council to secure respect
for and implementation of its own resolutions relating
to peace and security.

Secondly, the Council must address the seriously
growing deficit in respect for international
humanitarian law and human rights, so painfully
visible in so many armed conflicts. The atrocities of
Rwanda and Srebrenica are still fresh in our minds.
The civilian suffering in occupied Palestine and in
Jammu and Kashmir is ongoing. The emergence of the
International Criminal Court, and the increasing
willingness of the international community to penalize
gross violations of international humanitarian law and
human rights, are welcome signals that atrocities in
armed conflicts will not continue to enjoy impunity in
the future.

Thirdly, we fully endorse the Secretary-General's
observation that international norms and standards
codified for the protection of children should be
applied through a strengthened monitoring and
reporting mechanism to identify the violators. We note
the list in the Secretary-General's report. We know, of
course, that it is not exhaustive or complete. We also
agree with the Secretary-General that the era of
application should encompass the key elements of
dissemination, advocacy, monitoring and reporting. We
trust that the Council will agree to install such
mechanisms. One way of doing so would be to
appropriately extend the authority of existing United
Nations peacekeeping or observer missions in various
conflict areas to perform the task of such humanitarian
monitoring and reporting.

Meanwhile, we hope that the concerned parties to
armed conflicts in which children are combatants or
victims will take resolute action to implement the
purpose and aims of the international community as
reflected in the Secretary-General's report and in the
resolutions adopted by the Council on this item,
including the one that we shall approve pursuant to this
debate.

