Mr. Onal (Turkey): I would like to begin by
congratulating Russia upon the successful completion
ofits presidency. I thank you, Sir, for organizing today's
Council briefing, with our participation.

Another word of appreciation goes to Ambassador
Geir Pedersen, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Syria. As perhaps one of the closest
witnesses to his dedication and professionalism, I would
like to congratulate Ambassador Pedersen and his team
on their efforts in the finalization of the Constitutional
Committee and its rules of procedure.

The establishment of the Committee is an important
first step. It could not have been possible without the
constructive engagement of the Syrian parties within
the Astana context, in coordination with the United
Nations. In this respect, I would like to take this
opportunity to thank the Russian Federation and Iran
for their contributions to bringing about this result. As
we keep emphasizing, it takes an alignment ofpositions
among all major stakeholders to advance the political
process and bring it to a final conclusion.

The international community, first and foremost
the Security Council, should continuously support and
encourage the Committee to achieve an end result that
should eventually pave the way for free and fair elections
under United Nations supervision, in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015) and in line with the aspirations
of the Syrian people.

The political process and the upcoming round
of negotiations in Geneva can hardly yield a positive
outcome unless a conducive environment is ensured on
the ground. Idlib is a case in point. We are pursuing
our efforts within the Astana format for the full
implementation of the Sochi memorandum. As such, the
preservation of the status quo in the province remains
crucial. We recognize the presence of radical elements,
as well as the necessity to address this threat.

However, we do not agree that the targeting of
civilians and civilian infrastructure is the right way
to achieve this objective. There can be no military
solution to the crisis. We subscribe to the principle that
the political process should be led and owned by the
Syrians themselves. The success of this process will
depend to a large extent on the ability of the international
community and the United Nations to create a certain
level of mutual confidence among Syrians. Special
Envoy Pedersen will enjoy Turkey's continued support
in this regard.

On our part, Turkey will continue our efforts
within the Astana format to contribute to putting in
place confidence-building measures in support of the
United Nations endeavours. We consider the projects of
the Astana format working group on the simultaneous
release of abductees and detainees to be modest but
promising practices. We will continue to support the
working group's activities.

As one ofthe countries most affected by the conflict
in Syria, Turkey is determined to tackle the threats
emanating from the conflict. Terrorist elements - be it

in Idlib or in the north-east; be they Da'esh or the Partiya
Yekitiya Demokrat-People's Protection Units, should
have no place in Syria. The presence of such terrorist
organizations, let alone their empowerment, constitutes
a direct threat not only to our national security but also
to Syria's territorial integrity and political unity.

Turkey has always been in the forefront of efforts
to alleviate the plight of Syrian refugees. While hosting
3.6 million Syrians in our country, we spare no effort
in facilitating humanitarian assistance to those living
in difficult conditions inside Syria as well. On the
other hand, we believe that the time has come to think
seriously and start to act on creating conditions for the
safe and voluntary return of Syrian refugees to their
homeland. That is an exercise that we have started first
with neighbouring countries and in coordination with
regional and international stakeholders.

I would like to conclude by reaffirming Turkey's
commitment to remaining engaged in efforts to find a
sustainable political solution in Syria.

