Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to welcome here the Minister for
External Relations of Angola, Mr. Joao Bernardo de
Miranda, as well as the members of the Mechanism to
monitor sanctions against UNITA, in particular its
Chairman, Ambassador Juan Larrain. May I also pay
tribute to the new Chairman of the Committee on
sanctions, the Ambassador of Ireland, to whom I wish
every success in his new duties.

France fully agrees with the views that will be
expressed in a few moments by the Ambassador of
Sweden on behalf of the European Union regarding a
conflict that has lasted too long and whose catastrophic
humanitarian consequences we have all seen: 300,000
deaths in the past 10 years, 3 million displaced persons
today and every day more victims, especially from
anti-personnel mines.

As I did last month during the open debate of the
Security Council on the report of the Panel of Experts
on Sierra Leone, I would like once again to emphasize
the importance that France attaches to the holding of
real debates that are transparent and open to all
regarding reports that in some way or another make
accusations towards States. Since the effectiveness of
any sanctions regime depends first and foremost on the
determination and capacity of States to implement it, it
is essential that each one be able to put forward its
views in a constructive dialogue. I welcome the fact
that today we are able to have such a discussion on the
report of the Mechanism to monitor sanctions against
UNITA.

France welcomes the rigorous work done by
Ambassador Larrain and his team. They have
endeavoured to follow a strict methodology with regard
to evidence, cross-referencing information sources and
respecting the right of response of protagonists, States,
organizations or individuals that have been the subject
of accusations. The report also has the major advantage
of attempting to describe problems in arms-trafficking
and diamond-trafficking linked to sophisticated
organized crime networks, comprehensively and in all
their complexity, without simplifying or glossing over
the difficulties and the responses.

The work of the Monitoring Mechanism shows
that violations of sanctions are continuing. It is
encouraging, however, to note that the sanctions have,
at least in part, achieved results. The military capacity
of UNITA has been considerably weakened, and the
organization has hardly any territorial bases left in the
country itself. Several thousand rebels have given
themselves up to the legitimate authorities in order to
take part in the process of pacification and national
reconstruction and in the implementation of the Bicesse
and Lusaka Protocol agreements. There is no doubt that
the sanctions-monitoring process has, under the
authority of the Committee, yielded results by helping
to maintain and to intensify the pressure on Jonas
Savimbi and his movement.

We must continue to find concrete means that will
help to enhance the effectiveness of measures against
UNITA and to dismantle diamond-, oil- and arms-
trafficking networks, as well as transport networks and
networks for the falsification of documents - be they
false identity papers or forged end-user certificates for
arms exports. These networks, with the complicity of
some and by taking advantage of the weakness of
others, continue to fuel the conflict and hold back
progress towards a genuine process of national
reconciliation and a lasting return to civil peace.

In this context, France attaches particular
importance to two of the recommendations of the
Monitoring Mechanism.

First, there is a need regularly to update the list of
UNITA leaders and their family members to whom
States must refuse entry into their territory. In this
connection, I welcome the imminent publication of an
updated list by the sanctions Committee. This is a
necessary instrument for States to be in a position to
implement the sanctions effectively.

The second recommendation, which I should like
to emphasize, is the importance ofthe establishment, as
soon as possible, of a system - monitored by the
Security Council - for the certification of Angolan
diamonds, as well as a system for licensing buyers. In
the same vein, France supports the establishment of an
overall certification system for diamonds and
welcomes the encouraging results of the international
conference held in Windhoek last week on conflict
diamonds. We want to be able to submit a draft
convention to the Sixth Committee at the fifty-sixth
session ofthe General Assembly next fall.

Above and beyond these two recommendations,
France notes with great interest all of the proposals -
most of which are extremely relevant - put forward
by the Monitoring Mechanism. However, I should like
recall the position of France on the question of
secondary sanctions. Clearly, it is not enough to
highlight sanctions violations; we must also find the
proper means to put an end to them. But for this
purpose, rather than doling out punishment, we must
help States, regional organizations and the other actors
involved - such as companies and professional
organizations - to implement the measures taken by
our Council and to ensure compliance with them.

As my delegation had the opportunity to note
previously, during an earlier debate on Angola last
April, we believe that only a constructive, instructive
and unified approach can, in the long term, ensure the
success of sanctions and fulfil their objective of
completely isolating UNITA and its leader, Jonas
Savimbi. Only that approach will allow us to force
them to comply with their obligations and their
commitments for national reconciliation and a return to
peace.

Imposing secondary sanctions against countries
that are believed to have violated sanctions is the
wrong response to a genuine problem. As we have had
the opportunity of stating on several occasions,
sanctions, in order to remain relevant and credible and
retain their political force, should be used in a limited
manner, as provided for by the Charter. They should be
limited to cases in which there is a threat to the peace,
a breach of the peace or an act of aggression. An
increase in sanctions regimes would, furthermore,
result in practical management problems that would be
difficult to resolve.

I should like to conclude this statement by
making a comment and putting forward two proposals.

First, there are obvious parallels between the
report of the Monitoring Mechanism and that of the
Panel of Experts on Sierra Leone, with regard both to
the observed sanctions violations and to the
recommendations made to remedy them. This
similarity is due, inter alia, to the sources that are
fuelling the conflict: a rebel movement supplied thanks
to arms trafficking, itself fed by revenues from illicit
diamond trafficking and supported by sophisticated
transport and intermediary networks.
Quite logically, the same weaknesses are apparent
in the sanctions provisions regarding organized crime
and the merchants of war. We note the same violations.
Victor Bout and his company, Air Cess, are at the heart
of sanctions-busting operations. No less than seven
pages of the report of Ambassador Larrain are devoted
to him. This comparison of the two conflicts leads me
to put forward two proposals, which we have submitted
to the Security Council.

First, we have in mind a plan to create a
permanent mechanism for monitoring sanctions and
illicit traffic in valuable raw materials involved in
conflicts. Such a permanent mechanism would allow us
to gather in one location the necessary expertise to
cross-reference data systematically and to formulate
comprehensive recommendations.

Secondly, and in a more targeted manner, we
would propose that we ask States to undertake inquiries
and, if need be, to take the appropriate administrative
and judicial measures against the activities of
merchants of war such as Victor Bout, who are
internationally acknowledged to be primarily
responsible for sanctions-busting operations.

