The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Belgium, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Mozambique, Namibia and Zambia in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Mr. Leonard She Okitundu.

At the invitation ofthe President, Mr. She
Okitundu (Democratic Republic ofthe Congo)
took a seat at the Council table; Mr. De Ruyt
(Belgium), Mr. Dos Santos (Mozambique),

Mr. Andjaba (Namibia) and Mr. Musambachime
(Zambia) took the seats reservedfor them at the
side ofthe Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Amos Namanga Ngongi, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Amos Namanga Ngongi to take a seat
at the Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members have before them the ninth report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
document S/2001/970.

I should like also to draw the attention of the
members to document 8/2001/998, which contains a
letter dated 23 October 2001 from the Permanent
Representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo addressed to the President of the Security
Council.

As there is no list of speakers for the Council
members, I would invite those members who wish to
speak or ask questions to so indicate to the Secretariat
as from now.

I now give the floor to Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Ngongi to introduce the report of
the Secretary-General.


