Mr. Muchetwa (Zimbabwe): My delegation
extends its heartfelt condolences to the people of the
Republic of Korea and the United States over the loss
of life that occurred a few days ago in their countries.

I want to associate my delegation with the official
position adopted by the African Union that unilateral
military action against Iraq would adversely affect
Africa's stability and development.

During the last few weeks, this Council has
witnessed an assault on the principle of multilateralism
by a determined and impatient ad hoc coalition, which
believes that might is right. The role and importance of
the United Nations cannot be overemphasized in the
settlement of disputes and the preservation of peace
and security. Indeed, even former United States
Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, a Republican by
political persuasion, agrees that:

"There is no dispute that the vast range of UN
activities are indispensable. There is no place for
meetings with people where otherwise the fact of
the meeting might be controversial than the
annual sessions of the General Assembly. There
are many occasions when a negotiation has been
completed, where the mechanism which the
United Nations provides for observing
compliance with the agreement would be very
difficult to replace if not impossible to replace."

The United Nations setting and its emphasis on
cooperation resonate with former Deputy Secretary of
State Strobe Talbott's assertion that

"in a fashion and to an extent that is unique in the
history of great Powers, the United States defines
its strength - indeed its very greatness - not in
terms of its ability to achieve or maintain
dominance over others, but in terms of its ability
to work with others in the interest of the
international community as a whole. American
foreign policy is consciously intended to advance
universal values".

Those pronouncements by Henry Kissinger and
Strobe Talbott are not the ramblings of two old men
showing off at a public speaking contest. Rather, those
statements by renowned United States public servants
capture the essence of multilateralism. I retrieved them
from the annals of history to quicken our memory -
lest we forget.

Germany has reminded us that the sanctions
regime imposed to encourage Iraq's compliance with
its disarmament obligations has been more effective in
ridding Iraq of its weapons of mass destruction than the
Gulf war itself. Let me add that the sanctions regime
was made possible because of cooperation. It is true
that a Member State can engage in individual and
collective measures of self-defence even without the
United Nations but, as is shown by the Iraq case,
Security Council authority has assisted United States
policy by adding the teeth of economic sanctions,
extending a broad political umbrella and authorizing
on-site monitoring on foreign-State territory.

The Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), Mr. ElBaradei, speaking on 14
February 2003, submitted to the Council that the
Agency could carry out its mandate without Iraqi
cooperation. That should put to rest the concerns of
those who want us to believe otherwise.

While my delegation is not suggesting that Iraq
should not cooperate with the inspectors, we must give
serious consideration to the Arab proverb that we heard
from the Iraqi Permanent Representative in the Council
Chamber last week that "an empty hand has nothing to
give" (S/PV4707, p. 31). Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei
have informed us that they have found no evidence to
suggest that Iraq has reactivated its weapons of mass
destruction programme, and we must abide by their
findings.

It is the bounden duty of the Security Council to
support the inspectors - whose mandate, by the way,
is not to find fault but to verify Iraq's disarmament.

Observations by the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission and the IAEA
that they have not found Iraq in material breach of
resolution 1441 (2002) and that Baghdad is proactively
supporting the inspectors by encouraging its scientists
to accept private interviews with the inspectors and by
allowing reconnaissance flights are welcome and
should be encouraged.

I was present in the Security Council last Friday
and heard the thunderous applause that punctuated
France's statement. I would like to take this
opportunity to identify my delegation with the
leadership France has assumed in guiding the Security
Council back to its core business of providing global
peace and security. The French proposals and the offers
made by other members of the Council to assist in the
disarmament process of Iraq are a milestone in that
process.

Let us remember that resolution 1441 (2002)
deals with the disarmament of Iraq and has nothing to
do with regime change. Resolution 1441 (2002)
remains a beacon of hope and the only legitimate road
map for verifying Iraq's disarmament.

