Mr. Norov (spoke in Russian): At the outset, I would
like to express my gratitude to the Russian Federation for
the invitation to take part in today's meeting. This topic
is extremely timely and relevant, especially in today's
world where factors of instability are increasing, owing
to the terrorist threat and the merging of terrorism and
transnational organized crime.

Foreign terrorist fighters returning from hotspots
are striving to create new strongholds in various
parts of the world, including in the Eurasian space.
The threat of their gaining access to radioactive and
toxic substances, as well as to new types of financing
and weapons, is growing. At the same time, the fight
against terrorism and related threats has been one of
the main priorities in the activities of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization (SCO) from the very moment
the organization was created.

In 2001, three months before the tragic events in
New York, the founding Heads of State of the members
of the SCO signed a convention on the fight against
terrorism, separatism and extremism. The adoption of
this document demonstrated to the whole world that
our countries, even then, had a deep awareness of the
negative trends that were unfolding, and embraced a
path of an unwavering fight against these three forces of
evil. The SCO has a well-developed legal framework and
bases and practical mechanisms that make it possible to
conduct effective work in the area of security. Many of
them, including the SCO Convention against Terrorism
and the SCO Convention on Countering Extremism, are

open to accession by any interested State. Developing
and putting into practice a common definition of
terrorism and extremism is rightly considered to be one
of the most important achievements of the SCO.
The SCO Regional Anti-terrorism Structure
has operated effectively in Tashkent. Just last year,
some 360 terrorist crimes were pre-empted and some
80 underground cells and 67 terrorists, including
10 ringleaders of terrorist groups, were eliminated.
Considerable work was done to cut off the financing of
terrorism, the illegal flow of weapons and explosives,
as well as recruitment through the Internet. The SCO
also significantly increased its capacity in combating
today's challenges and threats, with new members India
and Pakistanjoining the organization. The SCO is now
transcontinental, comprising countries accounting for
half the population of the entire world,

The Peace Mission anti-terrorist command and staff
exercises, as well as the Web International anti-drug
operation, are organized regularly. I would like to say
in particular that the SCO is not a military organization
focused on States or other international organizations.
It is an open organization geared towards broad
international cooperation. There are no small or large
States in the SCO: all are equal, and all decisions are
taken by consensus.

One of the key factors of strengthening security
and stability in the region is to resolve the conflict in
Afghanistan as soon as possible. The SCO is making
a significant contribution to this end by activating
dialogue through the SCO-Afghanistan Contact Group.
The road map for future actions of the Contact Group,
which was approved at the SCO summit in Bishkek, is
aimed at supporting further efforts to restore peace and
facilitate the economic development of the country, as
well as combat terrorism and drug trafficking.

In order to combat the link between drug trafficking
and terrorism and address the threat of drug trafficking
from the territory of Afghanistan, a renewed SCO
anti-drug strategy is being implemented. Over the
past five years, through joint efforts, we have seized
more than 40 per cent of the illegal narcotic substances
found in Eurasia. We also actively cooperate with
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and
regularly organize joint events on the margins of the
United Nations Commission on Narcotic Drugs. The
next meeting of the expert group of the Paris Pact
Initiative will be held with the assistance of the SCO
secretariat in Shanghai this November. With a View
to implementing the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy and Security Council anti-terrorism
resolutions, we are actively developing cooperation with
relevant United Nations entities and other international
and regional organizations. We are strengthening our
cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, the Office of Counter-Terrorism
and the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia.

In that context, we welcome the adoption of
resolution 73/334, on cooperation between the United
Nations and the SCO, at the seventy-third session of
the General Assembly, which makes it possible to hold
regular consultations between the Secretaries-General
of the two organizations and to support the broad
cooperation ofthe SCO with specialized agencies ofthe
United Nations system. Cooperation between the SCO
and the Collective Security Treaty Organization, the
Commonwealth of Independent States, the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations, the Conference on
Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia
and INTERPOL has also been strength.

The SCO is consistently developing its cooperation
regarding humanitarian aspects of the fight against
terrorism and extremism and regional security efforts.
Guided by the spirit of Shanghai, we are developing
dialogue between cultures, religions and civilizations
on the basis of mutual trust, respect and equality of the
parties. . In this regard, we attach particular importance
to SCO cooperation with such specialized agencies of
the United Nations as UNESCO, the World Tourism
Organization, the United Nations Economic and Social
Commission for Asia and the Pacific and others.

At the same time, we believe it is important to
implement joint measures to deal with the root causes
and conditions of terrorism and extremism and prevent
youth from being recruited into terrorist groups and
also to reintegrate people who return from conflict
areas. We are improving our legal basis for ensuring
that young people are able to enjoy their full rights and
have access to knowledge and education. We attach
particular importance in that regard to drafting a United
Nations convention on the rights of youth.

States members of the SCO are in favour of strict
adherence to the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and of strengthening the role of
the Security Council as the main organ for maintaining

international peace and security, and are ready to
complement the Council's efforts at the regional level.
We call on the international community to strengthen
global cooperation in fighting terrorism, counter
efforts aimed at undermining the role of the United
Nations as the universal multilateral organization for
the maintenance of international peace and security
and stability, and strive to reach consensus on the issue
of adopting a comprehensive convention to combat
international terrorism.

The SCO will continue expanding its multifaceted
cooperation with the United Nations and its Security
Council. Currently, we are preparing to conduct our
third joint special high-level event with the United
Nations to counter terrorism and its financing, and we
would like to invite all those present in the Chamber
today to take part in it.

