Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We express our
appreciation to Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing
and to the delegations of Bolivia, Egypt, Italy, Senegal,
Sweden, the United Kingdom and Uruguay for
requesting this meeting on the status of Jerusalem.

This meeting is important as it demonstrates once
again that there is unity among the States members of
the Security Council that peace in the Middle East is
important, and it is a warning that any unilateral action
to change the status or even a declaration about it will
cause great concern.

Kazakhstan's position on the Middle East peace
process remains unchanged: maintain the historical
status quo in accordance with the previously reached
international agreements. We firmly support the two-
State solution and stand for an early resumption of
dialogue, especially in the bilateral format and without
preconditions. The ultimate goal shouldbethe restoration
and promotion of the peace process in accordance with
the relevant Security Council resolutions, the Madrid
principles, the land-for-peace formula, the road map for
peace and the Arab peace initiative.

We stress once again that there is no alternative
to the two-State solution. We call on both sides to
refrain from provocative actions and rhetoric, to take
appropriate steps to resume direct negotiations as soon
as possible, and to comply with their obligations in the
spirit of mutual respect and understanding, and calm
and compromise, in accordance with the previous
Security Council resolutions.
Peace should be based on the inalienable right of
the Palestinians to statehood and the right ofIsrael to its
own durable long-term security. It is necessary to begin
negotiations on each existing problem with a view to
reaching agreement on pending issues and arriving at a
so-called final status. Only such an approach can lead
to the adoption of a basic treaty.

Kazakhstan is strongly against any modification
of the existing status quo concerning the future of
Jerusalem, as it could aggravate an already difficult
situation and threatens to result in serious consequences
for the entire region and the world.

