Mr. Antonio de Aguiar Patriota (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the Spanish delegation for
organizing this very important debate on the situation
in the brotherly nation of Haiti.

(spoke in French)

I would also like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Sandra Honore, for her
briefing and reiterate the gratitude and respect of my
Government for her leadership and her ongoing support
for the strengthening of peace and democracy in Haiti.

I thank Ambassador Denis Regis of Haiti for his
statement.

I take this opportunity to once again thank the
members of the Council for the many messages of
condolence following the recent death on 30 August of
Lieutenant-General Jose Luis Jaborandy, Jr., the former
Force Commander of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). At a recent meeting
of troop-contributing countries, the President of Brazil,
Ms. Dilma Rousseff, while acknowledging his passing,
stressed his professional and personal qualities as
well as his valuable contribution to stability in Haiti.
Following an accelerated selection process, the new
Force Commander, Lieutenant-General Ajax Porto
Pinheiro, has already arrived in Port-au-Prince and will
soon assume his duties.

We welcome the holding of the first round of the
legislative elections on 9 August in a relatively stable
environment, while regretting the incidents that led to
loss of life as well as the disruptions in certain polling
stations. The handling ofthe electoral process by Haitian
authorities helps to normalize the exercise of legislative
power. Furthermore, we are convinced that for the
third time in a row a democratically elected President
will lead the country on the path towards sustainable
development, stability and peace. Brazil in cooperation
with the international community will continue to
support the efforts of the Haitian Government to hold
the local, legislative and presidential elections under
way.

On the basis of our own experience in Brazil, we
believe that respect for the democratic process is a
prerequisite for the development and the continuation
of the progress observed in recent years in Haiti.
Besides the financial contribution being made to the
electoral process, Ambassador Celso Amorim, former
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Minister of Defence
of Brazil, will lead the electoral observation mission of
the Organization of American States in Haiti during the
upcoming presidential elections.

(spoke in English)

Brazil supports the Secretary-General's assessment
regarding stability and security in Haiti, while
recognizing that there are still reasons for concern
with respect to security, including in the context of
the ongoing electoral process. We also support the
recommended extension of the mandate of MINUSTAH
for an additional year, until 15 October 2016, with the
maintenance of the current troop and police levels. The
military and police components have a relevant role in
the logistics and security operation. As stated in the
Secretary-General's latest report (S/2015/667), it is
important to keep them as mobile and visible as possible.
We concur with the Secretary-General's proposal for
a new strategic assessment of the situation in Haiti as
a basis for his making recommendations on the future
United Nations presence in the country. It is important
to undertake the assessment after the formation of a
new Government and for the reconfiguration process
to be guided solely by the conditions on the ground and
by the need to preserve the progress made in the past

11 years.

Despite the enhanced performance of the Haitian
National Police (HNP) in preventing crimes and
controlling civil unrest, it is worth underlining that the
force has yet to reach the target of 15,000 officers by the
end of 2016. Furthermore, only 8 of the 70 goals of the
2012-2016 HNP Development Plan have been fully met.
We encourage the HNP to continue to benefit from the
MINUSTAH efforts to ensure a successful handover of
responsibility for security in critical areas.

Brazil also believes that MINUSTAH should keep
its mandated tools to develop community violence
reduction programmes and quick-impact projects
as well as an adequate engineering capability. The
experience of Haiti has clearly shown that such
activities directly benefit the local population and assist
in confidence-building in the peace process and the
Mission throughout its life cycle. Any future presence
of the Organization in Haiti should take this success
story into account and ensure the continuity of such
activities, so as to contribute to the sustainability of the
reconstruction efforts.

The humanitarian situation continues to raise
concern. Although there is a downward trend in the
number of internally displaced people, currently at
60,000, there was an increase in the number of new
cholera cases - 20,000 cases and 175 deaths - and a
worsening of the levels of food and nutrition insecurity
in rural areas, mainly due to drought and the effects
of the El Nifio phenomenon. In this scenario, the
international community's relationship with Haiti
should increasingly be guided by the establishment of
partnerships capable of improving the living conditions
of Haitians.

The Brazilian Government is committed to
maintaining its humanitarian cooperation efforts as well
as the current special immigration policy for Haitians.
We expanded our capacity to issue permanent visas in
Port-au-Prince, with the support of the International
Organization for Migration, to ensure an appropriate
entry and a dignified welcome for those migrants in
our country. Currently, close to 2,000 permanent visas
are issued per month by the Embassy in Port-au-Prince.
A similar measure has already resulted in a decreased
flow of immigrants across the border in the state of
Acre in northern Brazil and has been an effective tool
against human traffickers.

We believe that the United Nations Peacebuilding
Commission could support the stabilization and
development efforts in Haiti. There are important
elements for Haiti's development and stability that
deserve more careful consideration. Among those
elements, let me highlight two areas that we believe
will continue to be at the core of our collective support
for Haiti and that may play a constructive role during
the transition, namely, improved access to justice and
poverty reduction. Improved access to justice should
empower the weakest and the poorest, especially
through the effectiveness of social rights, and produce
tangible dividends for the most vulnerable. We welcome
the Haitian Government's allocation of resources to
guarantee the continuation of the important work of the
Bureau d'assistance legale, which has been supported
by the MINUSTAH community violence reduction
programme.

Brazil also welcomes the revised United Nations
Integrated Strategic Framework for Haiti and its
alignment with Haitian priorities. The challenge
henceforth is to make the gains of recent years
sustainable, while the country moves forward,
increasing stability and making institutional, economic
and social progress.

(spoke in French)

As Ambassador Regis has said, a new order is
currently emerging in Haiti. Brazil continues its
commitment towards our Haitian brothers and sisters
in their efforts to build a future of democratic stability
and sustainable development.

