Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I have the honour to
present the report of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), in accordance with
paragraph 18 (h) of that resolution. The present report
covers an extended period, from 6 March to 15 July.
Because of its length, I will read a shortened version.
The full text of the report will be published on the
Committee website soon.

I would like to begin by updating the Council on
the progress the Committee has made on a number
of matters included in my report of 6 March (see S/PV.6930). In March, I reported that the Committee
was exploring appropriate responses to the Panel's
unanimous conclusion in its report of 11 January that
Iran's launches of the Shahab-l and -3 missiles during
the Great Prophet VII exercises constituted a violation
ofparagraph 9 ofresolution 1929 (2010). The Committee
wrote to Iran on 12 April seeking its comment, within
15 days, on the Panel's conclusion. Regrettably, Iran
has not answered to date. The Committee notes that the
President of the Security Council subsequently reached
out to the Iranian Mission on 28 June to inquire whether
a response would be forthcoming.

The Committee is currently considering additional
follow-up actions, including the issuance of an
implementation assistance notice on Iran's prohibited
ballistic missile programme. A number of Committee
members expressed the view, as confirmed by the
Panel of Experts, that the launches constituted a clear
violation of resolution 1929 (2010) and that, therefore,
all Member States should redouble their efforts to
implement ballistic missile-related sanctions on Iran.
At this stage, some Committee members cannot share
this view. The Committee intends to provide an update
on this issue in its next 90-day report.

I also referred to an incident reported by a Member
State, involving the interception in January of a vessel
suspected of carrying illicit weapons from Iran to be
delivered to the reporting State. The Panel of Experts
submitted its report to the Committee on the results of
its investigation into that incident on 22 April, and the
Committee held informal consultations on 29 April to
discuss the report. In that report, the Experts concluded
that the case constituted either a violation or a probable
violation of paragraph 5 of resolution 1747 (2007).
Several Committee members stated that the evidence
presented in the report was sufficient to assert that
Iran was in violation of its obligations, illustrating a
pattern of sanctions evasion through arms smuggling
in the Middle East. Other Committee members stated
that the lack of stronger evidence as to the provenance
of the arms, such as documentation, justified the lack
of definitive conclusion. The Committee agreed to
send a letter to Iran bringing to its attention the Panel's
conclusion, expressing concern about the Panel's
findings and asking for comment. The letter was sent
on 21 May seeking Iran's comment within 15 days and
I again regret to inform the Council that, to date, Iran
has not responded to that letter either.

The Committee continues to discuss whether and
how to respond to the Panel's compilation of publicly
available statements made by Iranian officials and
alleged recipients of Iranian military assistance,
including Palestinian Islamic Jihad, Hamas and
Hizbullah, regarding potential violations of paragraph
5 of resolution 1747 (2007). While some Committee
members saw value in getting Iran's official position
on this matter, others believed that, in the absence
of physical corroborative evidence such as actual
seized arms or related materiel, such a letter would be
premature. The Panel is now investigating the substance
of those reported statements to determine whether such
corroborative evidence exists, and the Committee looks
forward to receiving its report in due course.

During the current reporting period, the Committee
received communications from several Member States
relating to actions they had taken to implement the
relevant Security Council measures. More details are
in the fuller report.

During the informal consultations of 28 May,
the coordinator of the Panel of Experts briefed the
Committee on the Panel's 2013 final report, which
has since been published in document S/2013/331. In
her briefing to the Committee, she stressed that Iran
continued to seek items for its prohibited activities
from abroad by using complex procurement methods,
including front companies, false documentation
and intermediaries. She further stressed the Panel's
assessment that Iran remains dependant on foreign
imports for key components of its prohibited nuclear
and missile programmes, which indicates the ongoing
relevance of the sanctions.

The Committee continued its deliberations on the
Panel's report during informal consultations on 17 June,
when it discussed in detail the recommendations
made by the Panel in the report. The Committee is
currently considering proposed responses to these
recommendations, including on the implementation
of those recommendations that attract the consensus
support of the Committee.

In connection with the Panel of Experts, I am
happy to report that, following the Council's decision
in resolution 2105 (2013) of 5 June to extend the
Panel's mandate until 9 July 2014, the Secretariat has
now finalized the administrative steps related to the
Experts' appointment.

I am happy to report that the Committee adopted,
on 21 March, its programme of work for the first half of
2013, which was forwarded for the Council's attention
on 26 March. The Committee has already taken steps
to implement that document, including by updating
two important documents: the hand-out describing
implementation by States of resolutions 1737 (2006),
1747 (2007), 1803 (2008) and 1929 (2010); and the
fact sheet on the Committee and its Panel of Experts.
The fact sheet was brought to the attention of Member
States through a note verbale dated 30 April, and both
documents are available on the Committee's website.

Also in conformity with its programme of work,
on 24 June the Committee, with the assistance of
its Panel of Experts, held an open briefing to share
information about the work of the Committee and the
Panel. The briefing was an important opportunity to
engage with the United Nations membership on the
Committee's work and provide greater access and
transparency to its operation, and in this respect I am
pleased to report attendance of over 100 representatives
and a vigorous question-and-answer session following
our presentations. I believe that the briefing was of
great value not only for the participants but also for
the Committee and I will continue to look for such
opportunities for engagement.
On 26 March, the Committee received, through
the Focal Point for Delisting, a delisting request from
the First East Export Bank, an entity that is currently
on the Committee's consolidated list. The Committee
currently has before it a proposal received on 7 June
to designate an entity pursuant to paragraph 26 of
resolution 1929 (2010).

I referred in my last report to a pending request
to exempt a designated individual from the travel ban
to attend the high-level International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) conference in Saint Petersburg in
June. I can now advise that the Committee granted
that request, but did not grant a subsequent request to
extend that exemption for the individual to attend the
Gas Exporting Countries Forum, held in Moscow in
July. The Committee also denied a request to exempt
from the travel ban a second designated individual to
attend the June IAEA conference in Saint Petersburg.

During the reporting period, the Committee
received one notification with reference to
paragraph 5 (c) of resolution 1737 (2006) concerning
the delivery of ionizing radiation sources to be used
for quality control of welded joints on gas mains; and
one notification pursuant to paragraph 5 of resolution
1737 (2006) and paragraph 4 of resolution 1747 (2007),
concerning payments made under a contract entered
into prior to the listing of a person or entity.

Finally, I would like to renew the appeal to all
Member States to provide, on a voluntary basis,
additional identifying information regarding the listed
individuals and entities. Such information is absolutely
essential for the proper implementation of the sanctions
measures.

