The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of Guinea-Bissau to participate in
this meeting.

On behalf ofthe Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Aristides Gomes, Prime Minister of the Republic
of Guinea-Bissau, and I request the Protocol Officer to
escort him to his seat at the Council table.

Mr. Aristides Games, Prime Minister of the
Republic of Guinea-Bissau, was escorted to a seat
at the Council table.

The President: In accordance with rule 39 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
following briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Jose
Viegas Filho, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau; His Excellency
Mr. Mauro Vieira, Permanent Representative of Brazil
to the United Nations, in his capacity as Chair of the
Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission; and Ms. Elisa Maria Tavares Pinto,
spokesperson for the Economic Community of West
African States Women, Peace and Security Network.

Ms. Tavares Pinto is joining today's meeting via
video-teleconference from Bissau.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/77l, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau
and the activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau.

At this meeting, we will hear briefings by Mr. Jose
Viegas Filho, Ambassador Mr. Anatolio Ndong Mba,
Permanent Representative of Equatorial Guinea, in his
capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2048 (2012),
concerning Guinea-Bissau, Ambassador Vieira and
Ms. Tavares Pinto.

As the third meeting ofthe Council this morning and
with so many briefers, I would like to remind Council
members that they are encouraged to speak for no longer
than five minutes, as set out in document S/2017/507,
and encourage our briefers also to be concise.

I now give the floor to Mr. Viegas Filho.


