Mr. Egeland: Thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Council on the humanitarian
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
in Uganda, where I visited last week.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, I
Visited Kinshasa and then went into the field in
Katanga, South Kivu and Ituri. I would like to share
three main conclusions from my mission to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. First, the United
Nations and the Transitional Government have made a
lot of progress, with increased security and successful
elections, but we have not been able to make enough of
an impact on impunity. Sexual abuse has become a
cancer in Congolese society that seems to be out of
control. Military and civilian authorities are still
Virtually unaccountable for crimes against civilians. I
told President Kabila and the military and civilian
leaders that I met that they had to publicly condemn
2

impunity and act firmly to fire or demote perpetrators.
President Kabila replied that the contradictions in the
Transitional Government had made the latter difficult
for him, but one could act more firmly after the
elections.

In South Kivu alone, more than 1,000 women
who had been raped have been treated so far this year
at the Panzi Hospital in Bukavu, where I Visited. We do
not know how many more suffer without treatment in
inaccessible parts of the province. I was deeply
shocked by the stories of the women who had been
abused by the members of the national army - the
FARDC - and by militia groups. One woman told me
she had been raped repeatedly for more than a week by
a group of soldiers who kept her bound so tightly - by
hands and by feet - that she had permanently lost the
use of her hands. Dr. Mukengere, the heroic director of
Panzi Hospital, told me that mutilations often followed
the rapes. Those required extensive surgical
interventions.

I do not believe that the FARDC is systematically
addressing this issue. Although some military
prosecutions have occurred, often because of the
efforts of the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), far
too little is being done. This Council and the Member
States involved in security sector reform in that
country must exert more pressure on the FARDC to
end this pattern of abuse and violence against civilians.

Secondly, I am concerned about the impact of
FARDC military operations on the civilian population.
Since the beginning of the year more than 500,000
people have been newly displaced in eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In most cases, the
displacements follow a Government army operation
against a militia group. Too often, civilians flee
because of the fighting and then are victimized by the
FARDC, who blame them for supporting the militias.
In the Kivus and Ituri, MONUC provides logistical
support for those operations. The only long-term
security solution in the country is, of course, through
one competent national army with the exclusive right
to bear arms. Nonetheless, we cannot accept such a
huge cost on the civilian population caused by the
recent operations to disarm. The MONUC Force
Commander has invited the humanitarian community
to look at ways to reduce the humanitarian impact of
those operations. We accept this offer.
06-52438
Thirdly, the humanitarian situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has improved.
Compared to my last Visit three years ago, there are
more humanitarian staff working in more areas,
including some areas that were totally inaccessible for
years. When we went out to meet with internally
displaced persons (IDPs) in remote locations in the
bush - Pweto, Luhago and Gety - I was impressed
with the work done by United Nations and NGO
colleagues, often under very difficult circumstances.
However, the humanitarian effort still lacks the
resources it requires to meet the overwhelming needs.
For example, we do not have money for the food
pipeline beyond the next three months. In 2007, we
will expand our humanitarian programmes and
intensify early recovery efforts to meet the needs of the
more than 1.6 million IDPs who returned home in the
last year, often with little assistance.

The national disarmament and reintegration
programme run by the Commission Nationale de
Desarmement, Demobilisation et Reinsertion
(CONADER) is not working effectively. In Pweto, in
the southwest, I met with a group of Mayi-Mayi who
had voluntarily disarmed weeks before. However,
CONADER claimed that it no longer had resources to
serve them, and MONUC military observers had to
take it upon themselves to share their rations to avoid
looting by the Mayi-Mayi of the civilian population.
Other Mayi-Mayi groups who were ready to come out
of the bush have not because they want to be sure they
will be taken care of. In Ituri, MONUC has been
successful in disarming militia members, but the
programmes needed to reintegrate them into civilian
life have been insufficient. Unless these problems are
quickly fixed, these fighters will return to the life of
the gun.

The challenges ahead in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo are enormous. It will be a marathon, and
we are still only half way. We cannot stop now or we
will lose what we have gained. The Council should
show its strong commitment to the Democratic
Republic by maintaining MONUC's strength and
maintaining the pressure on the Government to end
impunity and promote the rule of law and good
governance. The conclusion of the elections is the
beginning of the rebuilding process, not its end. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo has seen the worst
haemorrhage of human life in this generation. Four
million people - six Rwandan genocides - is the
06-52438

death toll of war and preventable disease in the last
eight years. We must not fail to stop - once and for
all - this tragedy.

Let me turn now to Uganda. The picture in
northern Uganda is more promising than it has been in
years. We can see improvement on almost every
indicator. Since the negotiations between the
Government and the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA)
began in Juba earlier this year, security has increased
dramatically, allowing us to do much more on the
humanitarian front. We can now reach 54 of the 102
IDP camps without military escorts, up from 34 in
May. I was able to spend a memorable night in a family
hut in Opit IDP camp, something no United Nations
staff member had been able to do for many years. IDPs
in Acholiland are cautiously beginning to move
towards their homes. We stopped along the country
road to talk with a family who were making bricks for
a temporary house two kilometres from their ancestral
lands so that they could begin farming again. If peace
continued, they planned to finally move home in
January.

The number of night commuters has fallen to
10,000, from a high of 40,000 when I reported to you
last year. Few of the remaining children are moving
because of insecurity now. Most continue to move to
the towns every night because of social problems at
home related to prolonged displacement, such as
domestic Violence and overcrowding.

We will use the better security environment to
continue to improve the situation in the IDP camps and
to prepare for the return of more than 1.5 million
people. The Government will need to rapidly increase
social services in the north, including the return of
teachers, doctors and nurses. The Prime Minister told
me that the Government was working on this through
the Joint Monitoring Commission and the
Government's peace, reconciliation and development
plan. The international community must soon make the
necessary investments in peace and hold the
Government accountable for effective protection of the
civilian population and a real reconciliation process.

As the Council is aware, Riek Machar, the Vice-
President of the government of South Sudan, has been
facilitating talks between the Government of Uganda
and the LRA. On 26 August, the two sides signed a
cessation of hostilities agreement. I Visited Juba on 11
September to address the humanitarian aspects of a
3
possible peace agreement. I met with Vice-President
Machar and his mediation team, the Government and
the LRA delegations, and with the Acholi religious and
cultural leaders who are observing the talks. I
commended Vice-President Machar for the progress of
this African-led peace process and offered increased
United Nations support for the South Sudanese
mediation efforts.

The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) and UNICEF already have staff
members providing technical support to the mediation
team, and the Department of Political Affairs (DPA)
will dispatch someone over the weekend. Norway has
provided financial support for the peace talks through
OCHA, and several other European donors have
indicated their willingness to also support these efforts.
That is critical to keep the process moving forward.
The government of South Sudan does not have the
resources to support the rapid progress of the talks. In
addition, Vice-President Machar asked that the United
Nations provide monitors for the cessation of
hostilities agreement and assembly areas for LRA
fighters, along with monitors from the parties and the
African Union. I have transmitted that request to the
Secretary-General.

The cessation of hostilities agreement requires
the LRA to move to two assembly points in the
southern Sudan by 19 September. Those are shown on
the map that will be distributed. Reports from the field
confirm that LRA units are moving from northern
Uganda towards the assembly area at Owiny-Ki-Bul,
and from the northern Democratic Republic of the
Congo into Ri-Kwangba. An estimated 400 combatants
and non-combatants have so far arrived at the two
assembly points. Development Support Services
reports that most LRA members have now left northern
Uganda for the southern Sudan.

The United Nations has already assessed the
situation in the two assembly points and is prepared to
provide assistance to the women and children with the
LRA, whom the parties have agreed can be separated
from the LRA fighters. We will also help the
surrounding communities. The government of South
Sudan has moved some food supplies to the areas. The
United Nations country team in Uganda reconfirmed to
me that they have the resources necessary to receive
ex-combatants and women and children and to begin
their reintegration into northern Uganda, when agreed
by the parties.
While in Uganda and the southern Sudan, I
received several telephone calls from Vincent Otti, the
second-in-command in the LRA. He invited me to meet
with him at the western assembly point. I told him that
I could come only if the LRA made a humanitarian
gesture and released some of the women and children it
is holding. The LRA has not yet agreed to such a
release, but we will continue to press for the quick
release of the Sudanese and Ugandan captives.

It is important for the Council to know that the
International Criminal Court indictments were the
number one subject of discussion with the internally
displaced persons in Uganda and the parties and civil
society in Juba. All expressed a strong concern that if
the indictments were not lifted, they could threaten the
progress in these most promising talks ever for
northern Uganda. I said I believed that the indictments
had been a factor in pushing the LRA into negotiations,
that the indictments should not disrupt the talks, and
that there could be no impunity for mass murder and
crimes against humanity. The parties should look now
at the different ways to develop a solution that meets
local needs for reconciliation and universal standards
of justice and accountability. I believe that this can be
done, and that peace and justice can work together. For
the Council's information, I have discussed that
approach with Chief Prosecutor Luis Moreno-Ocampo,
who repeated that the United Nations should indeed
support the peace talks, aiming for the return of women
and children, the demobilization of fighters and a
solution that makes peace and justice work together.

This is the best chance we have ever had for
peace in northern Uganda. We must pursue it to the
end. As a woman asked me around the campfire in
Opit, "If we cannot find peace now, who will we blame
for another 20 years of war?" The Security Council's
interest in this issue has been crucial for the progress to
date. The Council should show its support for the talks
and encourage the Government and the LRA to reach a
final agreement as soon as possible. The Council
should also express its support for the Government's
efforts to develop a recovery plan for the North, while
stressing the need for the affected communities to be
fully engaged in this process. Finally, the Council
should stress the need for a reconciliation process that
addresses the root causes of this long and terrible
conflict and ensures the future protection of the
civilian population.
06-52438
