Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank
Ambassadors Gary Quinlan, Mohammed Loulichki
and Oh Joon - Chairs of the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities,
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism, and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), respectively - for their comprehensive
briefings today. We appreciate the coordination
between the three Committees and the efforts being
made by them to promote dialogue and transparency
with Member States.

Pakistan's comprehensive approach to counter-
terrorism is based on three D's - deterrence,
development and dialogue. Deterrence is necessary
to impede, impair, isolate and incapacitate terrorists
and their outfits. Development helps meet basic
human needs, build community resilience and prevent
terrorism. Dialogue is equally important, and it must
be allowed to continue according to national priorities.
Those who are willing to renounce violence should be
brought back to societal and national mainstreams.

Terrorists adapt to new conditions. Their tactics
continue to take more sinister forms. Terrorists use
new technologies and the Internet to store, transmit and
manipulate information for recruitment and incitement.
They use information technology to plan and finance
their activities. Counter-terrorism efforts also need to
adapt to those challenges and to develop strategies for
real-time responses.

We should address the root causes of terrorism.
Deprivation, unresolved conflicts, marginalization,
exclusion and stereotyping often create conditions for a
drift towards terrorism. Terrorism and extremism should
not be associated with any religion, race, ethnicity,
faith, value system, culture or society. That said, the
universal norm of zero tolerance for terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations should be strengthened.

We agree with the Chairman of the Al-Qaida
Committee that Al-Qaida has evolved in various
regions with diverse franchises. The second special
meeting of the 1989 (2011) Committee, with its focus
on the complementarity between the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel and the Al-Qaida
sanctions regime, created new synergies for holistic
solutions. Al-Qaida has changed in many ways. The
phenomenon of individuals radicalized by extremist
websites is rampant. Terrorists now use electronic safe
havens to host websites for inspiration and training.
The Al-Qaida sanctions regime should continue to be
made more effective, targeted and evidence-based by
using clear, fair and transparent procedures.

We support the efforts being made to strengthen the
role of the Ombudsperson by expanding her mandate to
the listing issues and by extending it to other sanctions
regimes. A large number of recommendations made by
the Ombudsperson has led to the delisting ofindividuals
and entities. That requires the Committee to improve
and refine the quality ofthe listing process. The biggest
challenge to the sanctions regime comes from court
cases. Questions of due process and effective remedy
are at the heart of courts' deliberations. A number of
listings have been challenged in Pakistan courts.

The 18 July judgement of the European Union
Court of Justice in the case of Commission, Council,
United Kingdom v. Yassin Abdullah Kadi, established

a new precedent in the implementation of the United

Nations sanctions regime for ajudicial review of listing

procedures for a fair balance between the maintenance

of international peace and security and the protection

of fundamental rights and freedoms of the person

concerned. It also prescribes concrete and detailed, not

abstract and superficial verification of the allegations.

While acknowledging improvements in the listing and

delisting procedures, the judgement underlines that the

guarantee of effective judicial protection has not been

fully provided to the listed individual. The judgement
may well set new standards for the judicial review of
Security Council decisions in other areas whenever a
balance needs to be struck between the protection of
human rights and the maintenance of international
peace and security.

We support the Counter-Terrorism Committee's
efforts to build the capacities of States to implement
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005). We welcome
the appointment of Mr. Jean-Paul Laborde as Executive
Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED). We are confident that
his experience and outstanding leadership will be
helpful in the effective implementation of the CTED
mandate. CTED's work in devising new assessment
tools, such the overview of implementation assessment
and the detailed implementation survey, will help
establish a meaningful dialogue on technical assistance
to Member States. We also appreciate CTED's focus on
the assets freeze, the prosecution of terrorism cases, the
strengthening of the capacity of central authorities, and
the protection of witnesses of terrorist incidents.

CTED seminars and workshops on specific themes
in various regions have been useful. In Islamabad last
month, Pakistan hosted the seventh regional workshop
for judges, prosecutors and police officers in South
Asia on effectively countering terrorism. The workshop
was aimed at strengthening cooperation among
professionals working in the field of counter-terrorism.

The war against terrorism must be prosecuted
within the framework of international law. The use
of armed drones in the border areas of Pakistan is a
continued violation of our sovereignty, international
law, international human rights and humanitarian law.
In that context, the Secretary-General has called for
adherence to the recognized principles of distinction
and proportionality. The use of armed drones results in
casualties among innocent men, women and children,
and leads to disaffection, violence, alienation and
psychosocial trauma among the population centres hit
by drones. It is also detrimental to our efforts to conduct
dialogue and eliminate extremism and terrorism. The
Prime Minister of Pakistan, Mr. Nawaz Sharif, has
called for the immediate cessation of drone strikes
against Pakistan's territory.

Pakistan fully supports the shared goal ofpreventing
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs) to non-State actors. The 1540 Committee and
its Group of Experts play a complementary role to the
treaty-based regimes and international organizations
on non-proliferation issues. The full implementation
by States parties of their respective obligations,
arising from relevant WMD treaties, including the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) by all States,
is essential and urgent. Pakistan will continue to be an
active partner of the international community in that
effort. Pakistan supports the measures undertaken
by the 1540 Committee and its experts in such areas
as awareness-raising, outreach, implementation,
assistance and capacity-building.

The long-term impact and success of the 1540
Committee depends, in our view, on the role that
the Committee can play in mobilizing assistance for
Member States. As the Committee promotes universal
reporting and implementation, assistance and capacity-
building will serve as anchors for such activities.
Pakistan supports efforts to promote cooperation
and coordination between the subsidiary bodies of
the Council and their respective groups of experts.
That objective is best advanced when joint activities
are conducted in close consultation with all Council
members and are consistent with the mandate and
nature of the work of each subsidiary body and its
group of experts.

