Mr. Mendez Graterol (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
Mr. Stephen O'Brien, and his team for their work in the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela welcomes
the humanitarian progress registered in Syria in
the month of July. Over 480,000 people received
humanitarian assistance, amounting to 40 per cent. It
is also important to highlight that since the beginning
of the year, humanitarian agencies have been able to
access 68 per cent of the besieged populations on more
than one occasion, benefiting over 400,000 people. Of
particular interest is the work carried out by UNICEF
in helping 214,000 Syrian children who are in hard-to-
reach areas, as well as the immunization campaigns
carried out by the World Health Organization.

We understand that the situation is not ideal, given
that clashes continue in various parts of Syria, in
particular in Aleppo besieged by armed groups linked
to Al-Qaida. We condemn the criminal activities that
have led to the loss of human life. We are concerned that
the situation on the ground could threaten the progress
made since the cessation of hostilities was declared.
In that regard, we are convinced that the humanitarian
issue must be addressed impartially and deliberately
in order to avoid its politicization. It is a question of
ending the siege of the civilian population. We reiterate
that the Government of Syria has the responsibility to
protect its citizens, as it has been doing in the areas
under its control and even beyond. The Council should
therefore step up its efforts to find a political and
peaceful solution to the armed conflict.

We hope that both Russia and the United States, as
referenced in the Secretary-General report (S/2016/7l4),
can continue to find areas of understanding to bring
about a strong and lasting peace in this Arab country.
Under the Venezuelan presidency (see S/PV.7634), the
Council adopted resolution 2268 (2016), creating the
political space to help the civilian population with its
most urgent needs. We call upon the co-chairs of the
International Syrian Support Group to pursue their
bilateral consultations aimed at implementing the
provisions of the resolution. The text of the resolution
points out that terrorist organizations should not be
protected by the cessation of hostilities but fought by
all means necessary under international law.

We also welcome the proposals of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
concerning 48-hour pauses, as well as the recent
announcements made by the Russians concerning the
establishment of humanitarian corridors in Aleppo and
other parts of Syria. We stress the importance ofraising
the sieges on all affected cities in accordance with
resolution 2268 (2016). We condemn sieges because
they run counter to international humanitarian law. In
that context, we are aware that in some cases, conditions
on the ground make it difficult for humanitarian
organizations to do their work. We therefore pay tribute
to their efforts in such adverse and very dangerous
conditions. We reiterate that they cannot be allowed to
become military targets, much less actors in the armed
conflict. Their sole task is to provide humanitarian
assistance to those in need, in accordance with the
provisions of international humanitarian law. Their
work however must be coordinated with the State
concerned in conformity with international law.

In the context of intense armed confrontations, we
condemn the destruction of basic infrastructure, such
as hospitals and water and electricity installations.
Despite the adoption of resolution 2268 (2016),
attacks continue against hospitals and basic services,
exacerbating the difficult humanitarian situation
already being endured by those affected by the armed
conflict. We also recognize what has been done to
remedy the situation by the Syrian Government and
the World Food Programme, which benefit 4.1 million
people and completed 87 parachute drops, to help the
people in Deir ez-Zor.

As mentioned in the Secretary-General's report,
Al-Raqqa is also one of the areas where humanitarian
needs have increased. We reiterate our condemnation of
the systematic practices of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham (ISIS) involving the denial of civilian access
to humanitarian aid, forced executions, criminal actions
perpetrated against members of ethnic minorities
and women, and the recruitment of children in areas
under its control. Such actions violate international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
and constitute war crimes for which their authors must
be brought to justice.

ISIS, the Al-Nusrah Front and their associates have
become a serious threat to peace and stability in the
region. Their influence must be fought by all means
possible. We reiterate that humanitarian assistance
operations are linked to the end of the conflict.
Accordingly, we reiterate our support for the peace
efforts of Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura to find a
political and peaceful solution to the armed conflict
in Syria. The complex humanitarian situation in Syria
requires that the parties sit down to negotiate without
preconditions for the benefit of the people of the country.

Finally, we call on the parties and those actors
who have an influence upon them to resume political
negotiations as soon as possible. As has been reiterated
by all members of the Council, the solution is political
and therefore efforts must be redoubled to make this
goal a possibility. If the conflict is not settled, there
will only be more suffering and the further resurgence
of terrorism in Syria.

