Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): I deliver this
statement on behalf of the African countries on the
Security Council, namely, South Africa, Equatorial
Guinea and Cote d'Ivoire.
At the outset, let me thank you, Madam President,
for convening this meeting. I would also like to express
our gratitude to our briefers today. We would also
like to express our sincere gratitude to the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2019/936) and welcome his
observations. We also recognize the tireless efforts
of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan under
the able leadership of Special Representative of the
Secretary-General David Shearer to assist in forging
peace and stability in South Sudan.

The Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in South Sudan continues to be the
beacon of hope and the rudder that will continue to aid
in rebuilding South Sudan and bring about the peace
and stability that has eluded the country for decades.
In that regard, the extension of the pre-transitional
period for an additional 100 days is a critical lifeline
to ensure an enabling environment to further address
the contentious issues, which, among others, include
the security arrangements and the state and boundary
issues, which are crucial components to the fulfilment
of the Revitalized Agreement.

We encourage the parties to continue dialogue
through peaceful means, utilizing the frameworks of
the African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) to bridge their divergent
views. Similarly, we urge the international community
to continue lending its support to the parties at this
critical juncture. Furthermore, we particularly call on
President Salva Kiir and Mr. Rick Machar to continue
their efforts in forging collegial relations and rebuilding
trust so as to help to unify the country. Similarly, we
urge the Government of South Sudan and IGAD to
address the final status of Mr. Riek Machar in order to
facilitate his full and effective involvement in moving
forward with the peace process.

Through progress in the implementation of the
Revitalized Agreement, we are encouraged by the
continued maintenance of the cessation of hostilities.
We call on all parties to continue on that trajectory and
to place primacy on the lives of the South Sudanese
people. Consequently, we call on all groups to join the
political process and, in that regard, request IGAD to
pursue its efforts in engaging Thomas Cirillo and Paul
Malong to join the Revitalized Agreement.

Furthermore, we welcome the Government's
intention to further disburse $40 million for the
implementation of the Agreement. That is of paramount
importance and it is particularly urgent that those funds
be disseminated in a prompt manner in order to avoid
any further delays in the implementation.

We encourage the Government to continue its efforts
to address the grave challenges of conflict-related
sexual violence and all human rights violations and to
hold perpetrators accountable. In addition, we continue
to be concerned about the dire humanitarian situation,
whose magnitude continues to dwarf the progress
that has been made. We therefore call on all parties
to prioritize human needs and on the international
community to continue to provide assistance to the
most vulnerable.

In conclusion, we would like to express our
appreciation to the countries of the region for their
support to the South Sudanese peace process. We
urge them to redouble their efforts in this extended
period to further bring all the parties together. We all
understand the ramifications of the failure of the peace
process and, as such, we should closely guard against
any reversal of its progress. The people of South Sudan
deeply yearn for peace, stability and development to
rebuild their lives.

