The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Bangladesh.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
excellent statement this morning and for his
comprehensive report on the role of United Nations
peacekeeping in disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration - commonly referred to as the DDR
process.

The effective disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of ex-combatants strengthen post-conflict
peace-building and make peace sustainable. Increasingly,
the United Nations peacekeeping operations are being
mandated to facilitate the DDR process.

Bangladesh agrees with the suggestions of the
Secretary-General on the ways United Nations
peacekeeping operations can support and strengthen the
DDR process.

But if the United Nations is to play a helpful role in
this regard, the parties have to have the political will to
commit themselves to peace, and the basis of the process

 

should be laid within peace agreements that provide for the
end of a conflict. Peace agreements should specify the
responsibilities of the parties involved in the process and
establish broad strategies and time-frames. We agree with
the Secretary-General that where a United Nations
peacekeeping role is envisioned, the United Nations should
be represented in the peace negotiations.

A second prerequisite for a successful DDR process is
curbing the flow of arms in a post-conflict situation. If the
flow of small arms and light weapons into the hands of
belligerents continues unabated, there can never be
successful disarmament. Efforts by the international
community to this end are needed to ensure that while the
parties involved are talking peace they are not preparing to
resume war.

Bangladesh believes that United Nations peacekeeping
operations can ensure a successful DDR process by
facilitating the safety and security of the DDR sites, the
collection and disposal of weapons and ammunition,
demining activities, the creation of an environment of
confidence and trust, the reconstruction of war-affected
infrastructure, and the prevention of violations of peace
agreements.

To do this, peacekeeping operations must have clearly
defined tasks in their mandates and should have adequate
means, including a deterrent capacity and training, as well
as appropriate personnel to undertake these tasks. Resources
provided to peacekeeping operations must match their
mandates, and innovative ways for addressing the question
of financing have to be taken up. There is also a need to
harmonize the efforts of peacekeeping operations with those
of other agencies and organizations involved and for greater
coordination among them so that reintegration efforts are
addressed in a comprehensive manner.

From our own experience in Bangladesh in
successfully addressing this matter, we are convinced that
only a comprehensive approach can result in effective
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of ex-
combatants. The peace agreement concluded in 1997,
regarding the Chittagong Hill Tracts, in south-east
Bangladesh, provided autonomy to the region, mandated
resettlement plans, addressed the question of land reform,
ensured financing for development programmes that created
livelihoods and jobs for the ex-combatants, and guaranteed
the security of those who laid down their arms. The
successful DDR process has enabled the region to
experience economic and social development.

Before I conclude, I would like to raise one more
important issue. We find it encouraging that the special
needs of child soldiers and, more generally, of all war-
affected children have been recognized by the Security
Council and that institutional mechanisms are being
arranged within peacekeeping operations to address them.
The efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Olara Otunnu, have been most helpful in this
regard. However, the needs of women ex-combatants have
not been addressed with the urgency they deserve. We
believe that it is time to take the matter up more urgently.
It was really gratifying for us that, on International
Women's Day earlier this month, the Council made a
statement to the press on the situation of women in armed
conflict. This was the first clear indication of the
Council's concern, which provides strong support for the
work that is being done in the Beijing + 5 process. We
would urge the Secretary-General to keep this matter in
mind.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Algeria. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.

