Mr. Oshima (Japan): My delegation would like
to thank the Ghana delegation for organizing this
debate on an important issue - peace consolidation in
West Africa - and appreciates the fact that you, Sir,
the Foreign Minister of Ghana, are presiding over the
deliberations. We also welcome the participation of
ministers from the region in this debate, and I thank
Mr. Ould-Abdallah, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for West Africa, for a useful
briefing.

A decade ago, several countries in West Africa
were racked by wars and civil disturbances, and much
of the subregion remained, unfortunately, a centre of

06-4607]
extreme instability, violence and much suffering.
Today, however, remarkably, we are witnessing in the
subregion a transition from conflict to constitutional
rule and steady progress towards peace consolidation.
In view of those latest welcome developments in West
Africa, the timing of this meeting is certainly
appropriate.

The conflicts in West Africa have occurred in a
geographically compact area and have shared in
common many of the same root causes. This has meant
inevitably that conflict in one country could easily spill
over into another and make solution of the problems
more complicated. At the same time, in these
circumstances, national and international efforts for
finding peace and keeping the peace in a subregional
framework of cooperation have become especially
important. We therefore highly commend the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) for the
many invaluable initiatives it has taken and for the key
role it undoubtedly will continue to play in the
consolidation of peace in the subregion. Here, I thank
the Executive Secretary of ECOWAS, Mr. Chambas,
for his briefing and his useful observations. We note in
particular the role of ECOWAS in the areas of conflict
prevention, mediation, peacekeeping, humanitarian
relief and reconstruction, as well as with regard to
measures to tackle the problem of small arms. The
Japanese Government will continue its support for such
regional efforts through measures including direct
assistance to the ECOWAS secretariat.

Since the conflicts in West Africa interact with
each other, it is important to define common challenges
and to coordinate the efforts to achieve peace
consolidation in the subregion as a whole. At the
Conference on Consolidation of Peace, held in Addis
Ababa in February of this year within the framework of
the Tokyo International Conference on African
Development (TICAD), which my Government
co-sponsored, focus was placed on three issues -
security; political governance and transition; and
community reconstruction and socio-economic
development - since those three clusters of issues are
considered essential to implementing a comprehensive,
integrated and consistent approach to peace
consolidation anywhere, including in West Africa.
In a post-conflict society, the first and most
important task should be to establish a stable and
secure social environment. To that end, the planning
and successful implementation of security-sector

06-4607]

reform, as well as disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and judicial reform, are critically
important. Secondly, in the fields of political
governance and transition, all parties to a conflict
should be made aware of the importance of the
democratic process and should respect and participate
constructively in the agreed political process. Finally,
to achieve community reconstruction and socio-
economic development, it is essential to meet basic
human needs such as safe water and sanitation, as well
as to ensure infrastructure- and capacity-building. It is
also important to address issues which if unaddressed
could lead to the destabilization of society, including,
especially, the problems of ex-combatants and youth
unemployment. Development of the private sector is an
indispensable ingredient to solving these core
problems.

The conditions surrounding peace consolidation
in West Africa and the requirements for attaining it
differ from country to country, making for differences
in the prioritization of tasks. In Cote d'Ivoire, for
example, resolving the political confrontation that has
led to armed conflict is the most urgent issue, whereas
in Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea-Bissau security-
sector reform and socio-economic stabilization take
first priority.

Sierra Leone is regarded as the most successful
example of peace consolidation in West Africa. We
must bear in mind, however, that a seemingly
successful outcome of United Nations peacekeeping
operations may contain pitfalls and that the situation
can relapse into chaos, as we have witnessed in the
past, including most recently in Timor-Leste. The
problems in Timor-Leste clearly show how important it
is to address comprehensively the three clusters of core
issues which I mentioned earlier, and that, in dealing
with peace consolidation in West Africa, one should be
fully mindful of the lessons learned from past
examples.

In supporting the efforts of Governments in the
subregion to address these issues, the international
community must extend seamless and generous
assistance and appropriate support. To that end, the
Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission
should address the issues in accordance with their
specific areas of responsibility. From the Security
Council's point of view, the newly established
Peacebuilding Commission can offer constructive input
to the Council, particularly with respect to the
following two points.

First of all, the Commission should clarify the
order of priority of the matters it takes under
consideration, within the comprehensive and integrated
approach on which Member States have agreed.
Secondly, it is necessary for the Commission to study
carefully and in detail the peacebuilding strategies of
each State under consideration, by listening to, and
incorporating into its recommendations, the views of
the States concerned, United Nations field missions,
experts, non-governmental organizations and other
relevant actors, while expecting that each country
under consideration will demonstrate full ownership of
the process in addressing the issues that are identified.
In that respect, we hope that all participants in the
forthcoming country-specific meetings of the
Peacebuilding Commission, on Sierra Leone and on
Burundi, will contribute to a constructive discussion by
offering their frank views on the issues at hand.

Japan regards the consolidation of peace as one
of the main pillars of its foreign development
assistance policy. The TICAD process, initiated in
1993, has made a significant contribution by fostering
partnership between African States and the
international community. In the TICAD process, we
have designated the consolidation of peace as one of
three main pillars of assistance to Africa from 2003 on,
along with human-centred development and poverty
reduction through economic development. During the
Gleneagles summit of the Group of Eight countries last
year, Prime Minister Koizumi announced the expansion
of Japan's assistance for peace consolidation, and at
the TICAD Conference on Consolidation of Peace,
which I mentioned earlier, the Japanese Government
launched a new initiative which included the
immediate disbursement of $60 million in assistance
by the end of March this year, focusing on West Africa,
the Sudan and the Great Lakes region in particular.

In conclusion, Japan intends to continue its active
efforts to support peace consolidation in West Africa,
and in Africa as a whole, and to play a substantive role
in the activities of both the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission. In doing so, we sincerely
hope that in the near future, West Africa will no longer
be seen as a cradle of war and instability but as a
beacon of peacebuilding and the consolidation of
peace.

Japan thanks the delegation of Ghana for
preparing a draft presidential statement, which my
delegation supports.

