The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of Japan.

Let me begin by expressing my deep appreciation to
Secretary-General Guterres for participating in today's
open debate and sharing with us his vision of how the
United Nations, especially the Security Council, can
effectively address complex contemporary challenges
to international peace and security.

In the 25 years since the Cold War, some parts ofthe
world have been enjoying the benefits of improvements
in science and technology, from groundbreaking
medicines to new frontiers in cyberspace and outer
space. On the other hand, during the same period we
have witnessed the rise in complex contemporary
challenges to international peace and security, such as
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, the
expansion of terrorism, climate change, pandemics,
transnational organized crime, including drug
trafficking, and violent extremism. These challenges
can manifest themselves as root causes and drivers of
conflict that can destabilize countries, lowering the
threshold to entering into violent conflict. They can
also exacerbate and prolong existing conflicts.

Examples of these threats abound. For instance,
in the Sahel region, climate change has become a
multiplier of existing challenges, which include food
exhaustion and malnutrition. Between 2014 and 2015,
we experienced pandemics that became direct causes
of instability of those countries affected, while also
seriously affecting their economies and societies, even
regionally, thereby becoming multipliers of destabilized
situations. Peace operations, such as peacekeeping
operations and special political missions, are also
facing non-traditional challenges, such as non-State
actors and inter-State criminal organizations.

The Security Council has been tackling
these challenges, in most cases in the country or
region-specific context. However, Japan believes that
it is very important for the Council to discuss these
complex contemporary challenges to international peace
and security in a holistic and methodological manner,
and to develop ways to better address the situation
on the ground. There have already been a number of
meaningful Council meetings that have taken such an
approach, and we would like to encourage the Council
to be bold, active and at times innovative.

That does not mean that the Security Council will
encroach on the responsibilities of other organs, as some
may fear. The Council has a clear mandate to maintain
international peace and security, and the Council cannot
fully assume its responsibilities without addressing
mutually reinforcing, multidimensional factors that are
closely interlinked with peace and security. From this
perspective, Japan would like to propose three ideas.

First, the Security Council should take a more
comprehensive and integrated approach by embracing
perspectives of the peace continuum, as well as
peace and security, development, human rights and
humanitarian nexus. If the Security Council is to
more effectively address complex challenges, it needs
to increase its focus on effectiveness throughout the
whole conflict cycle, that is, by preventing the outbreak,
escalation, continuation and recurrence of conflict. At
the same time, attention should also be paid to the fact
that peace and security, development, human rights and
humanitarian elements are closely interlinked. To that
end, we believe that it would be helpful for the Council
to receive more integrated analysis from the field and
the Secretariat.

Secondly, as a means to achieve the first point,
especially from the perspective of sustaining peace,
we would like to stress the importance for the Council
to enhance cooperation with other organs within and
outside the United Nations. A recent good example is
the case oftrafficking in persons in Libya, on which we
have received briefings from the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the
International Organization for Migration, and sought
coordination with the African Union. While there is
no need to mention the importance of partnership with
regional and subregional organizations, cooperation
with other United Nations organs should be further
enhanced. The Council also needs to listen carefully to
the voices ofnon-Council Member States. For example,
for small island developing States, sea-level rise caused
by global warming is threatening their very existence. In
addition, it may be helpful for the Council to be briefed
by international development and financial institutions.

Thirdly, we believe that the human security
approach is highly relevant when addressing complex
contemporary challenges to international peace and
security. Human security places the individual at
the centre, based on a cross-sectoral understanding
of insecurities. Therefore, human security entails a
broadened understanding of threats and challenges.
Attaching great importance to this approach, Japan has
consistently provided human-centred, comprehensive
and preventive assistance through cross-sectoral
efforts with a range of partners. We hope to see
renewed attention paid to the human security approach
when addressing complex contemporary challenges
to international peace and security. We count on the
Secretary-General's strong leadership to that end.

Finally, we would like to touch upon the ongoing
initiative of Secretary-General Guterres to reform
the United Nations. As we speak, a draft resolution
(A/72/L.33) on restructuring of the United Nations
peace and security pillar is being submitted for adoption
at the General Assembly. Although the scope of this
reform does not include Security Council reform, as
has been mentioned by many, no reform of the United
Nations will be complete without reform of the Security
Council. The Council also needs to change so that the
peace and security pillar of the United Nations can be
more coherent, nimble and effective, and truly have
positive impacts on the ground.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the fact that
we are all responsible for continuously reviewing what
measures and tools can be used in order for the Security
Council to play its leading role more effectively as one
of the principal organs of the United Nations, primarily
responsible for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Today's open debate is aimed not
at drawing a conclusion, but instead at calling for
continuous, thorough consideration on how the Council
can better address complex contemporary challenges.
There remains large room to be further examined
and explored by Member States. We hope that today's
discussion will lay a good foundation for future ones,
and of course Japan will continue to participate actively
in discussions in the Council, as well as in the entire
United Nations system, and to contribute to the peace
and prosperity of the world.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Council.

