I would like to sincerely thank the German presidency for having organized this open debate on pandemics and security, and the Secretary-General and other briefers for their comprehensive briefings. Over the past months, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has spread across the globe, both in intensity and in scope, and has had far-reaching implications for every aspect of the international situation. This greatest challenge ever to the United Nations has vividly shown us how a global health crisis and non- traditional security threats to a larger extent could have profound consequences for the peace, security and the prosperity of every Member State. No single country can win this war against COVID-19 unless and until everyone wins. At this critical juncture, we should spare no effort to strengthen international solidarity and cooperation towards a prompt response to pandemics and sustainable socioeconomic recovery. Multilateral institutions, particularly the United Nations at the centre, could play a pivotal role in leading and coordinating global efforts. To promote the corresponding role of the Council, my delegation wishes to make the following points. First, protecting the health and lives of our people, particularly the most vulnerable, from the impacts of pandemics remains the utmost priority and, indeed, the primary responsibility of every State. We therefore call on all parties to conflict to heed the Secretary-General's call for an immediate global ceasefire and facilitate humanitarian activities to combat the COVID-19 pandemic. Within its mandate, the Council should send a strong message to ensure that this appeal resonates and take every action needed to help de-escalate tensions, build trust, reconcile and promote peaceful dialogues towards lasting conflict settlement. In that connection, we welcome the adoption of resolution 2532 (2020) and appreciate France and Tunisia's leadership and determination in promoting the initiative, to which Viet Nam actively and constructively contributed. Secondly, the Council should closely monitor and instruct United Nations peacekeeping missions and special political missions, in collaboration with United Nations country teams and specialized agencies, particularly the World Health Organization (WHO), to ensure the safety, security and health of all United Nations personnel on the field and to effectively assist host countries in dealing with the pandemic and prepare for future infectious-disease outbreaks. Viet Nam commends the ongoing efforts by United Nations peace missions and other United Nations agencies, as well as first-line responders, in the fight against the coronavirus. Thirdly, we strongly support the Secretary-General's appeal to waive sanctions that can undermine countries' capacity to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic. We also encourage the Council and Member States to work out appropriate measures to facilitate humanitarian assistance to countries under sanctions to enable them to address this overwhelming health crisis more efficiently, in the best interests of civilian populations. Being fully aware of the hazard of the pandemic, Viet Nam took very early actions against it. On the basis of the whole-of-Government approach, we have achieved encouraging initial results in keeping the pandemic under control and returning to normal socioeconomic activities. As the 2020 Association of Southeast Asian Nations Chair and a non-permanent member of the Security Council, Viet Nam has put forth initiatives and joined efforts in coordinating the regional and international responses to the pandemic and beyond. To the utmost of our capacity, we have provided timely and practical assistance and shared our experience with various countries, and also made a financial contribution to WHO's COVID-19 Response Fund. Viet Nam is confident that, with global solidarity and strengthened multilateralism as a common denominator, we will overcome the hurdles ahead and seize new opportunities to build the brighter future envisaged in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
