Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): I thank you very
much, Mr. President, for giving us the opportunity to
participate in this important debate. We wish to thank
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2012/283), as
well as his Special Representative, Ambassador
Augustine Mahiga, for his detailed briefing on the
recent developments in Somalia. We also wish to
welcome to this meeting President Sheikh Sharif
Sheikh Ahmed of the Somali Republic, and we want to
thank him for his wide-ranging statement.

Somalia is on the verge of making a decisive
break with its most recent past, marked by conflict,
crisis and instability. Recent months have seen
determined and deliberate action by the Somali people,
supported by the international community, to address in
a sustained and concerted manner the political,
humanitarian and security challenges confronting the
country. In this regard, we welcome the significant

progress made by the Transitional Federal Government
(TFG) in implementing the September 2011 road map.
Most notably, the Garoowe Conferences I and II have
culminated in important principles and decisions that
should guide the political and constitutional processes
for ending the transition. We welcome in particular the
agreements reached by the stakeholders during these
Conferences.

With the end of transition, fast approaching on
20 August, South Africa welcomes the establishment of
the Implementation Support Unit in the Office of the
Prime Minister to expedite the delivery of key tasks
and benchmarks. We look forward to the finalization of
the nomination process of the 825 members of the
Constituent Assembly by traditional elders. In this
regard, it would be important to ensure that the
selection process is inclusive and transparent and that
the Constituent Assembly is representative and
comprised of the agreed percentage of woman
representatives. We are encouraged that the legitimate
and reasonable concerns of key stakeholders regarding
the Constitutional process will be taken into account,
particularly if they have the potential to frustrate the
outcome ofthis process.

In the remaining months, the Constituent
Assembly will have to adopt a provisional draft
constitution and agree on a new federal parliament. We
look forward to the speedy completion of these
important processes, to be followed by the election ofa
new President and the appointment of a new Prime
Minister in July and August, respectively.

While we welcome these positive developments,
we note with concern that challenges remain that could
have negative impact on the implementation of the
road map. We urge Somalis across the political
spectrum to put their differences aside and focus on the
common good of the country. Progress and peace can
be achieved only by a united Somalia. We wish to
recall the readiness of both the African Union and the
Security Council to sanction spoilers who frustrate the
implementation of the road map.

The joint letter issued recently by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
African Union and the United Nations reaffirms the
determination of the international community to give
full effect to resolution 1844 (2008), indicating that
action will be taken against those who obstruct and
undermine stability in Somalia.

The future of Somalia must be determined by the
Somali people and the solutions to its current
challenges must be Somali-owned. My delegation
therefore wishes to urge the political leadership in
Somalia to set its differences aside and to put the
interests of the country above its own in order to seize
the existing window of opportunity for the country to
abandon the instability of its recent past.

South Africa notes the funding gap of $12 million
for implementing key aspects of the road map. We
share the concern of the Secretary-General that this
could jeopardize the significant progress achieved so
far. We call on the international community to continue
its support for the TFG during this critical time.

My delegation acknowledges the important gains
registered by the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), the security forces of Somalia's
neighbours and the Somali national security forces.
These security gains have laid the foundation for
extending the authority of the TFG beyond Mogadishu,
providing an enabling environment for establishing a
United Nations presence in the capital, and creating a
security environment conducive to facilitating the
return of the international diplomatic and business
communities. The military successes must be
accompanied by reconciliation and stabilization, and we
encourage national efforts towards this end. The
international community must therefore continue its
investment in AMISOM. and in the Somali national
security forces. In this regard, South Africa welcomes
the recent "uncaveated" support by the United
Kingdom, Sweden and Denmark to the AMISOM. Trust
Fund.

We continue to condemn the asymmetric attacks
by the armed opposition against Government, civilian
and United Nations targets. We underline that the
strengthening of the Somali national security forces
must remain an important benchmark in the
international community's efforts to ensure sustainable
peace. We are therefore concerned that the capacity-
building of the Somali military and police force is
constrained by the limited ability to pay and equip
operational troops and pay arrears in police salaries.
We join the Secretary-General in encouraging Member
States with the necessary capabilities to assist
AMISOM. and Somali forces in building their capacity
to prevent attacks and to improve civilian security.
12-33979

In addition to progress on the political and
security front, attention must also be given to the
humanitarian challenges still confronting the country.
We should further ensure stabilization and the delivery
of basic services in areas recovered from Al-Shabaab.
Funding by the international community for the
Mogadishu Stabilization and Recovery Plan therefore
remains a priority. Additionally, investment by the
international community in the private sector
development of Somalia, including its road, water and
energy infrastructure, would ensure the long-term
development of the country. In that regard, we look
forward to the upcoming second Istanbul conference on
Somalia, to be held from 31 May to 1 June, as an
important opportunity for the international community
to invest in the long-term economic future and stability
of Somalia.

In conclusion, South Africa will play its part in
supporting efforts that can help bring lasting peace,
security and stability to Somalia. In that regard, the
South African Government, on 13 March, signed an
agreement on the establishment of diplomatic relations
with Somalia, during the visit of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs to South Africa. South Africa is
committed to providing capacity- and institution-
building, socio-economic support, as well as specified
training in key Government sectors.

With three months of the transition remaining, the
political leadership in Somalia, with the support of the
international community, must take full advantage of
the opportunities in the political and security sphere in
placing the country on a trajectory of sustained peace,
stability and long-term development.

