Mr. Motoc (Romania): My delegation is, of
course, more than pleased to welcome to the Council
the Chairman-in-Office of the Organization of Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), Foreign Minister
Passy of Bulgaria, a friendly neighbour of Romania
with which we share common institutional experiences
in the assumption of international responsibilities. It
seems that wherever Romania has exercised a mandate,
Bulgaria has succeeded it, and that wherever Bulgaria
has done so, Romania was next in line. I take the
opportunity therefore to commend Bulgaria for
activities and achievements of its chairmanship during
the first four months of its mandate.

The rich presentation we heard at the beginning
of our meeting shows eloquently the usefulness of
periodic interaction between the universal
Organization, and the Security Council in particular,
and regional organizations, especially when their
respective agendas intersect. Romania has made the
relationship between global and regional organizations
in stabilization processes a main thread of its mandate
as an elected member of the Security Council. We truly
hope to see Foreign Minister Passy, as OSCE
Chairman-in-Office, join the high-level debate on this
topic, which we plan to organize during our July
presidency.

Romania held the chairmanship-in-office of the
OSCE fairly recently - in 2001 - and had
opportunities then to explore areas for improving the
operational relationship on the ground between the
United Nations and the OSCE. We now have a very
good opportunity to put that institutional synergy to
work even more effectively, especially in the western
Balkans, since two neighbouring countries of the
region - Bulgaria and Romania - are currently
chairing, respectively, the OSCE and the South-East
European Cooperation Process, which is the most
representative subregional organization.

With a view to best profiting from the presence of
our guest, I would like to ask him to kindly elaborate
on the strategy and thoughts of the OSCE
chairmanship-in-office with regard to dealing with so-
called frozen conflicts, such as the ones he briefly
referred to in the first part of his rich remarks - he
mentioned Moldova and Georgia - since in that
respect the United Nations and the OSCE, we think,
can successfully share experiences and ideas.

