Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): We extend our best wishes to you, Mr. President, for a successful presidency of the Security Council this month and assure you of our full support and cooperation. We express our thanks and appreciation to Belgium for its excellent presidency in February. We welcome the Ambassador of Iraq to this briefing and extend our appreciation and thanks to Special Representative of the Secretary-General Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert for her briefing, her first since we joined the Council. We heard a lot of hope, which we share, for a better future for Iraq, first in terms of stability then in terms of forming a new Government. Iraq is embarking upon a new course to national reconstruction and economic development. We are encouraged by the progress Iraq has made in recent months, as reported by the Secretary-General (S/2020/140). We are happy to see that the Government of Iraq is taking a number of measures to meet the legitimate demands of its people, is continuing efforts towards national reconciliation, is investing more resources in reconstruction and is strengthening relations with countries in the region. We welcome the adoption by the Council of Representatives of the new laws on the Independent High Electoral Commission and on elections. We express our appreciation for the efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) to assist the Government and the people of Iraq. We note UNAMI's efforts in the implementation of resolution 2107 (2013) and encourage the parties to continue their cooperation on that issue. However, the situation in Iraq remains challenging, especially in the context of increasing regional tensions. We share the concerns of the Secretary-General that, during the reporting period, various forms of violence continued in Baghdad and several other governorates, that the formation of a new Government has been delayed and that the living conditions of people in some areas remain worrisome, with about 1.8 million people in acute need. At this very important stage in Iraq, we wish to stress the following points. First, we call on the parties concerned to make further efforts to overcome their differences in order to facilitate the formation of anew Government for the sake of stabilizing the political situation. The Government of Iraq should be keen to introduce reforms to meet the aspirations of its people, which should be carried out in parallel with policies that foster national reconciliation, unity and stability. Secondly, addressing the economic difficulties in Iraq should be a priority. We are of the view that the Government of Iraq has the primary responsibility for the course of economic development but that international support and assistance are very important. We call on the United Nations, international organizations and Member States to continue to assist Iraq in that regard for the long-term stability of the country. Thirdly, UNAMI plays an important role in Iraq at this point in time. We therefore support andencourage the Mission to continue to work effectively, in accordance with the mandate assigned to it by the Security Council, to assist Iraq with reforms and in achieving an inclusive political process.
