Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation supported resolution
2368 (2017), on sanctions related to the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and Al-Qaida. Taking into
account the unprecedented magnitude and scale of the
threats to international relations from those groups,
we concur with our colleagues from the United States.
Today yet another important step has been taken towards
strengthening the counter-terrorism regime. Now all
States, without exception, are called upon to fully and
conscientiously comply with the provisions of today's
key resolution. There can be no double standards.

We are deeply troubled by the fact that, due to
the positions of some delegations, Council members'
concerns were not fully taken into account in reaching
agreement on the adoption of a text on such a key issue
as jointly combating terrorism. I am chiefly referring
to the Russian proposal to impose a comprehensive ban
on any trade and economic links with any territories
under ISIL control. We must bear in mind that terrorists
deal with wide-ranging, cross-border smuggling in
hydrocarbons and other goods. Illegal business provides
them with tens of millions of dollars in revenue on
a monthly basis. That revenue is used to purchase
munitions and weapons, which makes it all the more
difficult to apply coercive measures against them. We
firmly advocate that we continue to such measures, as
well as other others, in order to ensure a full financial,
material and technical isolation of terrorist groups.

We are equally confounded by the fact that the
text does not include a reference to Article 103 of the
Charter of the United Nations, which is something that
we insisted upon. Article 103 refers to the primacy
of the Charter over other international treaties. The
relevance of such a reference based on the need to
enhance the authority of the Security Council's binding
decisions with regard to sanctions and to ensure that
they are fully implemented nationally by all branches
of Government. Our firm position is that we must
ensure full and complete compliance with the Charter.
Without that, it will be impossible to ensure the
integrity of the sanctions regime. We firmly believe
that, in order to make consistent progress in combating
terrorists, we need to genuinely dovetail the efforts of
all stakeholders. Therein lies the sole way of ensuring
a full and definitive end of the terrorist threat to global
stability. We stand ready to engage in collective efforts
to that end.
