Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The delegation of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela thanks you, Mr. President,
for convening this important meeting of the Security
Council on the Middle East, in particular to consider
the situation in the Gaza Strip arising from the brutal
military attack by Israel, the occupying Power, on the
people of the territory of the State of Palestine.

We align ourselves with the statement made by the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The international community is once again shaken
by the escalation of violence caused by Israel's bloody
military actions in Gaza. The severity of the conflict,
which erupted a few days ago as a result of the military
operations, requires the Security Council to make
a resounding statement in the form of a resolution in
favour of an immediate ceasefire in accordance with
the agreement of November 2012, leading to the full
withdrawal of Israeli military forces from Gaza and
putting an end to the violence against the Palestinian
people.

Our country categorically condemns the
aggression perpetrated by the occupying Power,
through indiscriminate bombing and the invasion of the
territory, which has sown destruction, killed more than
500 innocent civilians, mostly children, women and
the elderly, and wounded thousands of people, in clear
violation of the norms of international law, including
international humanitarian law.

Venezuela reiterates its solidarity with the
Palestinian people and Government in the face of this
new attack by the Israeli military forces, which has
subjected the inhabitants of the Gaza Strip to an illegal
embargo since 2007 and violated their human rights
and the provisions of the Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War. We
therefore demand that Israel put an end to this military
aggression and the construction of settlements in the
occupied territories of the Palestinian State, refrain
from taking measures of collective punishment, and
lift the suffocating blockade on the Gaza Strip, which
has had an ongoing and devastating impact on the
Palestinian people by deliberately depriving them of
their means of subsistence, including economic income,
food, medicine and other goods that are essential to the
daily lives of its inhabitants and the functioning oftheir
political institutions.

Finally, our country reiterates the need to return
to the path of negotiations in order to achieve a broad
peace founded on a vision of a region in which two
States - Israel and Palestine - live side by side within
secure and recognized borders, on the basis of the pre-
1967 borders, in accordance with international law.

