Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to welcome you, Mr. President,
and to express the Kingdom of Morocco's appreciation
for your choice topic to highlight the presidency of
Burkina Faso in December. The choice of this topic is
neither meaningless nor accidental. It clearly illustrates
the concern of many countries, especially African
countries, regarding the magnitude that drug trafficking
has attained and its consequences for the health of its
victims and for development and political stability in
affected States.

Drug trafficking has become one of the world's
most pressing transnational threats. No country can
consider itself safe from its harmful effects. It is a
threat because of its scope, its cross-cutting nature and
the people involved in it. The $400 billion per year that
the drug trade represents is in and of itself very
revealing in terms of the threat that it poses to our
common security.

The situation in Africa, particularly in West
Africa, is of concern because of the extent of this
scourge. The figure of 50 to 60 tons of traffic per year,
cited this morning by the Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
2
reveals the gravity of this trade and the need to address
it.

The situation is all the more threatening in that it
affects a region that is fragile in terms of peace and
stability and where a number of countries are emerging
from many years of armed conflict. This is of concern
on several fronts, and requires States and our universal
Organization to act, as the threats posed by this
phenomenon are twofold.

On the one hand, there is the risk that a number
of countries will be destabilized in the region by an ill-
intentioned use of the proceeds of trafficking to
undermine the Governments in place, finance
subversive actions or even carry out terrorist attacks.
On the other hand, as international cooperation to fight
narcotics trafficking has developed, there has been a
parallel and increasing collusion among drug cartels,
small arms traffickers and those who exploit
clandestine migration routes. Such groups will stop at
nothing, including terrorism and hostage-taking, to
maintain their illegal source of income.

The major itineraries for the traffic in drugs, in
particular cocaine, have evolved. Given the steady
international demand for cocaine and the strengthening
of measures to intercept the drug along traditional
routes, traffickers have turned towards West Africa.
The choice of this region is incredibly unfortunate, as
our region has just painfully emerged from a decade of
endemic violence.

As seen at the 2008 Praia summit of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), States of the region have demonstrated
their commitment to curbing this traffic. However,
their efforts are not enough in and of themselves.
Financial, technical and training support will also be
necessary to the success of their efforts.

Fighting drug trafficking in West Africa and its
many implications for regional and international
stability require a renewed commitment on the part of
all Member States, given the indivisible nature of
security, in order to assist States of the region to
develop their capacity for cooperation against
organized crime, whose connections to terrorist
networks are now known to all.

My country welcomes the initiatives carried out
by ECOWAS, with the support of the United Nations
and the international community, to reverse the trend in
09-63874
this harmful trafficking, as well as the first positive
results of these efforts witnessed since last year. This
initiative must be pursued and broadened to include
other destination countries in the larger Sahara area,
which stretches from West to East Africa.

Strengthening regional and subregional
cooperation in combating drug trafficking in West
Africa requires a multilateral effort in which the
international community should invest in a resolute
approach to curbing the phenomenon. In this respect,
we must note that the critical areas for building West
African capacity to combat this scourge include the
provision of technical assistance by donors, the
improvement of prevention and treatment of addiction,
and the strengthening of cooperation in detection and
interdiction. Given the density and international
ramifications of active local narcotics trafficking
networks, States of the region must cooperate with
INTERPOL.

Given its geographical position, its proximity to
West Africa and the importance it attaches to stability
in that sensitive region of our continent, the Kingdom
of Morocco follows with particular attention the
situation in the vast Sahelo-Saharan region, in
particular the alarming developments in the trafficking
of arms, narcotics and persons and the recent terrorist
acts directed against the people - and sometimes the
States - of the region.

This situation requires the international
community to take a three-pronged approach. First, the
ongoing conflicts and disputes in the region must be
resolved; secondly, countries emerging from conflict
must be bolstered and supported in their political and
economic reconstruction; and thirdly, bilateral,
regional and international cooperation to eliminate
trafficking must be strengthened.

Beyond such urgent measures, the true asset in
combating these scourges remains socio-economic
development and the establishment of economic
governance and the rule of law. We hope that the
response of the international community will be
commensurate with the challenge and our shared
responsibility.

