Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): Sir, my
delegation is very pleased at the fact that this meeting of
the Security Council is being held under your presidency.
My delegation would like to express to the delegation of
Namibia its thanks and appreciation for its initiative to hold
this meeting on one of the items on the Council's agenda,
"Children and armed conflict".

This initiative is clear evidence that the international
community, represented in the Security Council, is
determined to eliminate this dangerous phenomenon and to
uproot this evil, which could destroy future generations
through teaching children to use weapons or through the
abuse of those who do not carry weapons, and by denying
them their right to enjoy their childhood and live in a quiet,
suitable environment that would ensure them a bright future
based on education so that they can be useful to society
instead of carrying weapons.

I should like also to express my thanks and
appreciation to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Olara Otunnu, for his exhaustive report and
for his strenuous efforts in this field, as well as to the staff
of the United Nations Children's Fund and the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
the other specialized United Nations agencies for their
efforts to provide the best standard of living for all the
children of the world in general and for children affected
by armed conflict in particular.

The special impact of armed conflicts on children is
an old phenomenon. It used to be considered one of the
many negative side-effects of armed conflicts.
Unfortunately, these side-effects have taken a dangerous
turn and acquired threatening new aspects, forcing the
international community to sound the alarm. Indeed, more
than 300,000 children in 32 countries are involved in
armed conflict. Among those countries, there are 24 in
which the children concerned are under 15 years of age.
Millions of children are affected by these conflicts, and
this constitutes a further burden to the international
community, particularly as it prepares to enter the twenty-
first century. Many of the children affected by armed
conflict live in terrible conditions and lack food and
education.

The tragedy of children affected by armed conflict,
whether they are soldiers participating in a conflict,
refugees or displaced children, is considered a black stain
on the world's conscience. The international community
is therefore called upon to make the efforts necessary to
ensure that the parties to the conflict should respect and
abide by international laws and norms, particularly the
1949 Geneva Convention, the 1977 additional protocols
and the 1989 Convention on the Rights of the Child. It is
necessary to bring to justice to those responsible for child
recruitment during armed conflict and to consider them
war criminals, as we deal with war criminals responsible
for acts of genocide. The recruitment of children and their
encouragement to carry weapons and to participate in war
has psychological consequences that are difficult to
remove once they are adults, particularly when they have
been carrying weapons since childhood. Humanitarian and
relief agencies should pay more attention to the refugee
and displaced children affected by armed conflicts all
over the world.

My delegation supports the draft resolution
submitted to the Council today and is going to vote in
favour of this draft resolution.
