Archbishop Auza (Holy See): The Holy See
commends the Japanese presidency for once more
bringing the difficult situation in the Middle East to the
attention of the international community, in the light of
the release of the Quartet's 1 July report on the Middle
East and in the context of the continuing violence in
Syria, the deadly sectarian violence in Iraq and the
stalled Israeli-Palestinian peace talks.

The Palestinian question has remained without
an answer that is satisfactory to both the Israelis and
the Palestinians. Almost 69 years after its adoption
by the General Assembly, resolution 181 (II), of
29 November 1947, remains only half-fulfilled.
Decades of negotiations have failed to achieve the
creation of a Palestinian State. The time is long overdue
to put an end to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which
has become increasingly unacceptable as it becomes
increasingly intractable.

My delegation would not miss this occasion to
underline once more that, for the Holy See, the two-
State solution holds the best promise. Durable peace
will remain a distant dream, and security will remain
an illusion if Israel and Palestine do not agree to exist
side by side, reconciled and sovereign, within mutually
agreed and internationally recognized borders. Let the
two States be created now for the sake of the Israelis
and Palestinians who, in the depths of their hearts,
desire nothing greater than peace and security. It is
time to act on the recommendations of the 1 July report
of the Quartet by bringing peace and security to the
citizens of Israel and the State of Palestine and to the
people of the world.

The situation in Syria remains one of unspeakable
suffering for the Syrian people who are being killed,
forced to survive under bombs or flee to less-ravaged
areas. My delegation feels duty-bound to call the
Council's attention once again to the continuing
persecution of Christians, Yazidis and other ethnic and
religious minority groups by non-State actors in parts
of Syria and Iraq.

Pope Francis has denounced in the strongest
possible terms all those responsible, from whichever
side of the conflict in Syria they may come, for the
senseless slaughter of civilians. The Pope has also
denounced those who supply substantial amounts of
money and weaponry to fighters who kill and maim the
innocent population and destroy civilian institutions
and infrastructure. One cannot but lament the duplicity
of simultaneously talking peace while supplying arms
to those who kill on every side of the conflict. Pope
Francis has asked: How can you believe in someone
who caresses you with the right hand and strikes you
with the left?

My delegation avails itself of this opportunity to
plead once more to the weapons-producing States to
strictly limit the supply of arms to client States and
monitor their use. In particular, my delegation asks
the international community to stop the illegal supply
of arms to non-State actors who have been lately
responsible for crimes against humanity, other forms of
mass atrocity and egregious violation of human rights.

Statistics have clearly shown that it is the civilian
population which is disproportionately victimized
by ever-more technologically sophisticated weapons.
Remote-controlled assassinations without the due
process of law and so-called collateral damage to
civilians by lethal autonomous weapons systems bring
to the fore ethical and legal questions that merit careful
review and perhaps even a challenge on the basis of
international humanitarian law.

The Holy See believes that peace processes do
not depend solely on formal negotiations, no matter
how indispensable they may be. As the cradle of great
civilizations and the birthplace of the three main
monotheistic religions of Judaism, Christianity and
Islam, the Middle East has the cultural, intellectual and
religious resources that make it a fertile ground for civil
society and track II diplomacy, including faith-based
informal diplomacy, to play their role in promoting the
values of encounter and mutual acceptance, thereby
equipping all citizens to become active protagonists in
peacemaking and peacebuilding in the region. Religions
and believers, in particular, must prove themselves
worthy of their rightful place in the whole process of
pacification in the region.

