Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): Iwish to thank our colleagues
from the United States for the serious efforts they
made to ensure consensus was reached on resolution
2351 (2017). We appreciate the readiness they have
demonstrated to accommodate all legitimate concerns.

We have all been following developments that have
unfolded over the past several months surrounding
the issue of Western Sahara, as well as the undeniable
progress - although fledgling - that we had begun
to see. We would have been even more pleased if the
points we had raised, which did not amount to more
than minor tweaking, had been taken on board. They
were not, and we understand why not. Our effort
was designed to ensure alignment with fundamental
principles in the position of the African Union. All the
same, we decided to vote in favour of the resolution
because of our conviction that the Secretary-General
appears to be committed to relaunch the peace process,
and of our hope that there is a new spirit. Of course
we also felt we needed to take into account the effort
that has been made by the presidency to achieve the
progress we saw.

That said, however, we would like to reiterate the
importance of the restoration of the full functionality
of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in
Western Sahara (MINURSO), whose role has become
all the more significant in light of developments on the
ground. We welcome the progress made in facilitating
the return of the civilian component of MINURSO.

We are very pleased at the progress made
surrounding the programme created in connection
with the buffer zone. This should create a positive
atmosphere for the relaunching of the peace process
and de-escalate the tension. Both parties, with which
we are equally friendly, should be called upon to honour
their commitments to the agreement reached with
MINURSO in relation to the ceasefire. They should
refrain from taking any action that could undermine
their agreement and further aggravate the situation on
the ground.

The latest developments have underscored the need
to exert renewed efforts for the resumption of talks
between the parties to find ajust, lasting and mutually
acceptable political solution to the long-standing issue
on the basis ofthe relevant Security Council resolutions.
This is something that we have always supported based
on our conviction that it would provide for the self-
determination of the people of Western Sahara in the
context of arrangements consistent with the principles
and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations.

In this connection, it is imperative that the Council
understand the context of the problem we have been
facing and fully support the proposal by Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres to relaunch the peace
process with a new spirit and dynamism to achieve a
mutually acceptable political solution to the Western
Saharan issue, in accordance with all relevant Security
Council resolutions. Any meaningful progress on
the peace process hinges on the full cooperation of
the two parties with the Secretary-General, and it is
only appropriate that the Council call on the parties
to commit themselves to resuming the fifth round of
negotiations in good faith and without any conditions.

We believe that the appointment of a new Personal
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Western Sahara
who commands the trust and confidence of both parties
will be very critical to realizing that objective. It
would be remiss of us to fail to take this opportunity
to thank, following the presidency, Personal Envoy
Mr. Christopher Ross for having been such an upright
person in whom we can repose confidence. We wish to
thank him for his service. We feel this is fair and proper.

We hope that the resumption of direct and serious
talks between the parties without preconditions - what
the African Union has been calling for and has fully
supported now that Morocco has returned to the African
Union family, which is a very important development
which we welcome - might facilitate speeding up the
process of finding an amicable solution to this long-
standing dispute and that the African Union will have
a supportive role in the United Nations-sponsored
peace talks.

