Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): My
delegation too would like to thank the Presidents and
Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunals for
the Former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda for their
briefings today. I would like to reaffirm the full support
of France.

I would like in particular to congratulate Judge
Dennis Byron on his assumption of the presidency of
the Rwanda Tribunal, and would ask him to transmit
our appreciation to his predecessor for the remarkable
work that he accomplished.

As this is the last occasion on which Ms. Del
Ponte will be speaking to the Council in her current
capacity, my delegation would also like to take this
opportunity to express to her my country's great
appreciation for the work that she has done as
Prosecutor of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, as well as for her work for the Rwanda
Tribunal. Her determination, independence and skill
have played an important part in attaining the results
achieved. It has become clear to the perpetrators of
atrocities that it is not a good thing to be on what we
now call Carla's list. Her actions should serve as an
inspiration. We understand her impatience with regard
to the lack of cooperation, and we appreciate her
tenacity.

Indeed, that tenacity has recently borne fruit,
because a few weeks ago, just before her visit to
Belgrade, General Tolimir was arrested and transferred
to The Hague, and, yesterday, General Djordjevic was
also handed over. France welcomes those arrests,
which reaffirm the willingness of Belgrade to
cooperate with the Tribunal.

Four indictees are still at large, however. We note
that, according to the Prosecutor's report, all remaining
accused are within reach of the Serb authorities. We are
encouraged by the Prosecutor's comments regarding
the possible arrest of Ratko Mladic in the near future.
We welcome the measures taken recently by the
Belgrade authorities towards full respect for its
international commitments, as set out very clearly by
the International Court of Justice in a recent ruling.

It is only on the basis of the results achieved,
however, that cooperation with the Tribunal will be
evaluated. France believes that the full and complete
cooperation of Serbia and Republika Srpska with the
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia remains a sine qua
non for their integration into the European family.

France would also like to thank the two Tribunals
for the work that they have done to respect their
completion strategies, and we have taken note of the
timetables that have been announced. Recent progress
has been made in referring matters to national
jurisdictions, which President Pocar identified as
playing a key role. We also note that Prosecutor J allow
recently requested the first transfer of cases to Rwanda
as concerns one of the 18 fugitives, and we welcome
the positive developments in the area of cooperation
between that country and the Tribunal. We are pleased
that the African Commission on Human and Peoples'
Rights has agreed to follow up on the trials, just as the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) does concerning cases transferred by the
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. We also note with
satisfaction the positive evaluation that the OSCE has
made regarding the first cases in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. France supports the appeal made by the
President of the Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia to
Croatia to deal as quickly as possible with the cases
that have been transferred to it, and we note that a trial
has opened today.

As the Presidents and Prosecutors have pointed
out, the major challenge facing the two Tribunals - as
well as the Council, which created them - is that
some of the major figures responsible for the crimes
are still at large. Their number has been reduced, but
some of those individuals, who are identified with the
odious policy of ethnic cleansing - Ratko Mladic and
Radovan Karadzic - are still at large. That is also the
case with Felicien Kabuga so many years after the
genocide took place.

Although the dates that we have specified by
which the Tribunals are to complete their work are fast
approaching, it is important that we bear in mind what
is meant by those dates. In our resolutions, we called
on the Tribunals to take all possible measures to
complete all trial activities at first instance by the end
of 2008, and to complete all work in 2010. Thus we
have set an objective, and my country's main concern
is that justice be done for the victims. But those are not
cut-off dates. The Council itself envisaged that the
dates could be changed if circumstances beyond the
control of the Tribunals meant that their objectives
could not be attained. Yet some seem to view the
timetable as being set in stone, and believe that the
Tribunals should close by 2010, whether or not the
principal fugitives have been brought to justice. That is
certainly the hope of those fugitives and of those who
support them. France cannot accept such an
interpretation. The Tribunals cannot close until they
have brought to justice the main suspects of the crime
of genocide. That would be a failure, which we could
not countenance, given the hopes placed in and the
efforts made by the ad hoc Tribunals.

That does not at all mean that we should keep the
Tribunals in their current state. Their structure and
means should be adapted to their activities. That
process has already begun, and it must continue, with
the support of the Security Council. Furthermore, it is
time for the Council to deal with the residual functions
of the Tribunals, whether this relates to the serving of
sentences, the protection of witnesses, the review of
judgements, transfers to national jurisdictions or the
management of archives. Those questions are complex,
and they are very important as regards the legacy of the
ad hoc Tribunals. They must be subject to guidelines
and decisions taken by the Council over the coming
months. The Security Council must be guided by the
need to bequeath an incontrovertible and viable legacy
for the victims, their societies and regions, and for the
international community as a whole.

The ad hoc Tribunals have been pioneers. They
must also complete their mission successfully, and for
that they need our support and the full cooperation of
the States involved. For France, it is clear that, if we
want the completion strategies to be respected, we
must redouble our efforts to ensure that the fugitives
are apprehended. That is an obligation for the States in
whose territory they are hiding. We must remind them
of that in a friendly but firm manner.

