Mr. Tarawneh (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Today
we are experiencing an Arab renewal that seeks
realization of its hopes and aspirations, rejects the
current situation and calls for a better future with
dignity. After the current stage, the most pressing issue
on the way forward will require attention to the Arab
peoples' pride and sources of indignation that will need
to be resolved. I refer, in particular, to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict, which has lasted far too long. In
fact, the calls of the Arab Spring are for justice and
non-discrimination will not accept that Israel or any
other party remain above the law or international
legitimacy.

It is absolutely unacceptable that Israel would
continue to build settlements, thus undermining the
efforts to settle the conflict based on the two-State
solution and the 1967 borders. As long as short-term
political gains retain priority over long-term strategic
interests, Israel will remain incapable of building a
better future for its people. Political decision makers in
Israel need therefore to promote broader strategic
interests rather than short-term interests. Today, more
than ever, it is necessary for Israeli decision makers to
consider the future and free their foreign policy from a
siege-based mindset in order to establish good-
neighbourly relationships based on equality.

Jordan confirms its support for Palestine's
application to full membership as an independent State
on the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
That request was made to the United Nations after
Israel had impeded all international and regional efforts
towards a resumption of negotiations and had denied
the negotiations any substance due to its settlement
activities and its refusal to negotiate on the basis of the
1967 borders.

Jordan also reaffirms its support for a final
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict that
addresses all final status issues, including the issues of
settlements, Jerusalem, refugees, borders and water,
within specific timeframes.

Jordan believes that recognition of the Palestinian
State within the United Nations is neither a substitute
for direct negotiations nor is it aimed at delegitimizing
Israel, for such recognition of the Palestinian State
would leave five points of the final status negotiations
pending, which means that the conflict would continue
without being fully addressed.

Jordan therefore believes that the latest statement
of the Quartet is clear and creates a good opportunity
for returning to the negotiating table, as long as there is
full respect without conditions for its substantive
contents or without any reservations that could deny
any meaning to the negotiations. The United Nations
and the international community, as well as the
influential parties, must take action to bring pressure to
bear on Israel to ensure that it complies with the
dozens of resolutions that reaffirm the right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination on its own
national territory, including East Jerusalem, based on
the 1967 borders. There must also be a comprehensive,
just settlement of the issue of Palestinian refugees,
without which there can be no peaceful settlement.
