Mr. Edmond (Haiti) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Peruvian presidency
of the Security Council for having invited me to
participate in this important meeting, under the heading
"Peacebuilding and sustaining peace".

I welcome the relevance of the topic of the
meeting and the excellent quality of the concept note
(S/2019/540, annex) to guide our discussions. I also take
this opportunity to welcome the Secretary-General and
thank him for his outstanding efforts to achieve peace.

It is important that we continue to engage in
sustained reflection on the main requirements of
sustainable peace, taking into account each country's
particular situation. Our discussions must focus on the
three interconnected and interdependent pillars of the
Organization's action, and consider the real problems
of countries, the basic needs of populations and the
priorities set by national authorities.

There is therefore a need for efforts towards
coherence, strengthening partnerships, building new
partnerships and coordination at all levels so as to
restore trust and maximize long-term development
opportunities. It is those constructive exchanges that
will allow us to share best practices and identify
measures to improve the quality of life of the affected
populations and further promote sustainable peace. I
stress that lasting peace goes hand in hand with long-
term development and that piecemeal solutions will
always be fragile.

I commend the efforts deployed by the
Organization, particularly by the Secretary-General, to
promote peacebuilding and sustaining peace. I would
like to emphasize, however, that the situation in the
Republic of Haiti must be well understood. Council
members will naturally agree with me that my country
has not emerged from a situation of armed conflict.
After the deployment in 2004 of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, we transitioned into
the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH), which, as of 16 October, will
be replaced by the United Nations Integrated Office
in Haiti, in accordance with resolution 2476 (2019),
adopted by the Council on 25 June. I welcome once
again the adoption of the resolution, outside Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations, which is a
positive development and a recognition of the efforts
deployed by the Haitian authorities, with the support of
United Nations missions.

Undeniable progress has been made in Haiti since
2004 in a particularly difficult security and stability
context, in particular in terms of strengthening the
capacities ofthe Haitian National Police. The same is true
in the areas of democracy, justice, human rights and the
rule of law. However, much remains to be done. In that
regard, we note with interest the main tasks assigned to
the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti, pursuant
to paragraph 1 of the aforementioned resolution.

It would be remiss of me not to underscore the
fact that sustainable peace cannot be built in a context
of poverty, hunger, social inequality and exclusion.
We must therefore take into account the growing
importance of the effects of climate change and natural
disasters on the country's security and stability. That
idea was largely upheld by the Ad Hoc Advisory Group
on Haiti of the Economic and Social Council following
its last mission to the country. The Group stresses the
need for a better understanding of all issues related
to insecurity, crime, instability and peace in Haiti.
The integrated United Nations presence must, in the
final analysis, seek to support the efforts of national
authorities and civil society initiatives to address the
root causes ofmistrust, insecurity and instability, which
are without a doubt genuine obstacles to the country's
long-term development.

I have duly noted Council members' judicious
comments on and support for the transition process
from MINUJUSTH to the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti. Council members can rest assured
that the President of the Republic, His Excellency
Mr. Jovenel Mo'i'se, and the Government of the Republic
are fully aware of their responsibility to improve the
living conditions of the Haitian people and will spare
no effort to that end.

The Haitian delegation will continue to call for
establishing United Nations missions that can address
the main emergencies faced by the countries concerned.
In the case of my country, I will mention only the
security, food, environmental and humanitarian
emergencies, including cholera.

Allow me to highlight two issues that I believe
deserve further attention: first, the importance of
unconditional and sustained funding for long-term
development efforts and, secondly, the need for
sustained dialogue, with due respect for their respective
functions and powers, between the Security Council and
other organs of the United Nations system, including
the Economic and Social Council, so as to ensure that
the United Nations presence in a country such as Haiti
is integrated, balanced and in synergy with the three
pillars of the Organization's work.

In conclusion, I would like to say that the desire
to promote lasting peace necessarily entails the desire
to improve the living conditions of all the populations
concerned, while bearing in mind the slogan of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development: "Leave no
one behind".

