Mr. Mugoya (Uganda): We too welcome Mr. Vuk
Jeremie, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and
thank him for his briefing. We also thank Mr. Lamberto
Zannier, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, and Mr. Skender Hyseni for their briefings.

We welcome the new developments in the region
regarding the reconfiguration and downsizing of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) within the status-neutral framework
of resolution 1244 (1999). Given the challenges in
inter-ethnic relations still being faced by Kosovo, the
structure and strength of the reconfigured Mission for
the 2009 to 2010 period will ensure that the Mission is
better resourced for continuous mediation between the
communities and for increased support to minority
communities throughout Kosovo.

We are encouraged by the level of cooperation
between UNMIK and the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) regarding exchange of
information and coordination on issues of major
concern, and we propose that such cooperation in all
sectors should continue to be strengthened. We are also
pleased to note that EULEX has reached full
operational capacity and that it is continuing to operate
under the overall authority of the United Nations and
within the status-neutral framework of resolution 1244
(1999).

We acknowledge the increased expertise and
professional role of EULEX in the areas of police,
justice and customs and commend its contribution in
the area of the rule of law. There is need to ensure
proper functioning of the Central European Free Trade
Agreement mechanisms aimed at promoting economic
growth and development in the region. In that regard,
we call upon the authorities in Kosovo and Serbia to
resolve any outstanding issues regarding customs.

Although it appears that the overall security
situation in Kosovo during the reporting period
remained relatively calm, we are particularly
concerned by the series of inter-ethnic incidents of
Violence that occurred in the northern Mitrovica
suburbs. We call upon both parties to exercise restraint,
mutual respect and tolerance in order to harmoniously
live together in the interest of peace. We salute the
efforts of UNMIK in coordination with EULEX and
the Kosovo Force that encouraged both sides to find a
sustainable and peaceful solution. We also commend
UNMIK for its continued mediation that eventually
broke the deadlock and brought the two sides together
to agree on a pragmatic solution.

Furthermore, we welcome the important
contribution that UNMIK, together with EULEX and
the International Committee of the Red Cross, is
making in the Working Group on Missing Persons, and
we call upon all concerned to offer continued support.

Finally, we commend UNMIK for its work and
urge the international community to continue to lend
the necessary support to enable it to acceptably execute
its role of maintaining peace and stability on the
ground.

