Mr. Alkalaj (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, I would like to express my appreciation to you,
Minister Westerwelle, for presiding over this important
debate. Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes and
commends the efforts of your country as Chair of the
Security Council Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict. Our thanks also go to Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his statement and to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, and Mr. Anthony Lake, Executive
Director of UNICEF, for their comprehensive
briefings.

Bosnia and Herzegovina attaches the utmost
importance to the protection of children affected by
armed conflict, and strongly condemns all violations of
international law committed against children in conflict
situations, including recruitment, killing, maiming,
rape and other sexual violence, attacks on schools and
hospitals, and denial of humanitarian access. We wish
to emphasize the primary responsibility of States to
respect and assure the human rights of all individuals
within their territory and subject to their jurisdiction,
as provided for by relevant international law. In
addition, we stress that the Convention on the Rights of
the Child and its Optional Protocol on the involvement
of children in armed conflict, as well as the Geneva
Conventions and their Additional Protocols, constitute
the standard in the promotion and protection of the
rights of the child in armed conflict.

However, bearing in mind that all parties to
armed conflict should comply strictly with
international obligations, we are deeply concerned over
the continued Violation, with impunity, of the relevant
provisions of international law relating to the rights
and protection of children in armed conflict. All
available tools should be used to end impunity for
violations committed against children. The perpetrators
must be brought to justice and held accountable. This
will send a clear signal that Violations and abuses
against children in situations of armed conflict will not
be tolerated and will not go unpunished.

In particular, more vigorous and targeted
measures against persistent offenders must be applied
when appropriate. We call on the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict to
continue the established practice of briefing the
sanctions committees and, in particular, providing concrete
recommendations from the Secretary-General's reports and
from the conclusions of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict for country-specific situations.

We are also confident that resolutions 1882
(2009) and 1960 (2010) have contributed to
establishing practical means to bridge the difficulty of
collecting, systematizing and verifying information on
sexual violence in conflict situations, while retaining
the separate focus of each mandate. In that regard, we
also fully support the cooperation between the Special
Representatives for Children and Armed Conflict and
for Sexual Violence in Conflict regarding parties
responsible for rape and sexual violence. We also
support and emphasize the importance of the work of
the Security Council Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflicts.

While we welcome the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2011/250), we call on all parties listed in its
annexes to respect their obligations under international
humanitarian and human rights law, to halt violations,
to enter into dialogue with the United Nations, and to
commit to preparing and implementing time-bound
action plans. That dialogue needs to be facilitated in
close cooperation and with the consent of the host
Government. In the same vein, preparation and
implementation of time-bound action plans should be
carried out and coordinated efficiently with all relevant

actors in the field, including the host Government,
United Nations entities, civil society organizations and
donors. It is essential that such efforts be provided with
proper resources and funding in the countries where
monitoring and reporting mechanisms are being
implemented.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is encouraged that a
number of parties have signed action plans with the
United Nations aimed at ending the recruitment and
use of children in conflicts. We also welcome the
development of guidance on resolution 1882 (2009)
and subsequent action plans. Furthermore, we wish to
stress that effective reintegration programmes for
children recruited by armed forces are a critical
element in sustainable peace and security, and, more
importantly, in ensuring the welfare of those children.

Last year, Bosnia and Herzegovina was one of the
main sponsors of General Assembly resolution 64/290,
entitled "The right to education in emergency
situations". We would like to recall that the
resolution - which emphasizes that all possible
measures must be taken to ensure the right to education
in all phases of emergency situations, and calls for the
criminalization under domestic laws of attacks on
schools - was adopted in the General Assembly by
consensus. We are deeply concerned about the number
of attacks, as well as of threatened attacks and closures
of schools and hospitals in situations of armed conflict,
and about military use of schools and hospitals
contrary to international humanitarian law. We are
convinced that effectively addressing issues related to
attacks on schools and hospitals will ensure that
children are not denied their right to education during
or after a conflict.

In addition, I would like to discuss some elements
and facts derived from Bosnia and Herzegovina's
experience, reminding the Council that among the
more than 10,000 people who were killed in the
besieged city of Sarajevo were 1,500 children, as well
as many other children throughout Bosnia and
Herzegovina. They were innocent children who will
never attend school or play again. Related to that was
the reburial yesterday, on the sixteenth anniversary of
the genocide in Srebrenica, of an 11-year-old boy,
Nesib Muhic', and his 15-year-old brother Hasib, who
were among the 613 newly identified bodies. And they
were not the only ones. Let us, from this Chamber,
send a strong message that such crimes against
children will be firmly condemned and punished, and
will not be tolerated.

We therefore firmly believe that the Security
Council should remain committed to protecting
children in armed conflict, including through
determination to ensure the full implementation of and
respect for its resolutions on this issue. Bosnia and
Herzegovina stands ready to contribute to that aim.

