The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Egypt, Turkey and
Ukraine, in which they request to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mrs.
Kalajdzisalihovic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a
place at the Council table; Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia),
Mr. Elaraby (Egypt), Mr. Gelem (Turkey) and Mr.
Zlenko (Ukraine) took the places reserved for them at
the side of the Council chamber.

The President: I have received a request dated 8
September 1995 from Ambassador Dragomir Djokic to
address the Council. With the consent of the Council, I
would propose to invite him to address the Council in the
course of the discussion of the item before it.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting
in accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following documents: S/1995/776, letter
dated 7 September 1995 from the Permanent Representative
of the Russian Federation to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting the text of a
statement issued by the President of the Russian Federation;
and S/1995/778, letter dated 7 September 1995 from the
charge d'affaires ad interim of the Permanent Mission of
Yugoslavia to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council.

Members of the Council have received photocopies
of a letter dated 8 September 1995 from the
representatives of France, Germany, the Russian
Federation, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America
addressed to the Secretary-General, which will be issued
as document 8/1995/780.


