Mr. Rivard (Canada): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to contribute to the
Council's deliberations on the challenges facing
contemporary United Nations peacekeeping operations.
For Canada, this is an issue of primary importance.

Let me first acknowledge the sacrifices of those
who serve in United Nations peacekeeping operations,
including the men and women who have lost their lives
in the cause of peace this past year. United Nations
personnel continually rise to meet new challenges with
professionalism and dedication amid difficult and often
dangerous conditions. Today's bomb attack outside the
main United Nations office in Abuja reminded us again
of the sacrifices made and challenges faced by the
brave women and men who work for peace and
security. We condemn this terrorist attack on the United
Nations and we extend our sincerest condolences to the
families of the victims and to the Government and
people of Nigeria.
Indeed, the United Nations efforts have
contributed to a number of key successes over the past
year. These include the peaceful conduct of the
referendum on the future status of Southern Sudan and
the re-establishment of public services and security in
Haiti after the earthquake, followed by the peaceful
conclusion of Haiti's presidential elections.

This said, United Nations personnel continue to
be tested by the complex operational environments in
which they work. These environments are often
characterized by multidimensional challenges and
asymmetric threats requiring an agile response from
our personnel. There remain a number of critical issues
facing contemporary peace operations. I would like to
focus my remarks today on three issues of particular
relevance to the Security Council: responding to the
gap in expectations, generating capabilities, and
building a comprehensive doctrinal framework.

First, let me address the issue of expectations.
Peacekeeping forces are called upon time and again to
perform a wide range of mandated tasks, from
protecting civilians in the lingering violence of
post-conflict settings to monitoring elections and
capacity-building of national security elements. Such
tasks require mandates and forces designed for
flexibility, responsiveness and mobility - in short,
military, police and civilian personnel fully able to
adapt to changing conditions on the ground.

Unfortunately, complex mandates are often not
matched with either sufficient or the most appropriate
capacities. We must also acknowledge that there will
always be limits to the sources of personnel and funds
needed to meet all of the needs that we believe should
be addressed. The Council must wisely balance the
expectations laid out in its mandates with the realities
of what can be readily achieved with the capabilities
available. The Council must also recognize that the
complex challenges typical of these environments
require solutions that cannot be realized in the short-
term.

Complex mandates therefore demand personnel
who are well trained and well equipped, are devoted to
missions, and have the full flexibility to be employed
across the spectrum of tasks and the breadth of the
field of operations, as the mission leadership requires.
We should note the recommendations contained in the
report (S/2011/85) of the Senior Advisory Group on
civilian capacities appointed by the Secretary General,
which lays out some proposals for the recruitment,
training, deployment and coordination of expertise
across United Nations missions.

In order for personnel to achieve the agility
required to carry out ever more complex mandates, all
Member States must assume responsibility for the
expectations these mandates create. This includes host
Governments, which must bear their share of
responsibility for ensuring that the mission achieves
the results that the population needs. These
expectations can only be managed effectively if the
Security Council ensures that, from the earliest
planning stages, there is a meaningful dialogue
between the Council, Member States - in particular
troop- and police-contributing countries and host
Governments - and the Secretariat.

(spoke in French)

Secondly, producing the desired effect within
multidimensional missions demands adequate
capabilities. The New Horizon initiative rightly focuses
on improving capabilities, streamlining and increasing
effectiveness at the level of Headquarters and in the
field. These two elements are complementary. Member
States also need to ensure that the achievement of the
major objectives of the New Horizon initiative is
maintained so that, in the mid-term, the United Nations
can effectively generate the capabilities needed to
deliver the more complex and diverse responsibilities
within existing budgetary capacities.

Thirdly, progress has been made in developing
policy doctrine and norms for peacekeeping personnel,
but much work still lies ahead to build a solid doctrinal
framework for all personnel. Without this, effective
recruitment standards and pre-deployment training and
the matching of capabilities with assignments cannot
follow. The international community can ill afford to
fail in sustaining efforts to standardize practices,
streamline management, deepen expertise and clarify
roles and responsibilities within the United Nations
system and with partners. Achieving sustainability in
operations depends upon such accountability.
Moreover, the challenges facing peacekeeping missions
continue to evolve. Without the revised framework for
peacekeeping that New Horizon proposes, there is a
danger of a widening disconnect between the Council's
response to emerging, unexpected challenges, and the
tools and capabilities available.
In closing let me underscore that we, the States
Members of the United Nations, must find common
approaches to strengthen all facets of peace operations.
Canada remains committed to this end.

