Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): We
should like at the outset to congratulate the Republic
of Kazakhstan on its assumption of the presidency of
the Council for this month and to thank you, Sir, for
having convened this open debate on the situation in
the Middle East.

Furthermore, we congratulate Kuwait, Cote
d'Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, the Netherlands, Poland
and Peru, which were elected as members of the Security
Council in 2018 in order to help maintain international
peace and security. We thank the countries leaving
the Council: Egypt, Italy, Japan, Ukraine, Senegal and
Uruguay. We would also like to thank Mr. Mladenov
for his comprehensive briefing this morning on the
situation in the Middle East.

My delegation supports the statements made by the
representatives of Venezuela, on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries; the United Arab Emirates,
on behalf of the Group of Arab States; and Turkey, on
behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.

The Republic of Iraq reiterates its unwavering
position in favour ofajust and comprehensive settlement
of the Palestinian question based on the establishment
of the independent Palestinian state within the borders
of 4 June 1967, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital,
in accordance with the Arab Peace Initiative and the
international legitimacy. It is now more important than
ever to maintain the prospects for peace. We warn against
the danger of mishandling the Palestinian question and
allowing some to present that cause as a religious war,
which fuels hatred and increases violence. That will not
be conducive to the peace to which we all aspire.

Iraq has always supported the cause of the
Palestinian people and their just struggle to attain their
legitimate rights. We are particularly concerned about
the dire humanitarian situation of the Palestinians
caused by Israel's ongoing flouting of international
decisions and its continued acts of aggression, of which
women, the elderly and children are the victims. The
overall infrastructure is undermined and the holy sites
in Al-Quds and Al-Aqsa mosque are also impacted. That
is why the Security Council must play its role in ending
such unprecedented acts, protecting the Palestinians
and ensuring that the occupied territories are returned
to the 1967 borders, in line with resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973).

In addition, we condemn all illegal Israeli
settlement activities, which are a major obstacle to
peace in the region, while the Arab side acts in good
faith towards ending this prolonged conflict. We need
to achieve a just peace that will have a positive impact
on the management of resources and the economy, and
strengthen security in the Middle East.

We call on all Member States to shoulder their
responsibilities by taking actions that will restore the
Palestinian people's faith in international law as the
best means to realize our rights and freedom, and to
prevent further deterioration, which could be exploited
by extremists to exacerbate the situation of violence,
terrorism and widespread unrest in the region and
elsewhere. We must all strive to find a solution to the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict.

We call also on those countries that have not yet
recognized the Palestinian State, with Jerusalem
as its capital and within the 1967 borders, to do so
without delay. That would be an investment in peace,
in line with the long-standing international consensus
and international commitment, and a significant
contribution to preserving the prospects for peace and
to putting an end to activities that undermine efforts to
find a just and lasting solution, based on the relevant
United Nations resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative
of 2002.

Iraq is of the view that we must take advantage of
this impetus and the renewed international interest in
the Palestinian question. We should go forward with the
direct and serious negotiations under the auspices ofthe
United States, the European Union and the Arab States.
We must take advantage of the rapprochement of and
the unity between the Palestinian factions, represented
today by the Palestinian Authority. However, we should
ensure that the outcome of the negotiations will be
respected by both parties.

To conclude, my Government values the efforts
of the Secretary-General, his Special Coordinator,
Mr. Mladenov, and members of the Security Council
in launching initiatives to achieve a comprehensive and
lasting peace and a solution to all final-status issues on
the basis of the Security Council resolutions. We urge
the international parties to the peace negotiations to
expedite their work and overcome the difficulties that
hinder the just and comprehensive solution.

