Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank you, Madam President, for convening this
emergency open debate and enabling all United Nations
Member States to share their views on and concerns
about the Ebola outbreak in West Africa. Its implications
and its threat it involves all of us and demands a global
response. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General, Dr. David Nabarro, Senior United Nations
System Coordinator for Ebola; Ms. Margaret Chan,
Director General of the World Health Organization;
and Mr. Jackson Niamah of Medecins Sans Frontieres
for their thoughts, their knowledge and, above all, for
their commitment. I would like to express how deeply
we respect all the work they are doing to try to halt the
spread of this serious epidemic. On behalf of the people
and Government of the Republic of Argentina, I would
like to convey to the thousands of victims and their
Governments our deep sorrow and solidarity. There can
be no question that Argentina will also cooperate with
this new mission, whose cause belongs to the whole
world.

Unfortunately, this is not the first time that the
Security Council has met to deal with a situation that
has arisen owing to a public health crisis. We should
recall that the Council has dealt with the impact of
HIV/AIDS and its implications for public security
conditions in various societies. The gravity of the
current Ebola epidemic unquestionably justifies our
meeting today. If we do not respond with urgency
and from the heart, with health policies on treatment,
prevention and education, the living conditions of
peoples around the world may be dramatically affected,
as the lives of thousands of people in the countries of
West Africa are being affected. And, fundamentally, if
we do not act with urgency and commitment, we will
have to answer to our consciences and our institutional
commitment.

Like the Secretary-General, Argentina believes
that Ebola is not merely a health problem. It is a
multidimensional reality, and it must be dealt with
accordingly. We recognize that this epidemic has the
potential to kill the present and wound the future,
eroding the possibilities of human social and economic
development, which is at the root of most of the
conflicts we deal with in the Council, and which may
have consequences for security. Indeed, the epidemic's
epicentre is a region that has suffered from severe
conflicts, and where, after expending great effort,
courage and intelligence, the people have begun to have
better prospects for the future. Tragically, this outbreak
of Ebola is jeopardizing that progress, and if it is not
contained very soon it could have worse humanitarian,
economic and social consequences for the countries
affected, as well as for their stability, democracy and
security.

For that reason, we believe that in this time ofdespair,
uncertainty and fear for so many, we cannot be selfish.
We must pool all our efforts under the coordination of
the United Nations, and not compete among ourselves.
For that reason, Argentina supported and sponsored the
adoption today of resolution 2177 (2014) by a Council
that has been supporting the stabilization of some ofthe
most deeply affected countries and that cannot stand on
the sidelines as the international community responds.
Because while hunger, poverty and sickness do not
directly cause conflicts, it is also true that situations of
insecurity may arise in the wake of so many injustices.

Argentina believes that we should establish
appropriate cooperation between the various bodies
under the terms laid down in the Charter of the
United Nations. It is important to remember that the
responsibility for dealing substantively with the causes
and consequences of this epidemic is in the purview of
other entities and agencies within the United Nations
system, such as the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council and specialized agencies such as the
World Health Organization. For that reason, while we
support cooperation on the part ofthe Security Council,
we also believe that the General Assembly should have
the responsibility of responding to the Secretary-
General's proposal to establish a special mission in the
region. I am certain that Argentina will work with all
the urgency and responsibility needed to ensure that the
United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response
will become a reality in the coming days.

In conclusion, I cannot fail to stress that an outbreak
of this nature could have been tackled more effectively
if the countries of the region had had more solid,
complete health-care systems with better infrastructure
and better-trained human resource capacities. But what
we are seeing is the reality of our developing countries.
It is the reality of poverty, not the inevitability of
destiny. A little less than three years ago, in this very
Chamber, Ms. Chan expressed her concern about the
differences between rich and poor countries, pointing
out that the gap in health-care spending between them
ranged from as little as $1 per person to nearly $7,000
(see S/PV.6668). The difference in life expectancy
between some countries exceeded 40 years.

What we are looking at is inequality and injustice.
The challenge facing us is about a fairer distribution of
wealth and reform of the international financial system
in order to create financing for development that is
based on solidarity and cooperation, not just handouts
to alleviate suffering. We must look at the weight of the
burden of sovereign debt. The United Nations agencies
should have adequate budgets that enable them to
operate effectively.

Finally, we would like to convey our respect for
all those who are working, with all their heart, at the
very heart of the epidemic, to halt this scourge, and to
highlight the support being provided by many countries
and organizations for that task. We are also grateful to
the Secretary-General for his leadership and thank him
and the Organization's agencies.

