Mr. Poukre-Kono (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): I thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Youssef Mahmoud, for
the briefing he has just given us on the last report of
the Secretary-General (S/2010/611) on the activities of
the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad (MINURCAT), the mandate of
which expires on 31 December, pursuant to resolution
1923 (2010).

I note that the report contains a certain number of
recommendations and lessons learned for future
peacekeeping missions. Its lessons are therefore a
source of inspiration not just for the peacekeeping and
peacebuilding organs, but also for States. Indeed, we
stress that a series of initial misunderstandings were
ultimately overcome. We thank Mr. Victor da Silva
Angelo, the previous Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, who helped to organize
MINURCAT.

The Central African Republic notes with
satisfaction the withdrawal of MINURCAT, which
began on 15 November with the closing of the two
military camps in Birao. We acknowledge that
MINURCAT discharged its tasks within the limits of
its capacities and contributed to ensuring a relatively
stable environment in the north-east of the country
through its deterrent presence; by assisting refugees,
internally displaced persons, and humanitarian
agencies; and by resolving inter-ethnic conflicts. The
Central African Republic has benefited from the
assistance of MINURCAT in establishing its authority
over the region. We appreciate the positive role it
played throughout its mandate.

The announced withdrawal of MINURCAT led to
debates within the Security Council about the follow-
up stages, given the ongoing threats in the north-east
due to the limited capacities of the Central African
forces, the fragility of State institutions and the
persistence of insecurity. The idea of a transition
period was even mentioned. Recommendations were
3
made by the international community to strengthen and
deploy the Mission for the Consolidation of Peace in
the Central African Republic, while the Central African
Government pleaded for the operational capacities of
its own armed forces to be strengthened. Time,
however, was all too limited for it to achieve all its
wishes.

While the Government gradually prepared to
deploy troops to Birao, that city was attacked on
24 November, to our collective surprise. The attackers
were armed with heavy weaponry, including
14.5 millimetre bi-tube machine guns, 12.7 millimetre
rounds and mounted rocket launchers, while the
Central African troops had nothing more than
Kalashnikovs. There was no comparison. Moreover,
the rebel groups came from Darfur to join up with the
Convention of Patriots for Justice and Peace (CPJP).
The Central Africans, with whom we are very familiar,
do not have such sophisticated weapons.

We believe that they want to reproduce the
situation in Darfur in north-eastern Central African
Republic, which is a very important area geopolitically
and geostrategically and the soft underbelly of the
region where the rebels of Chad, the Sudan and the
Central African Republic can converge easily. We
would add that the rebels of the Lord's Resistance
Army occupy four prefectures in the Central African
Republic.

The Birao event does not only concern the CPJP
and its search for weaponry; it also endangers
international peace and security in the frontier regions.
We ask the members of the Security Council to take
these facts into consideration and to be alert to a
possible rebel coalition.

As members of the Security Council know, the
Central African Republic is at a crossroads. It is
obligated not only to hold successful general elections
in 2011, but also to guarantee security throughout its
territory. The Government has chosen the electoral
period in which the people shall do their civic duty to
coincide with the dry season, which is also a dangerous
season rife with armed groups, rebels, bandits and
road-blockers. That reality was reflected in the attack
on Birao. However, we note the implementation of
certain regional agreements with respect to this
situation, for which we are grateful.

Calm has now been restored. On 10 December,
the President of the Republic even visited Birao to
encourage the armed forces and reassure the people of
the area. We reiterate once again the appeal made here
on 10 August and 20 October by Minister for Foreign
Affairs Antoine Gambi to the international community
to support the Central African armed forces with
equipment, transportation, observation capacities and
military materiel so that they can accomplish their
mission with enthusiasm and efficiency. The same
request has been addressed to friendly countries.

We have yet to receive a response to that appeal
as the Government prepares to enter a critical period.
We have expressed our ongoing desire for
reinforcements for our security and defence forces,
which cannot remain passive and ill-equipped in the
face of regional forces that are very well trained and
equipped. The major responsibility falls to our troops,
who must be properly equipped if they are to fulfil
their sovereign duty and be proactive in combat.
Regional missions are observer missions with very
limited mandates. The withdrawal of MINURCAT
would therefore appear to be an opportunity to launch
security sector reform and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration. We therefore call on
the international community to spare no effort in
helping us to move these processes forward.

In conclusion, we thank MINURCAT and all
contributing countries that have helped us through this
time, howsoever brief. We thank the Secretary-General
for his very useful and enlightening report, and express
our gratitude to Mr. Mahmoud, who has devoted
himself to the Central African Republic through the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the
Central African Republic and MINURCAT.

Attention must not be withdrawn from the
situation in the north-east of the country, which
remains fragile. We request the assistance of the
international community and ask friendly countries to
pursue their efforts to equip our security and defence
forces and to ensure a smooth electoral process by the
deadline established.

