Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): May I
begin by congratulating you for assuming the Council's
presidency this month and thank you for having
convened this timely and important meeting. Our
thanks also go to the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative, Mr. Koenigs, as well as to their
colleagues in the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan for their tireless and dedicated efforts in
Afghanistan. We wish Mr. Koenigs success in his
future endeavours.

We have carefully studied the latest report of the
Secretary-General on Afghanistan and have taken note
of various important issues contained therein.
Undoubtedly, the people and the Government of
Afghanistan, under the wise and dedicated leadership
of President Karzai, have made tremendous efforts and
great progress in their journey towards peace, security
and development in the past several years. The report
before us well indicates the encouraging efforts and
valuable accomplishments made by Afghanistan in
various fields such as economic growth, education,
health, the building of roads and rural development.
We commend the Afghans for these remarkable
achievements, which have been attained despite the
immensely difficult situation in the country.

Notwithstanding these positive developments,
Afghanistan is still suffering from various daunting
challenges, including the increasing insecurity and
terrorist activities by the Taliban, Al-Qaida, drug-
traffickers, illegal armed groups and criminals.
According to the Secretary General's report, rates of
terrorist violence this year are at least 20 per cent
higher than in 2006, and insecurity has hindered the
establishment of the rule of law, the provision of basic
services to the Afghan people and the full enjoyment of
their human rights and fundamental freedoms.

We are of the view that, as mentioned in the
Secretary-General's report, a key to addressing the
insecurity in Afghanistan and sustaining the security
gains in the country in the long term, is to increase the
capability, autonomy and integrity of the Afghan
National Security Forces, especially the Afghan
National Police and the Army. Clearly, providing
home-grown security and delegating the security
responsibilities to Afghan security forces are of
paramount importance and can help address the
insecurity, which is, unfortunately, so prevalent in
certain parts of the country today.

Also, certain important steps, such as allocating
the amount of money that is expended for the presence
of foreign forces to the reconstruction of infrastructure
and capacity-building in Afghanistan and utilizing
regional potential for the reconstruction of the country,
can equally contribute to the improvement of the
general situation in Afghanistan. Here, I would like to
support the statement made by the Ambassador of
Afghanistan that financial assistance to the
Government of Afghanistan would enable it to deliver
social services, education, health and poverty-
alleviation in the country and is vital in combating
terrorism and drug-trafficking. I would also like to
emphasize that the international financial institutions
should provide adequate financial and technical
assistance for such purposes.

The Islamic Republic of Iran, as a nation afflicted
by the Taliban's heinous terrorism, has always strongly
condemned that group's terrorist acts. Besides the
Taliban's carnage committed against Iranian diplomats
and journalists in 1998, shocking the whole world, the
international community has witnessed, even as
recently as in the past few months, terrorists, mostly
those affiliated with the Taliban and Al-Qaida,
infiltrating into Iran's eastern parts, killing innocent
civilians and law enforcement personnel and, in some
cases, abducting foreign tourists. We, therefore, have a
vital interest in a stable, secure and prosperous
Afghanistan and in an Afghanistan free from terrorism
and extremism.

By the same token, we reject certain efforts to
appease the Taliban terrorists. Foreign forces will
ultimately leave Afghanistan, but the impact of their
misled policies in this area will remain there, afflicting
the Afghans and the region long after they leave the
country. The fact that during the past two years
terrorists have seemed more emboldened in their
crimes in Afghanistan indicates that, in combating
terrorism and insecurity in that country, contacts with
those responsible for insecurity and terrorist activities
could be wrongly interpreted as rewarding terrorists
and criminals and will prove counterproductive and
dangerous for Afghanistan, for the region and for the
whole international community.

Undoubtedly, the narcotics problem is one of the
most serious challenges in Afghanistan, with
consequences that go far beyond the borders of that
country. The increase in poppy cultivation and heroin
production in Afghanistan has hindered the
advancement of the country towards development and
has put the security of Afghanistan, along with that of
the region and beyond, in danger. Moreover, narcotics,
as the source of finance for terrorism, have contributed
to supporting terrorists, extremists and illegal groups
that are attempting to destabilize the Afghan
Government. Narcotics have encouraged alliances of
convenience between narco-interests and terrorists. As
stressed by all of us at the recent high-level meeting on
Afghanistan in New York, breaking this link is vital to
creating a stable, prosperous and democratic
Afghanistan.
According to the annual survey of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, poppy cultivation
increased by 17 per cent in 2007 and opium production
by as much as 34 per cent. That increase and the
rampant drug trafficking indicate that the preventive
and countering measures have not yielded the expected
results and that the international community has,
unfortunately, so far failed to curb this menace. It also
confirms the conclusion of the Secretary-General's
report that the implementation of the national drug
control strategy in Afghanistan has, unfortunately, been
unsatisfactory. To counter that menace, a more resolute
approach by the international community -
particularly those foreign forces in the country that
have been entrusted with certain responsibilities in that
regard - and more serious and concerted efforts by the
Afghan authorities are essential.

On its part, the Islamic Republic of Iran has
fought a costly war against drug traffickers. We are
fighting that enormous threat with utmost seriousness
and determination so that our own people, the people
of the region and those living thousands of miles away
in Europe and elsewhere will not be affected by the
scourge of narcotic drugs. We have fought that war
almost single-handedly and have lost about 4,000 of
our great and brave law enforcement personnel, who
have sacrificed their lives on behalf of the whole
international community. Iran has also engaged in
trilateral agreements and regional arrangements with
regard to joint border operations and information-
sharing in that regard.

To the knowledge of all, Iran has been one of the
most serious and sincere supporters of the Afghan
nation and Government over the past several years as
they have endeavoured to develop their democratic
institutions, to establish their constitution, to rebuild
their country's infrastructure and, in sum, to build a
new stable, secure, developed and prosperous
Afghanistan. We have been firm and unwavering in our
support for President Karzai and his Government, and
continue to be so. That was recently underlined by
President Karzai. As I mentioned before, we strongly
believe that a secure and developed Afghanistan that is
free from terrorism and extremism is essential for the
security and stability of the region and for our own
country's security.

Our nation has openheartedly embraced millions
of its Afghan brothers and sisters as refugees for
almost three decades, despite the huge burdens and
certain other difficulties that the refugee issue has
created for our country. Also, Iran was among the first
countries to make its sincere contribution to
Afghanistan's reconstruction after the collapse of the

Taliban. We actively participated in the Tokyo
conference and made a pledge of $560 million, which
is the largest pledge in terms of the per capita income
of donor countries. In that regard, our country has thus
far granted about $300 million to Afghanistan for the
implementation of various important projects in the
areas of infrastructure, technical and educational
services, and financial and in-kind assistance. We have
also allocated almost the same amount to a line of
credit for the reconstruction of the country. Moreover,
we have just started our second phase of development
assistance to Afghanistan, amounting to $50 million at
a demanding time, while several important agreements,
including a general agreement on bilateral cooperation
and on capacity-building of Afghan ministries, were
also signed between the two countries during our
President's visit to Kabul in August 2007.

Before concluding, I wish to reiterate that we
commend and fully support the central role played by
the United Nations in Afghanistan and the continuation
of that essential role in leading the international
community's efforts in the reconstruction process of
that country.

