Mr. Mminele (South Africa): We thank the
delegation of the People's Republic of China
for organizing today's open debate on the topic
"Maintenance of international peace and security:
reflect on history, reaffirm the strong commitment to
the purposes and principles ofthe Charter of the United
Nations". My delegation welcomes this debate as it
extends to the very core of the strategic objectives of
South Africa's foreign policy, namely, the protection of
territorial integrity, sovereignty and enhancing respect
for the provisions of international law.

South Africa associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Mozambique on
behalf of the African Union as well as the representative
of Zimbabwe on behalf of the Southern African
Development Community, and we wish to make the
following additional remarks in our national capacity.

It was almost 70 years ago, in 1945, when the
Charter of the United Nations was introduced to the
global community. One of the most pertinent articles,
which is relevant to this debate and to the Organization's
future existence is Article 2.1, which notes that "The
Organization is based on the principle of the sovereign
equality of all its Members". That is self-explanatory in
all its pronouncements.

That provision prohibits all use of force against
another State unless that use of force is one ofthe limited
exceptions provided by international law - such as
military action in self-defence and military action
taken as authorized by the Security Council - or has
become part of customary international law binding
all States. The actions of Governments that are not
consistent with this provision show an unacceptable
disregard for international law and the key principles of
State sovereignty and territorial integrity.

South Africa would like to reaffirm the importance
of prioritizing the attainment of the African Union
(AU) Peace and Security Architecture in all parts of
Africa through the collective efforts of the member
countries. In this regard, we encourage the Security
Council to deepen its relationship with regional and
subregional organizations at the institutional level.
We further welcome the ongoing efforts to improve
the institutional relations between the United Nations
and the AU characterized mainly by the good working
relations between the secretariats of the two organs.
The United Nations representative office in Addis
Ababa is an invaluable conduit through which greater
policy coherence between the United Nations and the
AU can be achieved.

On our continent, the norms underpinning the
African Union peace and security regime resonate
directly with the Charter of the United Nations. That
stance is reflected in the African Union Constitutive
Act and the AU Protocol Relating to the Establishment
of the Peace and Security Council. Both these doctrines
assign high priority to the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of its member States. At the same time it
should be noted that although the AU Constitutive
Act does acknowledge that a State has the principal
responsibility for protecting its citizens, the AU has
the right to intervene for human protection purposes.
As noted in article 4 (h) of the Constitutive Act, the
Union has the right to intervene in a member State
pursuant to a decision of the Assembly in respect of
grave circumstances, namely war crimes, genocide and
crimes against humanity.

The AU has adapted and reformed according to
changing circumstances and realisms. My delegation
calls on this body to do the same and adapt to present-day
realities. We however appreciate the efforts undertaken
by the United Nations to review the peacebuilding
architecture and a comprehensive assessment of the
state of United Nations peace operations. This for us
is an important step towards addressing the changing
nature of conflict.

On the protection of civilians, we wish to underline
that it remains the primary responsibility of States to
protect civilians within their borders. Accountability
must first and foremost be sought at the national level.
Failing that, the international community has a collective
responsibility to act using mechanisms at its disposal
including independent fact-finding commissions and
commissions of inquiry. We would also reiterate that
Member States should commit governing and principles
of the United Nations Charter, as well as to basic norms
governing international relations. States should also
commit themselves to the noble cause of maintaining
international peace and security, promoting fairness
and justice to prevent conflict from erupting.

In conclusion, the fact that this open debate comes
in the year that marks the seventieth anniversary of the
founding of the United Nations is highly significant
to my delegation, as South Africa's expectations
are clearly defined regarding movement towards
meaningful reform of this organ, which at present
remains unrepresentative and has not conformed to
global realities. South Africa remains committed to the
Ezulwini Consensus, on which African countries speak
with one voice for Security Council reform. Africa calls
for the expansion of the Security Council in both the
permanent and non-permanent categories from 15 to
26 seats, with Africa getting no less than 2 permanent
seats and 5 non-permanent seats.

As the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations continues to deliberate on matters that
directly affect the peacekeepers, I should like to
conclude by commending all personnel involved in
peacekeeping missions as well as civil society groups
for the service they perform.

