Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I thank you, Sir,
for convening this debate on the work of the Al Qaeda
and Taliban sanctions Committee, as well as
Ambassador Mufioz, Chairman of the Committee, for
his briefing on the activities of the Committee and the
Monitoring Group.

Terrorism remains a global threat requiring a
coordinated international response. In recent years, by
carrying out terrorist attacks in more than 10 Member
States on four continents, Al Qaeda has shown the
magnitude of the threat it poses to all States Members
of the United Nations and to the fundamental values of
humankind, such as the right to live in peace and
security, mutual tolerance among peoples and nations,
the rule of law, justice and social progress. It has
therefore become clear that the campaign against
terrorism must be pursued in full understanding of its
nature and should be based on international
cooperation.

In recent years, the significance of targeted
sanctions as a policy instrument for meeting the
objectives of deterrence and prevention has
progressively increased. The Security Council has
played an important role in filling the gaps in counter-
terrorism strategy. Its relevant resolutions impose
uniform, mandatory counter-terrorism obligations on
all States and have established mechanisms to monitor
compliance and to facilitate the provision of technical
assistance.

The Al Qaeda and Taliban sanctions Committee
has played a very important and leading role in that
extraordinary endeavour. The monitoring team is also
of vital importance to ensuring the long-term success
of the Committee itself. In addition to analysing means
of improving the level of submission of national
reports and their quality, the team has an equally
important role in assessing how effective existing
Security Council resolutions and national and
international legislation have been in combating
terrorism financing, hindering the movement of
terrorists and upholding arms embargoes and related
sanctions.

In that regard, we encourage the monitoring team
to develop further its working relationship with the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), and all
relevant international agencies and regional and
subregional organizations in order to avoid duplication
in the discharge of their respective mandates.

We fully concur with the assessment made by
Chairman Mufioz regarding the priorities of the agenda
of the Committee, particularly the need for further
improvement in its quality. We believe, however, that
further action is needed if the full implementation of
relevant Security Council resolutions on combating
terrorism is to achieve its objectives. Building capacity
in a large number of States remains a key, urgent
priority, and that alone will enhance the capacity of
States.

In the view of the Angolan delegation, assistance
to States in combating terrorism is a critical issue,
particularly for those emerging from armed conflict.
The Committee should carefully consider the best
means to build capacity in those States for the fight
against terrorism, particularly in areas such as customs,
border control, intelligence gathering, law enforcement
and the financing sector, permitting those countries to
trace flows of laundered money to finance terrorism
and other criminal activities. Capacity-building would
also allow more effective monitoring of the
implementation of arms embargoes and related
sanctions.

The ability of regional and subregional
organizations, the private sector and the financial
institutions to become more proactive in preventing
and combating terrorism is also a significant factor. In
that regard, we recall the important precedent set by
the Kimberley Process in addressing the role of natural
resources in armed conflicts and in the implementation
of arms embargoes and related sanctions. The lessons
learned in dealing with the Kimberley Process could
certainly be useful to the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999). In that
regard, we underline the importance of resolution 1526
(2004).

To conclude, Ambassador Mufioz, his staff and
the secretariat of the Monitoring Group have
effectively brought the Committee from vision to
reality. I therefore seize this opportunity to welcome
the incoming Chairman and to reiterate Angola's
commitment to the goals set out in the relevant
resolutions on combating terrorism. As an outgoing
member of the Security Council, I would like once
again to thank Ambassador Mufioz for his inspiring
leadership of the Committee, which demonstrates a real
commitment to the high objectives of the global
campaign to combat terrorism - a global, mounting
threat which can be faced only if we act together to
reinforce multilateralism.

