Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Let me join previous
speakers in thanking Under-Secretary-General Susana
Malcorra, Mr. Jean-Marie Gue'henno and Ambassador
Eugene-Richard Gasana for their valuable
presentations. We appreciate the comprehensive review
undertaken by the Senior Advisory Group on post-
conflict civilian capacities, and we wish Ms. Malcorra
success in her endeavours as the leader of the Steering
Group established by the Secretary-General.

Brazil welcomes this exchange of views on the
recommendations presented by the Senior Advisory
Group. Given the importance of this issue and its
system-wide reach, we would encourage further
consultations in a broader setting that can incorporate
the views and inputs of the wider membership.

The review is an opportunity to translate into
practice the idea that peacekeeping and peacebuilding
are parts of an integrated and non-sequential process.
Those dimensions are complementary and mutually
reinforcing. We cannot lose sight of the main objective
of the review, which is to better address the needs of
countries emerging from conflicts. In this regard, we
appreciate the priority given by the report (see S/2011/85) to the use of national capacities and their
development. When international experts are deployed,
they must be able to train local personnel and foment
their use by the local Government. Just as important,
those sent to the field are expected to deal with and
understand the local reality with due regard for the
priorities established by national stakeholders.

The sustainability of the gains in security and
stability achieved with the help of peacekeeping
missions greatly depends upon the capacity of the local
Government to resume its core functions. Any
successful exit strategy must therefore be accompanied
by the development of national capacities and the
strengthening of local institutions and political
processes. It is thus very important that peacekeeping
mandates be supplemented as soon as possible by
peacebuilding activities that can help to strengthen
national institutions and to develop local expertise. An
effective deployment of civilian capacities can give
United Nations peacekeeping missions a lighter
footprint, as envisioned in the Brahimi report
(S/2000/809).

The deployment of military and police forces is
one of the distinctive characteristics of peacekeeping.
However, the role of the civilian component should not
be underestimated. We strongly believe that the
deployment of civilian experts to support economic
and social policies in the early stages of recovery can
create the conditions for a long-lasting peace. We agree
that partnerships are an important tool for expanding
capacities in post-conflict countries. Cooperation
among countries facing similar difficulties is of
particular relevance, which makes it preferable to seek
international capacities in the same region or to
stimulate South-South cooperation, as already
underscored by previous speakers.

The use of experts within the modality of experts
on mission and the establishment of civilian support
packages in close coordination with Member States are
interesting options that could enable developing
countries to offer more civilian expertise, including in
aforementioned areas such as finance management,
public administration, health and education. In the
context of United Nations peacekeeping, these
proposals could contribute to more effective mandate
implementation.

Brazil stands ready to contribute to the
implementation of the recommendations presented by
the Senior Advisory Group with a view to enhancing
our collective capacity to help post-conflict countries
reach sustainable peace.

