Ms. Viaud: First, I would like to thank the Council
for the invitation to provide an update on the situation
in Haiti. Haiti is not only the country I was born in, but
also the country I have dedicated my life to serving.

My name is Loune Viaud, and I am the Executive
Director of Zanmi Lasante, one of Haiti's largest
non-governmental health-care providers and sister
organization to Partners in Health, based in Boston.
Partners in Health is a social justice organization
providing access to education and health care to
communities across four continents.

I am honoured to have the opportunity to brief the
Security Council today on the situation of women and
girls in Haiti. I would like to thank MADRE and the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security
for their efforts to ensure that the voices of women in
civil society are heard.

Over the past 30 years, Haiti has been through
significant challenges, including the devastating 2010
earthquake and cholera outbreak, from which we
continue to recover. We have also seen a number of
positive changes in my country: roads exist where they
never did before, access to health services has increased,
and we are seeing better partnerships between local
organizations and their foreign counterparts on health
and education. Yet much more remains to be completed.
The United Nations promised to right Haiti's wrongs in
2014, four years after the cholera outbreak began, and
we hold it to this promise.

My briefing today will focus on three specific
areas: addressing inequality, sexual and gender-based
violence and women's political participation.

Addressing the root causes of conflict has been
increasingly highlighted by this body and the broader
United Nations system as an important priority.
Years after the United Nations first deployed a peace
operation in Haiti, my country serves as an example of
how failure to do so can contribute to instability.

Today women in Haiti face barriers to achieving
basic access to services, education and health care. For
example, Haiti has one ofthe highest maternal mortality
rates in the world: 359 women die for every 100,000
live births in Haiti. Watching a woman die because she
reached us too late, or seeing families devastated after

losing a mother, a wife or a daughter in childbirth, are
images one cannot forget. They haunt me, and they
should haunt all of us. Childbirth should not be a death
sentence in Haiti.

Cancer is another issue that primarily affects
women in Haiti; 75 per cent of our patients are women.
In partnership with the Haitian Ministry of Health,
Zanmi Lasante has provided free cancer care to
patients across the country for almost 20 years. Today I
am friends with Roselene Jean, our first cancer patient.
Without the care we provided, she would no longer be
with us.

No woman should die in Haiti because of a lack of
access to obstetric care or cancer. The lack of access
to women's health care poses one of the greatest
challenges to development in Haiti. Reinforcing the
relationship between sustainable development and
peace and security should therefore be central to the
way the Council addresses the situation in Haiti and is
fundamental to placing my country on the path to peace
and stability.

The difficult work to end sexual and gender-based
Violence in Haiti remains a silent fight. It is a topic no
one wants to discuss, yet it can change a young woman's
life forever. More than 40 per cent of all sexual assault
victims in Haiti are under the age of 25, with many
whom we serve being below the age of 15. I speak
on behalf of all survivors of sexual and gender-based
violence when I say that impunity for violence against
women and girls in Haiti must end.

We need not only a comprehensive law on gender-
based violence, we must also educate Haitians to
respect women and girls and shift the harmful social
norms that cause the violence in the first place. The
Security Council and the United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) should work
with the Haitian Government to advance the adoption
of the draft penal code and ensure that the definition
of sexual assault under the code is based on consent.
That would bring the penal code further in line with
international legal standards and ensure access to
justice for survivors.

As service providers, we know the critical
importance of medical care for survivors. We also
know that throughout the country such services are
insufficient. Survivors of gender-based Violence need
timely and comprehensive care to address the risks of
sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV, as well
as unwanted pregnancies. That means psychosocial
support, medical intervention and fair and safe access
to the justice system.

Haiti is a small country full of larger-than-life
women. Those women have helped their communities
and families flourish despite the most dire and tragic of
conditions. Those communities and families sacrifice
everything for their children's education and survival.
Yet girls have limited role models or advocates in Haiti's
halls of power. For a better future for our mothers,
sisters, cousins and daughters, we must support women's
participation in public and political life at all levels
and advocate for better laws, affordable health care,
education andjustice. The women of Haiti have so much
to offer their country and the world. However, we need
the Council's help to make that happen. The Council
should call on MINUJUSTH to build the capacity of
local organizations to provide the Government with
high-quality gender-sensitive services for survivors
of sexual and gender-based violence. Such work must
continue through the upcoming transitional period and
United Nations mission reconfiguration.

The Council should ensure sustainable and
continued funding and mission support in addressing
the urgent humanitarian needs of women and girls,
including sexual and reproductive health services for
gender-based violence survivors, and services in the
wake of natural disasters. The Council should also call
on Haiti to take the important step of creating greater
legal protections for women and girls. That should
include supporting the adoption of a comprehensive
law on gender-based violence and sections of the 2017
criminal code reform proposal that seek to fill some of
the protection gaps for survivors of sexual and gender-
based violence.

In any transition or drawdown, the Council should
ensure that any positive gains made on gender equality
are preserved and properly resourced. In its consideration
of the forthcoming report on MINUJUSTH and in
any briefings, senior United Nations officials should
include information on efforts to ensure women's
full and meaningful participation in all aspects of
parliamentary elections, including as candidates and
voters and as part of formal electoral mechanisms.

Women and girls in Haiti want to stay hopeful. As
author Rebecca Solnit said,
"Hope is not a lottery ticket you can sit on the sofa
and clutch, feeling lucky. It is an axe you break
down doors with in an emergency".

The emergency is now.

