Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman
and INTERPOL Secretary General Mr. Stock for their
interesting briefings. For our part, we would like to
note the following.

Sanctions are one of the most important instruments
at the disposal of the international community in the
interests of resolving crisis situations. Moreover, in
introducing them it is the exclusive prerogative of
the Security Council to identify clear and precise
objectives, as defined by the Charter of the United
Nations. In taking an appropriate decision, the Security
Council needs to take into account that sanctions must
be proportionate to the threats to international peace
and security.

Theimpositionofsanctions,especiallycomprehensive
ones, is a very harsh and a double-edged measure. They
should not be allowed to be a mechanism for collective
punishment affecting the well-being of the population
of a given country, and undermining the legitimate
interests of third countries. Given all the possible
negative consequences of sanctions, their introduction
should be a last resort to be taken only in cases Where
all other methods of political persuasion have been
exhausted, and when the Security Council determines
the presence of a genuine threat to international peace
and security.

Both at the preparation stages and in the
implementation of sanctions, it is critical to make
an objective assessment of the socioeconomic and
humanitarian impact of the measures introduced. We
should not create a situation in which sanctions cause
unacceptable suffering for civilians, especially the
most vulnerable, when they effectively turn into an
instrument for human rights violations. Sanctions must
be targeted and calibrated. In that regard, we believe
that any sanctions decisions of the Council should
necessarily be open to periodic adjustment, suspension
or lifting in the light of the humanitarian situation
and of whether those targeted have responded to the
Security Council's demands. They must be able to see a
light at the end of the tunnel.

Lately, there has been much talk of the need
to improve the effectiveness of the mechanism of
the Security Council's restrictive measures and to
strengthen the capacities of Member States with
respect to their implementation, which has allegedly
been inconsistent. We do not share that concern. There
may be some problems, but they are not of a systemic
nature, as some would like us to believe, including
the apologists who would like to tighten the so-called
sanctions screw. Instead, they are linked to an absence
of good will on the part of certain Member States
with respect to fulfilling their obligations under the
decisions of the Council.

We look favourably on all rational proposals
concerning ways to optimize the practices for
upholding Security Council sanctions, but we believe
that it would be unwise and harmful to periodically
toss around ideas, especially those not supported
by convincing arguments, regarding the creation of
additional bureaucratic barriers, whether inter-State or
at the level of the Secretariat. Moreover, what we detect
in such initiatives is not simply the danger of creating
excessive red tape but an attempt to consolidate the
approaches of a narrow group of States with regard
to the issue of sanctions, as well as to infringe on
the exclusive prerogatives of the Security Council
itself with respect to sanctions. Nevertheless, in the
spirit of constructive discussion of ways to improve
the effectiveness of sanctions. we might explore the
underutilized mechanism of the Informal Working
Group on General Issues of Sanctions, whose work, in
its day, made a significant contribution to improving
the work of the relevant Council committees.

We firmly believe that the issue of sanctions falls
within the purview and exclusive competence of the
United Nations Member States. The Secretariat has
nothing to do with issues relating to the implementation
and development of relevant recommendations. If
Member States require any kind of assistance in
implementing a given sanctions regime, they are fully
entitled to directly address the relevant sanctions
committee with regard to necessary clarifications and
assistance. That is all the more true inasmuch as each
sanctions regime is, by its very nature, unique and
specific.

In discussing the issue of sanctions, we should not
overlook other important issues, such as the illegitimacy
of unilateral sanctions or the fact that it is unacceptable
to use existing Security Council sanctions to arbitrarily
intensify or develop restrictive measures at the
national or regional levels. We categorically oppose
arbitrary, expansive interpretations of the Security
Council sanctions regime. Unfortunately, there has
been a number of attempts via unilateral restrictions to
circumvent the Security Council. We believe that such
actions only undermine the system of international
relations and torpedo political and diplomatic efforts
in the quest to resolve crisis situations. Moreover, such
actions are often of an extraterritorial nature, violating
the sovereignty of third States and their lawful interests,
in particular with regard to foreign trade.

The Russian Federation stands ready to participate
in the collective task ofimproving the sanctions regime.
However, such an undertaking will have added value
only if certain well known States abandon the futile
practice of unilateral restrictions. It is time to end the
practice of diktat in the international arena.

