I would like to thank Mr. Huang Xia, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, for his briefing. We welcome the continued political commitments by countries in the region and are pleased to see important steps being taken by the President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo at the national level and, together with his counterparts, at the regional level in order to create a peaceful environment. Accordingly, we take note of the efforts of the coalition Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to stabilize the country and efforts to implement the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic, as well as the easing of tensions between Rwanda and Uganda with the signing of the memorandum of understanding in August last year and the recent signing of the extradition treaty this February, et cetera. However, the security situation in some parts of the region continues to remain a concern. The eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo is still unstable. The Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation is still violated by signatories in the Central African Republic. Armed elements in Burundi and in Rwanda still carry out attacks. The lack of security is clearly hampering humanitarian efforts, as well as the development of the region, aggravating the suffering of millions of people from food insecurity, displacement, disease and natural disasters. We are gravely concerned over the new displacement of nearly | million people in the Democratic Republic of Congo in 2019. The country is now hosting the largest population of internally displaced persons in Africa, as well as several hundred thousand refugees. With the spread of the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic, the humanitarian situation is now even more precarious, given the weak health-care infrastructure in the region. This new enemy does not spare anyone, and it ruthlessly targets the most vulnerable. The region is now at a very important juncture. Considerable achievements are being made. Confidence and trust are being rebuilt. Political processes and preparations for elections are happening in various countries. The current situation is no justification for any of us - that is, the countries of the region, the United Nations or other international partners - to lose sight of the long-awaited goal of peace. Against this backdrop, we would like to highlight the following points. First, we stress the immense importance of addressing the root causes of instability in the region in a comprehensive and collective manner by supporting the ongoing diplomatic and political efforts, enhancing the process of reconciliation at the national and regional levels, addressing threats caused by armed groups, strengthening the governance of natural resources and providing development opportunities for countries, among other things. On the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we would like to reiterate the need for continued support to the Government, especially in strengthening State authority at the local level and tackling the threat posed by armed groups in the east. Secondly, we are confident in the commitment of, and work achieved by, the guarantors of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region, including the African Union, the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, the Southern African Development Community and the United Nations. We would also like to emphasize the central role of regional actors in this endeavour and voice our support for the good offices of the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy. Thirdly, we call on all international partners to continue, through bilateral and multilateral frameworks, to provide technical and financial support to countries in the region in order to achieve sustainable peace and development. Last but not least, we urge all relevant actors to heed the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire in order to control the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic and support the most vulnerable populations.
