Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): Slovenia will vote against the
draft resolution submitted for action by the Security Council
today. The text represents, in our opinion, an inadequate
attempt to address the situation concerning Kosovo. It takes
a selective political view of the situation and lacks the
objectivity necessary in a resolution of the Security
Council. The draft resolution ignores the fact that several
months ago the Security Council declared the situation in
Kosovo to be one constituting a threat to peace and
security in the region.

Furthermore, the draft resolution ignores the fact that
the Security Council has already spelled out the
requirements for the removal of that threat and the fact
that those requirements were flagrantly violated by the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro).
The most dangerous among those violations is the
ongoing massive military offensive by the military and
security forces of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
affecting the civilian population in Kosovo.

All these and other obstacles to the implementation
of the resolutions adopted by the Security Council under
Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter are ignored in
the draft resolution. It appears as if the draft resolution
were intended to redefine the assessment of the factual
situation contained in resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199
(1998) and 1203 (1998). Proceeding from such a
fundamentally flawed factual assessment, the text tries to
invoke some of the basic norms of the United Nations
Charter. The draft resolution fails to address the relevant
circumstances and ignores the situation of necessity which
has led to the current international military action.
Furthermore, the draft resolution does not even address
the stated reasons for that military action, let alone
provide any argument against those reasons. Instead, in its
third preambular paragraph, it describes that action as a
"flagrant violation of the United Nations Charter". The
political jargon of "flagrant violation" cannot conceal the
lack of convincing argument.

Furthermore, the draft resolution completely fails to
reflect the practice of the Security Council, which has
several times, including on recent occasions, chosen to
remain silent at a time of military action by a regional
organization aimed at the removal of a regional threat to
peace and security. It is true that each case is unique.
However, the requirement of consistency in the
interpretation and application of the principles and norms
of the United Nations Charter demands at least some
indication as to the specific justification for the approach
proposed by the draft resolution in the present case. Such
indication is sadly lacking and, as I mentioned before,
cannot be replaced by the strong words we see in the
draft resolution.

For these reasons, the delegation of Slovenia will
vote against the draft resolution proposed for action today.

 

Before concluding, I wish to make an additional,
general point. The use of force by the Belgrade
Government against the civilian population created a
situation that made the current military action inevitable.
We would have preferred such military action to be fully
authorized by the Security Council; however, that was not
possible for reasons that we explained during the
discussions of the Security Council two days ago. In the
present circumstances, it is important to be aware that,
according to the Charter, the Security Council has the
primary but not exclusive responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security. At a moment like this,
all the Council members have to think hard about what
needs to be done to ensure the Council's authority and to
make its primary responsibility as real as the Charter
requires.

