At the outset, I would like to congratulate the Permanent Mission of Russia on successfully steering the work of the Security Council in October 2020. We wish it every success in the remaining meetings of the month. We also thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his valuable briefing. Today's quarterly open meeting on the Middle East, including the Palestinian question, comes at a time when the international community is continuing its fight against the novel coronavirus, which has spread all around the planet and poses an imminent threat to the survival of humanity as a whole. Regrettably, in view of that direct existential threat, Israel, the occupying Power, has persisted with its aggressive policies towards the Palestinian people, and continues to give us periodic reminders that it has not renounced its plans to annex more of the West Bank, and that the plans have merely been temporarily suspended. Such policies show yet again that Israel seeks to entrench the occupation by extending its illegal activities and policies through the expansion, construction and establishment of thousands of settlement units and the annexation of land, in an open violation of resolution 2334 (2016). Recent United Nations reports show that settlement activities in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, have escalated since the Israeli Government gave the green light for the construction of thousands of new illegal settlement units. We are also concerned that, concomitantly with the Israeli authorities authorizing illegal settlement construction, Israeli settlers committed acts of violence against defenceless Palestinian civilians and destroyed Palestinian buildings and property in order to make space for settlements. Those actions will help eliminate the Palestinians' prospects of establishing an independent, contiguous, viable, lasting and sovereign Palestinian State. In their reports and on numerous occasions, the Secretary-General and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights have reported on the prevailing climate of impunity for settlers and those taking over Palestinian land and displacing Palestinian families from their homes. In a recent report of the Secretary-General on Israeli settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory, it is stated that the Israeli Ministry of Justice has conducted dozens of investigations without convicting a single settler. Such practices require us, more than ever before, to leverage international political and legal mechanisms to hold Israel accountable for the ongoing and constant violations of the rights of the Palestinian people, rights that are guaranteed under international law. Despite the current exceptional circumstances, Kuwait and the Arab States have worked to confront Israel's attempts to take advantage of the world's concern with the coronavirus and to ignore the humanitarian and global opinion that the aggression, war and blockade should come to an end during these challenging humanitarian conditions. When it met on 9 September, the Council of the League of Arab States at the ministerial level stressed the centrality of the Palestinian cause to the Arab homeland and the Arab character of occupied East Jerusalem. It reiterated that Arab States are committed to peace as a strategic choice, and to reaching a solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict consistent with international law, the internationally recognized resolutions and the 2002 Arab Peace Initiative, enabling the Palestinian people to exercise its full, legitimate political rights and establish its independent State on its own territory, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.
