Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the United Kingdom
presidency for organizing today's meeting and would
like to thank the Secretary-General, the Archbishop of
Canterbury and Ms. Qadeem for their briefings.

The peaceful resolution of conflicts is enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations as both a founding
purpose and a principle of the Organization's work.
Beyond that, mediation has the potential to be one of
the most effective means we have for preventing the
escalation or resumption of conflicts as well as their
resolution. There can be no question that from an
economic point of view mediation is greatly preferable
to other instruments in the United Nations arsenal
such as peacekeeping or Security Council sanctions,
as it does not create obstacles to development. As the
most authoritative and representative organization in
existence, the United Nations has every opportunity to
play a central role in international mediation efforts,
which should be undertaken in accordance with the
provisions of the Charter and take into account the
fundamental principles of national responsibility and
respect for States' independence, sovereignty and
equality in international relations.

Besides that, it is essential that we take into
account the potential role of regional and subregional
organizations in resolving disputes in their regions. It
is their mediators' deep knowledge and understanding
of every nuance of a conflict that enables them to
analyse a situation more accurately and therefore to put
forward objective, realistic proposals for bringing the
parties closer together. The use of regional bodies and
agreements for the purpose of the peaceful settlement
of conflicts is an important mechanism provided for
in Article 33 of the Charter. In turn, Chapter VIII of
the Charter encourages Member States to prioritize the
settlement of so-called local disputes with the help of
such bodies and agreements before handing them over
to the Security Council.

There are some regional organizations, such as
the African Union, that have by now accumulated
a good deal of experience in the area of mediation,
which the United Nations should rely on and, where
appropriate, should use to approach mediation issues
based on a sensible division of labour with regional
and subregional entities. In that context, we want to
point to the enormous potential for the United Nations
of cooperation with bodies such as the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization and the Collective Security
Treaty Organization. Russia itself participates in
mediation efforts within the framework of both
international and regional organizations, including the
Commonwealth of Independent States. However, it is
crucial to ensure coordination at the international level
in order to avoid any duplication of effort when various
mediation efforts end up competing with one another to
the ultimate detriment of the settlement of a conflict.

As the United Nations organ entrusted with
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, the Security Council is
called on to play a central role in the peaceful settlement
of disputes, including by encouraging the use of good
offices in mediation, which is why it seriously values
and supports the Secretary-General's efforts, including
by backing his nominations of envoys and mediators.

It is important to understand that, ultimately, the
most effective way of resolving conflicts is through
direct dialogue between the conflicting parties and
the political will needed to find mutually acceptable
solutions. In turn, the effectiveness of mediation
depends entirely on all the parties to a conflict agreeing
to such international efforts and, of course, on the
impartiality of the mediators. Unfortunately, we have
seen plenty of examples of mediation that are simply
not worthy of the name, because they are either attempts
to monopolize the mediation efforts or to pursue one's
own geopolitical ends in the guise of mediation.

Mediators' work is not an all-purpose art form
but is rather based on a knowledge of the historical,
cultural and other peculiarities of a specific conflict.
Every unique situation requires patient efforts to find
its individual solution. There are times when we cannot
measure the success of mediation efforts in the short
term. It is vital to allow the parties to come up with their
own solutions, and that can be a lengthy process. In that
regard, it is essential to select United Nations mediators
carefully, based on objective criteria, while being sure
to maintain a strict regional balance. A mediator's
main task is to encourage the parties to resolve
disputes and to identify the root causes obstructing a
settlement. That is the only approach that can guarantee
a reliable, long-lasting peace. Mediators should never
impose unilateral solutions or give grounds for being
suspected of bias. Artificially imposed recipes are not
only ineffective but can also jeopardize a negotiation
process and a fragile peace. In that regard, it is critical
that United Nations mediators have the ability not just
to be impartial but to maintain neutrality, which means
that references to any principles, whatever they may be,
should not serve as an excuse for indulging one of the
sides to a conflict, or the mediators will not gain the
parties' trust. Incidentally, we think that a correction
to that effect should be made in the United Nations
Guidance for Effective Mediation.

Most crises today are internal ones, and there is
a fine line between mediation efforts, preventive
diplomacy and pressure on internal political processes.
Unfortunately, we in the Security Council often hear
proposals that basically amount to interference in
the internal affairs of States and their constitutional
procedures. It is no secret that people frequently want
to use the Council to openly support a particular
political group. How can that contribute to a settlement?
All it can do is aggravate and prolong a conflict and
undermine trust in the international community and
the United Nations. We are all familiar with examples
of that.

Russia always supports the settlement of disputes
through direct dialogue between the parties. The global
experience of preventing and resolving conflicts has
shown clearly that only impartial mediation, based
on the rapprochement of parties and on efforts to find
areas of agreement and to achieve mutually acceptable
agreements, has any chance of success.

