Mr.Elarahy (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic): It
is a year since United Nations forces left Somalia. This
meeting therefore represents an appropriate opportunity to
review developments in Somalia, to exchange views and to
consult on steps the international community should take to
help establish a central authority that would enjoy the
support of all parties and enable Somalia to regain stability,
and the Somali people to enjoy prosperity and progress.
I extend our sincere thanks to you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting. I hope that the Council will
continue to convene such meetings on various important
issues in order to exchange information and the views of
Member States.

Last year the Security Council addressed the crisis in
Somalia on the basis of a report by the Secretary-General
issued in January 1995 and through presidential statements.
So far the international community has been unable to
agree on playing a further role in Somalia. Can this
situation continue? Will the international community
continue to disregard the tragic situation in Somalia, which
has been described as a failed State, in the context of what
can be called benign neglect? In the light of the
deteriorating situation in Somalia, I fear that continued
disregard for it would transform that neglect into
malignant neglect.

The Egyptian delegation calls for genuine change.
We call upon the international community to shoulder its
responsibility for the people of Somalia. The aim of the
United Nations intervention in Somalia under Security
Council resolution 794 (1992) was the establishment of a
favourable climate for humanitarian relief operations. This
intervention was undertaken under Chapter VII of the
Charter, in view of the exceptional conditions prevailing
in Somalia. The most pressing problems were the
humanitarian tragedy, which was caused by starvation, the
continuing civil war, which claimed the lives of thousands
of innocent people, the total collapse of State institutions
and the disappearance of central authority. That is why
the term "a failed State" was used.

The United Nations has achieved great success at a
humanitarian level, while its success in establishing
social, community and political institutions to replace the
State institutions destroyed by the civil war has been
more limited. It has assisted in the establishment of a
national police force and district and regional councils,
and in strengthening the judiciary. However, the United
Nations has not succeeded in laying down a framework
for settlement and national reconciliation to which all
parties are committed. Apart from contributing to the
convening of the Addis Ababa Conference in March 1993
and the Nairobi Conference in 1994, all the efforts of the
international community to influence the leadership of the
clans and factions and prompt them to hold a serious and
constructive dialogue on the future of the country have
failed.

Today, the situation in Somalia is very similar to
what it has been for the past four years. Stability is
fragile; there is a complete lack of central authority; tribal
leaders are vying for the State presidency without any of
them achieving it. All this is accompanied by a lack of
food which is especially dangerous in the light of the
scarcity of resources, continued political tension, and the
fact that the port of Mogadishu has been closed since last
October.

It is vital that Somalia's humanitarian needs be met,
especially given the reports of cholera and malnutrition;
the international community must respond positively. That
response should also extend to other aspects of the Somali
problem.

 

The desperate conditions that persist in Somalia have
not discouraged or thwarted the endeavours of many
regional and international organizations to achieve a
settlement in that country. The Organization of African
Unity decided only a few days ago to dispatch a new
mission to Somalia to establish direct contacts with the
various factions and to assess the real situation. The League
of Arab States has continued its efforts to establish
channels of communication with all Somali factions and
prominent individuals, and has proposed the convening of
a meeting of all relevant international and regional
organizations with a View to reaching a common
understanding to ensure the provision of humanitarian
assistance to the Somali people and to discussing ways to
achieve a peaceful settlement of the crisis. The League of
Arab States has also proposed sending a joint mission of
representatives of regional and international organizations
to meet with Somali leaders and has indicated its readiness
to host that meeting and any preparatory meetings.

For its part, the Organization of the Islamic
Conference has called for an international conference for
peace and national reconciliation in Somalia, with the
participation of all the Somali parties and all relevant
regional and international organizations. It has dispatched
a contact group to urge the resumption of dialogue and to
discuss the convening of an international conference. And
the European Union has carried out field missions through
the special envoy of the European Commission; it is
considering a number of options, inter alia with respect to
governmental systems, that the Somalis could adopt to
break the current deadlock. It is also considering a joint
initiative by the European Union, regional organizations and
a number of States concerned with the Somali question.
Nor are neighbouring States sparing their efforts, as
evidenced by the work of Prime Minister Zenawi of
Ethiopia and President arap Moi of Kenya.

Turning to the role of the United Nations, there should
be a follow-up to the ongoing commitment to the
comprehensive international embargo on the supply of arms
and military equipment to Somalia under Security Council
733 (1992), as well as active, comprehensive follow-up
with respect to the political and humanitarian situation with
a View to building State institutions and to carrying out
post-conflict peace-building. But the fact is that none of this
is taking place.

The delegation of Egypt considers it necessary to
energize the role of the United Nations in Somalia, and to
that end we wish to propose a number of ideas, any or all
of which could be adopted to achieve real progress. First,
we advocate the convening in a neighbouring State of a
pan-Somali conference attended by representatives of all
Somali regions.

Secondly, regional and international organizations
should be encouraged to undertake a joint initiative to
convince Somali leaders of the importance of dialogue.
Thirdly, the United Nations and regional organizations
should offer Somali leaders feasible alternatives, such as
the establishment of a country-wide joint presidential
council, similar to the current experiment in Liberia, or
other means of power-sharing such as a federal or
confederative system.

Fourthly, the role of the United Nations office in
Nairobi should be enhanced; transferring its functions to
Mogadishu should be considered when conditions permit.
In this regard, I listened attentively to the representative
of Chile, who put forward such a proposal, and to the
representative of the Republic of Korea, who endorsed it.

Fifthly, the Security Council should dispatch a
mission of Council members or a high-level envoy to
assess the situation on the ground and to ascertain
whether the time is ripe for making specific proposals.

We hope that these ideas will receive careful study.
We are open to other initiatives proposed by other
delegations interested in putting an end to what is
happening in Somalia.

Egypt has a special interest in achieving stability in
Somalia, owing to unique historical and cultural ties
dating back to the reign of Queen Hatshepshut, who
dispatched trade missions to the Kingdom of Punt 3500
years ago. Relations between Egypt and Somalia have
evolved and have grown stronger throughout history. In
this regard, I would note that Egypt participated in the
United Nations Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM. II). At
a time when some States were withdrawing their
contingents, Egypt doubled its contribution, and has
continued to this day to be fully prepared to participate.
Progress by the United Nations or other international
and regional organizations depends on a number of
factors. The most important of these are: commitment by
the international community not to recognize any
authority in Somalia unless it represents all Somali
communities and factions and enjoys general acceptance;
continued application and strengthened monitoring of the
international embargo on the supply of arms to Somalia;
exerting all possible pressure on the Somali parties to get

 

the process back on track, and putting the options before
them so that they can choose those that are most suitable
and acceptable; and last but not least, continued provision
by the international community of development and
humanitarian assistance of all kinds, even-handedly to all
parts of Somalia.

I wish in conclusion to emphasize that the basic
responsibility for stability in Somalia lies with the people
of Somalia; their leaders must shoulder this responsibility
in the full View of the international community. At the
same time, we must recognize the need for and the
importance of action by the United Nations to help the
Somali people overcome its ordeal.

