Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Sir, for your initiative in convening
this briefing on the evaluation of sanctions. Such
initiative has been a hallmark of your presidency and
of Australia's tenure in the Security Council. It is also
a coherent follow-up to your close engagement in the
recently concluded high-level review of United Nations
sanctions, which was sponsored by your country,
together with Greece, Norway and Sweden.

The high level of participation by Member States,
including my country, and other stakeholders in the
high-level review was a strong recognition of the
important role United Nations sanctions can play in the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
review also reminded us that improving the effectiveness
of sanctions requires a constant dialogue with those
affected and those in charge of their implementation.

I welcome the briefings delivered by Jeffrey
Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, who heads the Department that is the focal
point of the United Nations system on sanctions
issues, and by Mr. Jiirgen Stock, Secretary General of
INTERPOL - an important partner in the effective
implementation of sanctions imposed by the Council. I
wish to take this opportunity to congratulate Mr. Stock
on his appointment.

Under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations, the Security Council is empowered with an
important set of tools that it can use to carry out its
mandate, and sanctions are among them. Sanctions
have become more targeted and more sophisticated
so as better to serve their remedial and preventative
purposes. From 1966, when the Security Council first
imposed sanctions, on Southern Rhodesia, as stated
by our friend Jeffrey Feltman, to most recently, when
targeted sanctions were imposed in Yemen in 2014
against those obstructing its stability, sanctions have
continuously evolved in order to respond to emerging
threats to peace and security.

However, we all recognize that the first condition for
the effectiveness ofa sanctions regime is to ensure that
they are fully and faithfully implemented by Member
States. The increasing sophistication and complexity of
the targeted sanctions measures that we enact require
that we account for the practical challenges associated
with implementation, which in our view include the
following.

First, we know that the legally binding nature of
the Council's sanctions is not in itself sufficient to
ensure their effective implementation. A commitment
to compliance requires that sanctions be perceived as
just and contributing to peace and security. However,
what is often the case on the ground is the lack of
knowledge about sanctions and the perception that they
are punitive rather than preventive. We therefore see
a need to establish, throughout the life of a sanctions
regime, effective communication between the sanctions
committees and the affected countries and regions on
the purpose of the sanctions. A regional consensus on
the necessity and legitimacy of a sanctions regime can
go a long way towards ensuring that they are effectively
implemented.

Secondly, presently the large majority of sanctions
regimes are in Africa. Very often, the targeted States
and their neighbours do not have the institutional
capacity to implement the sanctions. It is therefore a
challenge to translate those measures into a national
regulatory system. There is thus a need to renew
efforts and focus on ensuring that those crucial actors
are better assisted in capacity-building and accessing
technical assistance.

Thirdly, as we know, the range of actors involved in
the implementation of sanctions is broad and continues
to expand as the sanctions evolve. Therefore, the
Council should encourage cooperation and coordination
with neighbouring States, regional and subregional
organizations, and international organizations. All
those stakeholders mustjoin efforts to first and foremost
promote the basic principle that sanctions are intended
to help Member States, not to undermine them.

Fourthly,Iwouldwishtomakesomerecommendations
as a non-permanent member of the Security Council.
For example, the decision that the sanctions committees
should be chaired by newly elected members should
be made at an early stage. That would allow members
to prepare adequately, as they do not have time for an
appropriate hand-over from the outgoing Chairpersons
of the subsidiary bodies, or to choose their national
experts to be included in their Security Council teams.

Incoming members also need to avail themselves,
at an early stage, of comprehensive information on the
sanctions regime. We are provided only with initial
information by the Security Council Affairs Division,
whichI commend here. It is done only towards the end of
November or December, which can be very helpful, but
one basically learns on the job while already assuming
the chairmanship of the sanctions committees. We
therefore call on the Council to change the system to
give more time for the preparation of new members,
which should be adequately informed on the sanctions
implementation mechanisms and given the means to
keep track of the evolution of sanctions.

My fifth and last point is on the groups or panels
of experts. We underscore their crucial support for the
work of the sanctions committees, acting as their eyes
and cars on the ground. It is therefore important to
have minimum standards for the selection and training
process for those experts, which also need to reflect a
balanced geographical distribution. It is also important
that experts execute their mandate in accordance with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.

As we have stated in the past, Member States play
a critical role in the implementation of sanctions. It is
therefore essential that when they are mentioned in the
report of a group or panel of experts, they be provided
with an opportunity to review the preliminary draft
of the report and put forward relevant comments and
responses they may have, with a view to enabling the
group or panel to adjust the conclusion by reflecting the
positions of the said Member States in the reports. That
is a fundamental and indispensable step in legitimizing
the procedural and substantive components of the
reporting of the groups or panels of experts. We note
that such a heightened standard can serve only to
increase the credibility of those groups or panels of
experts, and to bolster the collaborative efforts of the
Member States and the sanctions committees.

To conclude, Rwanda reiterates its views that
Security Council sanctions play a prominent role in
the maintenance and restoration of international peace
and security. We further believe that the Council can
benefit from holding regular meetings or briefings on
the general issues of sanctions, with the participation of
national, regional and international actors, in order to
take on the challenges that come with the effective use
of sanctions.

