Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting. I would also like to thank
Mr. Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, for the briefing he gave us this morning.

I would like to make the following three
comments. First, the Lebanese Government affirms
today, as it always does, its respect for its obligations
under international resolutions, including resolution
1701 (2006). On numerous occasions, the Lebanese
Government has called for the implementation of all the
provisions of that resolution. By the same token, it has
often called upon the international community to urge
Israel to fulfil its obligations and to end its violations
of Lebanese sovereignty by land, sea and air, also in
accordance with resolution 1701 (2006).

It is undeniable that the current calm in southern
Lebanon reflects my country's commitment to those
obligations and the cooperation between the Lebanese
Army and the forces of United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL). In that regard, we pay tribute
to UNIFIL's contribution through its command and
its troops. Nonetheless, efforts must be strengthened
to move from a cessation of hostilities to a permanent
ceasefire.

It should also be underscored that the Israeli air
force violates Lebanese airspace on a daily basis, as
underscored by the Secretary-General in his periodic
report (see S/2013/l20). That is a threat to the safety
of civilians and is also likely to undermine UNIFIL's
mission. In that connection, must I recall that Israel
continues to occupy the northern part of Al-Ghajar
village and neighbouring regions? That is a gross
violation of its obligations under resolution 1701 (2006)
and disregards the plan put forward by UNIFIL to bring
an end to the occupation. Today we reiterate our call for
an end to Israeli occupation of the northern part of the
Al-Ghajar village, the Shab'a farms and the Kfar Shuba
hills.

Secondly, since our meeting on 18 April on the
humanitarian situation in Syria (see S/PV.6949), the
situation in that country has worsened further, as has
its impact on neighbouring countries, in particular
on my country, Lebanon, at all social, economic and
security levels. I would therefore like to state that
Lebanon is committed, now more than ever, to a policy
of dissociation from the crisis in Syria. It is committed
to the tenets of the Baabda Declaration, adopted by the
National Dialogue Committee in June 2012.

This morning His Excellency, Mr. Michel Sleiman,
President of the Republic, reiterated his position that
Lebanon will not allow weapons or combatants to be
sent to Syria or training camps to be set up in Lebanon.
In that regard, he underscored that this position is not
only in accordance with the implementation of the
Baabda Declaration and the policy of non-interference
in Syrian affairs, but also helps to consolidate Syrian
national unity and avoids destabilizing the situation.

However, the military impact of the fighting in Syria
continues to spread to the border areas with Lebanon
and constitutes a gross violation of my country's
security. In that connection, we again condemn those
who order such violations, whatever their justification
may be.

Furthermore, the ongoing influx of Syrian refugees
into Lebanon is constantly increasing. The number
of refugees has increased by 20,000 during the past
week, while resources are noticeably decreasing. We
are no longer able to meet the basic needs of refugees
for housing, food and medicine. Nonetheless, we
reiterate that the borders of Lebanon will remain open
to Syrian refugees and that Lebanon has no intention
to deport anyone. At the same time, we reaffirm our
support for the two requests made by the the President
of the Republic of Lebanon for the convening of an
international conference on Syrian refugees in order
to consider ways to share the burden, based on the
principal of a shared responsibility, and to establish
camps within Syria far from the confrontation zones
and close to neighbouring States, under the protection
of the United Nations.

Thirdly, returning the to the main topic of today's
debate, all reports underscore the fact that Israel is
pursuing its settlement activities in the occupied
territories with impunity and in violation of United
Nations resolutions, and continues to build the separation
wall in contravention of the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice. Similarly, it continues
to confiscate lands and take control of water sources in
contravention of the provisions of conventions signed
in Geneva and The Hague.

However, a new factor that is actually both new and
old is the worsening of the difficulties experienced by
prisoners in Israeli detention. As the Council is aware,
since it began its occupation in 1967, Israel has detained
over 726,000 Palestinians and left many to rot in prison
without trial. Since the beginning ofthis year, Israel has
arrested more than 1,070 Palestinians. Ofthose, 234 are
children, some of whom are only eight years old. Samer
Issawi and his companions have continued their hunger
strike and their heroic resistance month after month in
order to ensure that the cause of Palestinian prisoners
is publicized in the international media. Indeed, their
cause has been taken up by numerous humanitarian
human rights organizations. The conditions that led to
the deaths of the two prisoners, including Maysara Abu
Hamdiyeh, has shaken international public opinion.
However, the Security Council has remained silent in
the face of that unacceptable humanitarian tragedy.

In the same context, I should now like to focus on
the issue of children in the Israeli military detention
system, in particular following the publication of a
report on that subject by UNICEF on 6 March. The
report documents the most abject, arbitrary, institutional
types of maltreatment - including torture, blows and
humiliation - inflicted upon Palestinian children
when they are stopped or transferred to be interrogated.
Those practices include, inter alia, raids into houses
and arrests in the middle of the night. They are detained
alone, threatened with rape and are not allowed to have
their family members present with them. In the report
on the subject, UNICEF calls for all measures to be
taken to ensure appropriate treatment of Palestinian
children who are arrested by the Israeli authorities, in
accordance with the Convention on the Rights of the
Child and other national instruments.

We are not living on another planet. We are fully
aware of the political reasons for this situation, even
if we do not approve of the political reasons that have
prevented the Council from assuming its responsibilities
and bringing an end to Israel's occupation of the
Palestinian State and the realization of its independence.
But what is stopping the Council from at least adopting
a statement to reflect UNICEF's recommendations,
based on the most basic humanitarian standards? How
can the Council remain silent?

