Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I would like to begin
by thanking the delegation of Nigeria for organizing
today's open debate and for preparing its comprehensive
concept note (S/2014/238, annex). I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing earlier
today.

My delegation welcomes the adoption later today
of the first-ever Security Council resolution on security
sector reform (SSR), which proves the increasing
recognition of the importance of the subject by the
Council's membership.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union.

Security sector reform may sound technical, yet its
direct impact on both security and millions of lives is
obvious. Its need becomes particularly urgent and real
when a soldier or a police officer whose only calling
should be to serve his country and people with integrity
and honour, acts as a thug, using his uniform and
weapon to spread fear and extort what few possessions
battered civilian populations might have, when security
institutions created to ensure safety and security turn
into machines of torture, forced disappearances or
oppression.

Security sector reform strategies, while often
detailed and complex, seek to respond to some very real
questions and situations. How does one restore trust in
men in uniform who have just recently spread fear and
imposed their will on local communities by raping and
sexually abusing women, girls, boys and men? How
does one give back a childhood to a child soldier, whose
life has so far taught him that killing and maiming
others is the way to ensure his own survival? How
does one convince a Government propped up by armed
militias used to turning a blind eye to graft and other
abuses that investing in accountable security sector will
bring greater dividends through stability, security, and
eventually through the ballot box? Building sustainable
peace requires sustainable answers to those and many
other questions related to security sector reform.

While originally perceived as an element of
peacekeeping exit strategies, security sector reform
is now widely accepted as an integral part of conflict
prevention, peacebuilding and efforts to avoid relapse
into conflict. Security sector reform is also a vital
element of the rule of law, which can hardly be achieved
without a security sector that is accountable, effective
and responsive to the needs of the population.

As noted in the concept paper, linkages between
SSR and other related areas, such as countering
illicit flows and destabilizing accumulations of small
arms, should also be kept in mind. In particular,
close links must be established between SSR and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes, and former combatants must be offered
alternative livelihoods, as for example in the case of
the Afghanistan Peace and Reintegration Programme
supported by the United Nations Development
Programme, which provides anti-Government militants
with an opportunity to give up their arms and become
reintegrated into their communities.

While the United Nations has developed an
impressive toolbox for assisting Member States, long-
term national ownership remains key for the legitimacy
and sustainability of any SSR effort. National
Governments should undertake both sector-wide
initiatives and reform of individual components, such
as armed forces, police, law enforcement, judiciary
and corrections, complemented by horizontal measures
aimed at fighting corruption, strengthening governance
and accountability and ensuring the protection of
human rights.

As the report ofthe Secretary-General (S/2013/480)
rightly notes, the United Nations must make sure it
supports inclusive and accountable SSR that enhances
the social contract between the State and society.
In order to achieve that goal, it is key to ensure that
all parties to a conflict and all segments of society,
including women, youth and vulnerable groups, are
involved in the SSR process.

As noted in the report of the Secretary-General,
success or failure of SSR efforts depends on the
broader context of transformative processes in a
society, such as national dialogue, reconciliation efforts
or transitional justice initiatives, all of which require
genuine inclusivity. Time and again, we have seen how
exclusion of certain armed groups from SSR leads to
continued threats to communities, undermining overall
peace efforts.

All national stakeholders must be genuinely
involved in the reform process, since the trust between
security institutions and the society at large can be
reinstated only if past abuses do not go untold and if
proper accountability is ensured. In that respect, the
link between an effective, transparent SSR process and
ensuring justice and accountability for past crimes is
key.

Also key is the need for the most stringent vetting
for those who are reintegrated into security structures
during the course of SSR. As my delegation has noted
on other occasions, blanket amnesties can undercut
the success of SSR and heighten perceived insecurities
among local populations ifperpetrators ofmajor crimes,
including crimes against humanity or mass rape, are
included in new security and law and order structures.

In order to maximize the effectiveness of United
Nations involvement and tailor international efforts
to the exact needs of each country, it is important to
know how useful particular measures have been so far,
which measures proved to be effective and why in any
given situation they have proved to be effective. As the
concept paper rightly points out, measuring only the
quantitative elements of reform may not be enough, and
we may need to find ways to assess and measure deeper
change. The complexity of measuring impact should
not deter us from trying to do so. We therefore welcome
efforts in Cote d'Ivoire and Liberia to develop a set of
indicators and benchmarks to monitor implementation
of national SSR strategies.

The United Nations system should also be constantly
reviewing the effectiveness and coherence of its own
assistance to Member States and building on lessons
learned. In that regard, we are pleased that the draft
resolution we will be adopting later today recognizes
the need for the inter-agency Security Sector Reform
Task Force and United Nations operations to further
strengthen the monitoring and evaluation of SSR
initiatives, with the aim of ensuring the effectiveness
of the support provided to Governments.

To conclude, I wish to commend the United
Nations Group of Friends of Security Sector Reform,
co-chaired by Slovakia and South Africa, for being
a driving force in giving the issue the visibility
it deserves. We also acknowledge an important
contribution of the inter-agency Security Sector Task
Force, now comprising 14 United Nations entities and
the United Nations Inter-Agency SSR Support Unit, all
of which are working towards an integrated, holistic
and coherent United Nations approach to SSR issues.
The Council can count on my delegation's support in its
further efforts to advance that important issue.

