I wish to thank Under-Secretary-General Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing. I would like to reiterate once again my country's commitment to the firm rejection of the use of all non-conventional weapons under any circumstances. We are of the view that joint and concerted efforts should be made by all Member States to prevent and deter the use of such weapons in accordance with international norms, including the Chemical Weapons Convention and other relevant multilateral and bilateral treaties. My delegation takes note of the continuing efforts of the Syrian Government to shed light on the use of those weapons on its territory through its communications with the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the Security Council and its willingness to continue to work with the Technical Secretariat, in accordance with the provisions of the Convention. As I said last month, as a signatory to the Chemical Weapons Convention, Syria deserves to be supported by the other Member States in fulfilling its obligations. My delegation reiterates its call on Council members to avoid any politicization of this issue and to create the conditions for the peaceful and technical handling of the results of the investigations. This would undoubtedly facilitate the establishment of truth, and therefore the reporting. Furthermore, continued engagement between the OPCW Technical Secretariat and the Syrian Government could help to resolve the issue of Syria's initial declaration, and ultimately advance the work of the Declaration Assessment Team (DAT), in accordance with the Chemical Weapons Convention, decision EC-M-33/ DEC.1 and resolution 2118 (2013). My delegation is pleased to see in the report of the Secretary-General that the twenty-third round of consultations, which took place in Damascus between the DAT and the Syrian authorities, was fruitful (see S/2020/1056, annex). This collaboration could not only help resolve the issue of the initial declaration but also advance the work of the Fact-Finding Mission and the Investigation and Identification Team. As we have stated on several occasions, the allegations of armed terrorist groups in Syria possessing chemicals that could be used in attacks must necessarily be given due consideration. My delegation also reiterates the same appeal to the United Nations and the OPCW Technical Secretariat in view of the potential danger, should that information be confirmed. In conclusion, my delegation reiterates its support for the OPCW, which is essential to the United Nations disarmament programme and whose contribution has led to the virtual elimination of chemical weapons declared by the States that possessed them. In addition, the composition of any team investigating all listed incidents must be inclusive and participatory in order to ensure that the findings are not contested. We hope to see OPCW missions in Syria resume full deployment once the restrictive measures taken as a result of the coronavirus disease pandemic are lifted.
