The President: After consultations among
members of the Security Council, I have been
authorized to make following statement on behalf of
the Council:

"The Security Council recalls the statement
of its President (S/PRST/2008/l6) and
emphasizes the critical importance of post-
conflict peacebuilding as the foundation for
building sustainable peace and development in
the aftermath of conflict.

"The Security Council welcomes the report
of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding in the
immediate aftermath of conflict (S/2009/304) as
an important contribution towards a more
effective and coherent international response to
post-conflict peacebuilding. The Council also
welcomes the Secretary-General's strong
commitment expressed in the report to improve
the United Nations peacebuilding efforts, and
urges him to pursue these objectives.

"The Security Council emphasizes the
importance of national ownership and the need
for national authorities to take responsibility as
soon as possible for re-establishing the
institutions of Government, restoring the rule of
law, revitalizing the economy, reforming the
security sector, providing basic services and other
key peacebuilding needs. The Council
underscores the vital role of the United Nations in
supporting national authorities to develop an
early strategy, in close consultation with
international partners, to address these priorities,
and encourages international partners to align
their financial, technical and political support
behind this strategy.

"The Security Council stresses the need, in
countries emerging from conflict, to draw upon
and develop existing national capacities at the
earliest possible stage, and the importance of
rapidly deployable civilian expertise to help
achieve this, including, where appropriate,
relevant expertise from the region. The Council,
in this regard, welcomes the recommendation of
the Secretary-General for a review to be
undertaken to analyse how the United Nations
and international community can help to broaden
and deepen the pool of civilian experts, giving
particular attention to mobilizing capacities from
developing countries and especially women.

"The Security Council recognizes that post-
conflict situations require from the outset
experienced and skilled leadership on the ground
with effective support teams, and requests the
United Nations to increase its efforts in this
regard. The Council welcomes the Secretary-
General's efforts to enhance the authority and
accountability of senior United Nations
representatives in carrying out their duties and
responsibilities.

"The Security Council emphasizes the need
for the United Nations system to strengthen
strategic partnerships with the World Bank and
other international financial institutions, and to
complete by the end of 2009 the clarification of
roles and responsibilities for key peacebuilding
needs and to keep these under regular review, so
that the appropriate expertise is generated to
achieve a timely and predictable response.

"The Security Council recalls its resolution
1645 (2005) and recognizes the important role of
the Peacebuilding Commission in promoting and
supporting an integrated and coherent approach to
peacebuilding, welcomes the progress it has
achieved, calls on it to further enhance its
advisory role and support for countries on its
agenda and looks forward to the
recommendations of the 2010 review of the
Commission's founding resolutions on how its
role can continue to be enhanced.

"The Security Council recognizes the
critical importance of rapid, flexible and
predictable funding for post-conflict
peacebuilding. The Council urges Member States
to help achieve this, building on the
recommendations of the report and in particular
increasing the impact of the Peacebuilding Fund,
improving donor practices to make funding faster
and more flexible and making use of in-country
multi-donor trust funds, which are designed to
accommodate the funding requirements of
donors.

"The Security Council reaffirms that ending
impunity is essential if a society recovering from
conflict is to come to terms with past abuses
committed against civilians affected by armed
conflict and to prevent future such abuses. The
Council notes that justice and reconciliation
mechanisms can promote not only individual
responsibility for serious crimes, but also peace,
truth, reconciliation and the rights of victims.

"The Security Council, in accordance with
its resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008),
underlines the key role women and young persons
can play in re-establishing the fabric of society
and stresses the need for their involvement in the
development and implementation of post-conflict
strategies in order to take account of their
perspectives and needs.

"The Security Council reaffirms the role of
regional and subregional organizations in the
prevention, management and resolution of
conflicts in accordance with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations, and the need to
strengthen their capacity in post-conflict
peacebuilding.

"The Security Council recognizes the
importance of launching peacebuilding assistance
at the earliest possible stage. The Council affirms
the importance of early consideration of
peacebuilding in its own deliberations and of
ensuring coherence between peacemaking,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and development to
achieve an early and effective response to post-
conflict situations. The Council will strive to
apply this integrated approach and requests the
Secretary-General to intensify his efforts in this
regard.

"The Security Council invites the Secretary-
General to report within 12 months to the
Security Council and the General Assembly on
progress achieved in fulfilling his agenda for
action to improve the United Nations
peacebuilding efforts, taking into consideration
the views of the Peacebuilding Commission."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2009/23.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.55 pm.
