Mr. Gurirab (Namibia): On this momentous occasion,
we can see that different elements of history and current
affairs have converged, engendering great expectations for
the people of Africa, and especially for our suffering
sisters, brothers and innocent children in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. No one can blame the Congolese
people, because they are only expecting and yearning for
peace, justice and personal safety in their own country.
Their hearts are filled with hope that, at least this time,
there will come from the Security Council a renewed
resolve to speed up peace, save lives and prevent more
bloodshed in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The date 17 January 2000 was the thirty-ninth
anniversary of the assassination of the Congo's martyr and
Africa's hero, Patrice Lumumba. Like President Mugabe, I
recall with satisfaction another important Council meeting
on Africa that you, Madam President, convened on 25
September 1997 and that some of our leaders addressed.
As the President of the General Assembly, I have taken
action on the report of the Secretary-General that was
requested at that meeting and that has been the subject of
deliberations by the Assembly. I congratulate you warmly,
Madam, on assuming once again the presidency of the
Council.

I join you, Madam President, and the Secretary-
General in welcoming our esteemed guests to the United
Nations and to the Security Council, and, in particular, in
thanking them all for the timely and important
contributions they have made with such clarity and
candour.

This is a historic meeting because of all that we can
remember from the past, all that we can see around us
and all that we can hear in the strong views coming from
the heads of State. President Nujoma, my head of State,
regrets his unavoidable absence. He has, however,
invested me with all that I need to represent him and to
speak on behalf of the Republic of Namibia.

By their solid presence, after having traveled such
long distances from Africa, our leaders are demonstrating
their collective determination to do everything possible to
inject fresh momentum into the peace process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo so as to move it
forward on a sustained basis. Nobody is suggesting that
the road ahead will be easy. There are still some
problems and uncertainties, and references have been
made to them today. That notwithstanding, everyone, I
believe, wants the bleeding and the crippling bickering to
end forthwith, to be replaced by partnership, rededication
and a comprehensive and durable peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The whole of the Great Lakes
region and Central Africa also need peace and rebirth, for
they are inseparable and their destiny is one. Africa's
destiny is one.

The President's seat was occupied on Monday two
weeks ago by Vice-President Al Gore, who on that
occasion expressed strong and welcome views on Africa's
problems and needs and who offered help which we
appreciate. The Security Council's "month of Africa" has
been busy and productive in many ways. That is a result
of the outstanding leadership and industry of Ambassador
Richard Holbrooke, who recently paid a high-level visit
to Africa for consultations with some of our leaders who
are present here today. Ambassador Holbrooke has started
a dialogue with Africans, which we welcome, and has
launched commendable initiatives. There is still time left

 

for more, and we are ready to cooperate with the United
States presidency towards a win-win outcome.

So far, the Security Council has dealt with the
devastating HIV/AIDS pandemic in Africa, in all respects
from the virus and the disease to the cure and the cost. This
was followed by Council meetings on the conflict
situations, humanitarian needs and refugee crises in Angola
and in Burundi as well as on the effects of the spillover of
those tragedies into neighbouring countries. And today, we
are discussing the unfortunate and imposed situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The leaders have
addressed this problem extensively.

In his latest constructive report on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (S/2000/30), the Secretary-General
has provided us with an analysis of the situation and has
put specific recommendations before the Council for its
consideration. Furthermore, in his introductory statement
this morning, the Secretary-General has supplemented his
report with additional ideas. We thank him for that, and we
urge the Security Council to act on those recommendations.

One of our deepest anxieties is about what happens
next, after the "month of Africa", on the Council's calendar
for the rest of this year, next year and beyond, to firmly
keep the focus on Africa. We know that the rotation of the
Council's presidency does not nullify the continuity of its
previous undertakings. Namibia, as a member of the
Security Council, will certainly play its part to ensure that
that vital focus is maintained so long as we are still on the
Council.

Important views and concerns have been expressed in
this debate about virtually all aspects of the issue, from the
ugly background and the current impasse to the way
forward to bring about peace, the withdrawal of uninvited
troops and normality in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We must keep these thoughts in mind as we seek
practical and lasting solutions, without compromising
frankness or honesty.

Destabilization of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo will do no good, but only harm, to Africa, and
particularly to the immediate neighbours of that country. On
the other hand, comprehensive peace, stability and
cooperation will benefit all and will restore Africa' s dignity.
It is a political solution that the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement - regardless of the frustrating and needless
delays - is all about. Its implementation is the issue.

It was said a very long time ago that there is a time
for everything: a time for war and a time for peace, a
time to kill and a time to heal. Now is the time for peace
and for a new beginning in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. This comes from a member of the generation
of Namibian freedom fighters.

Last July, the African leaders held in Algiers the last
summit of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) in
the now bygone millennium and the twentieth century.
The letter and the spirit of the Algiers Declaration
eloquently and forcefully emphasized the sanctity of
African life and called for an end to military takeovers in
favour of democratic elections. Moreover, the African
leaders resolved that 2000 will be Africa's year of peace,
security and tolerance. To this end, they renewed
collectively and severally their commitment to and respect
for the United Nations and its Security Council in the
maintenance of international peace and security, a call for
continued partnership and cooperation.

Let me add in passing that the African leaders also
deplored the unilateral use of force in international
relations outside the duly conferred mandate of the United
Nations Security Council. They stressed that such a use
of force will open the way to practices inimical to world
peace and security. That is Namibia's view as well.

It is also, in a nutshell, Namibia's contribution to
this debate. We have resisted the urge to deal with all the
burning issues and to give reasons why Namibia is in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo at the expressed
invitation of the legitimate Government of President
Laurent Kabila and in response to the request by a fellow
Southern African Development Community (SADC)
member State. We have refrained because Namibia's
position is well known.

However, before concluding I would like to
underscore the following four cardinal points briefly.

First, Namibia steadfastly reiterates its unwavering
adherence to the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement, excepting
for the obvious need to update the timetable and the
related technical modalities. It is not the already
negotiated and signed text of the Ceasefire Agreement
which is the problem. No. The real problem is the
demonstrated lack of political will and vision for the
future of certain parties.

There is also the problem of interference by some of
the other interlocutors who are not being too helpful

 

because they seem to have their own hidden agendas and
pursue a different outcome in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo than the one that most of Africa and the rest of
the international community want. Clearly such acts are a
blatant violation of the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence and unity of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Let me reiterate that the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo must be respected.

Secondly, for Namibia it is really axiomatic that the
Joint Military Commission (JMC) and the United Nations
Observer Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) should at all times consult, coordinate and act
together until the end and to the satisfaction of all the
relevant parties involved, above all to the satisfaction of the
Government and the people of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. It should be mentioned, however, that the JMC
faces an acute lack of resources. This has been repeatedly
mentioned, and Namibia joins in calling attention to this.
Namibia has contributed to the funding of the J MC, and we
call on the international community to assist in this regard.

We welcome the presence of the Secretary-General of
the OAU at this meeting. We are happy to see the growing
cooperation between the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and the Secretary-General of the OAU, and we
urge them to continue.

Thirdly, whatever declaration or explanatory note may
emerge from New York must be clear and helpful to the
peace process and not create any room for new
misunderstandings or tampering with the substantive text of
the Lusaka Agreement. We must be able to look to the
future and go forward with confidence when we leave New
York. Thus, the explicit reaffirmation of the political will
here by all of us to move the process forward is what is
most needed at this time.

Fourth and last, we heartily welcome the appointment
of Sir Ketumile Masire, former President of Botswana, as
the facilitator for the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We will offer our good neighbour all that we can to make
his daunting task a success. To succeed, Sir Ketumile will
require adequate and all-round resources as well as strong
political and technical backup from the United Nations and
the rest of the international community. Needless to add,
Africa, and in this case the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, needs the same political considerations and similar
magnitude of mobilization of resources as Kosovo and East
Timor. In this regard, we call for the speedy deployment of
a United Nations peacekeeping force in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, military observers and
peacekeepers alike, under Chapter VII of the United
Nations Charter.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo is a unique
problem which must be treated as such. The resolution we
expect from the
Council should be consistent with this requirement and
also take into consideration the recent decisions taken by
African regional leaders in Maputo.

Any conflict and/or its effects have humanitarian
consequences on the people concerned. The people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo are no exception.
Namibia calls upon the international community to
continue to provide generous assistance in the United
Nations Inter-Agency Consolidated Appeal for 2000.

I cannot end without paying a well-deserved tribute
to and congratulating the United Kingdom's Permanent
Representative, Sir Jeremy Greenstock, for his sterling
service as Council President at the end of the last
millennium and of the century and especially for the
unprecedented, interactive meeting he convened on
Africa. His presidency concluded with a memorable
reception in the Delegates Lounge on 29 December. On
that occasion, he invited me to join him and the
Secretary-General to toast the old and the new alike. This
is a part of a vision I expressed on that occasion, and I
quote myself:

"Let us welcome the new millennium and the new
beginning with a universal kinship of spirit and
enlarged kindness towards one another".

I also said:

"If we do that - and we must - we will be able to
create more favourable conditions for a lasting
peace...human security and prosperity that all of us
can share in." (ibid.)

That is my dream for the sake of the world's
children. Africa, Africa, Africa will rise again, and peace
will come
 

to the Democratic Republic of the Congo as well, with the
assistance of the United Nations, the Organization of
African Unity and the friends of Africa worldwide,

