Mr. Sun Lei (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
wishes to thank Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi for his
briefing. We appreciate the great deal of work that he
and his team have done.

Over the past six months, the joint efforts of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) and the Group of Experts have
enabled the Committee to carry out its work in an
orderly manner on issues such as the implementation of
the resolution, international cooperation, and assistance
and outreach programmes. The focus of the Committee's
work in the next phase will be the comprehensive review
of the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). In that
connection, China wishes to make several remarks.

First, it is necessary to undertake a comprehensive
review of the implementation of the resolution. The
review should revolve around the core provisions of the
resolution and make full use of existing resources and
tools of the Committee to strengthen the analysis ofthe
implementation in order to identify both progress and
weak links and provide guidance to Member States with
a view to further raising their awareness with regard
to non-proliferation and improving their capacity to
prevent proliferation.

Secondly, it is important to ensure that the main
thrust of the resolution is properly understood. In
accordance with resolution 1540 (2004), all Member
States should prohibit any non-State actor from
manufacturing, acquiring, processing, developing,
transporting, transferring or using weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery, especially
for the purposes of terrorism. The comprehensive
review process should hinge on that core mandate
of the resolution, and should avoid expanding the
interpretation of the scope of the resolution, or
introducing other sensitive and complicated issues that
do not already fall within its scope.

Thirdly, it is vital to listen carefully to the views
of Member States and to ensure the transparency and
openness of the review process. China has noted the
Committee's work plan for the comprehensive review.
Next year, consultations will be conducted with the
membership. China believes that the principle of
transparency should be adhere to throughout the
process, listening to and fully taking into account
the views of all Member States so as to enable the
comprehensive review process to achieve its expected
results.

Fourthly, we must effectively enhance the assistance
mechanism of the Committee through the comprehensive
review. At present, the assistance mechanism has
played a certain role, but there is still room for further
strengthening and improvements. Targeted measures
should be taken through the comprehensive review to
promote a greater role for the Committee in providing
assistance in order to effectively meet the assistance
needs of the relevant countries.

China attaches great importance to the significant
role played by the 1540 Committee and its Group of
Experts. China has actively participated in the work of
the Committee in a constructive way. As part of the
efforts to strengthen capacity-building in the Asia-
Pacific countries and help them implement resolution
1540 (2004), China hosted a training course in
September on Security Council resolution 1540 (2004)
for national focal points in the Asia-Pacific region.
The training course enhanced the understanding of
participants with regard to resolution 1540 (2004) and
its background, thereby assisting countries in their
efforts to make progress on the implementation of the
resolution, both at home and among States. China will
continue to work with all countries to contribute to
international non-proliferation efforts.

