Mr. Jiiri Luik (Estonia): Allow me to thank France
for organizing this timely debate, which can strengthen
our collective approach towards the financing of
terrorism. Estonia welcomes the adoption of resolution
2462 (2019) on countering the financing of terrorism.
We align ourselves with the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union (EU).

Terrorist acts can destabilize the society and
attack the values that lie at the heart of the Charter
of the United Nations. We must step up our efforts to
combat those growing threats to peace and security. An
effective response to combating terrorism and terrorism
financing requires a comprehensive approach.

It is clear that while the military operation Inherent
Resolve in Syria and Iraq was a success, the challenge
of fighting terrorism financing remains as relevant as
ever. Da'esh and all terrorist organizations will continue
to need money to spread their ideologies and to carry
out attacks, especially those that operate clandestinely.

We believe that, despite it being a global challenge,
the fight against terrorism financing starts at the
national level. Only States themselves can ensure
that their national counter-terrorism and anti-money-
laundering legislation has been successfully established
and enforced. Only States can ensure that the relevant
internationallegalinstrumentshavebeenfullyintegrated
within their own national legal systems. Only States
can ensure that they have sufficient national capacity
and up-to-date information technology solutions to
tackle the challenge of terrorist financing effectively.
At the same time, effective counter-terrorism measures
and the protection of human rights are complementary
and mutually reinforcing objectives.

We recognize that the financing of terrorism goes
beyond State borders and that legal, administrative
and operational frameworks vary among States.
International cooperation, the exchange of information,
the development of data interoperability and operational
synchronization are therefore key. In that regard,
we believe that the role of the Financial Action Task
Force (FATF) and its regional body, the Committee of
Experts on the Evaluation of Anti-Money Laundering
Measures and the Financing of Terrorism, are of
crucial importance, together, of course, with the United
Nations, the Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development, the International Monetary Fund
and the World Bank. The global implementation of the
FATF international standard allows us to better identify,
mitigate and share information on terrorism financing.

Focusing on the implementation of counter-
terrorism financing legislation in Estonia, we joined
the International Convention for the Suppression of
the Financing of Terrorism. We support all United
Nations, NATO, Council of Europe and EU initiatives
to combat terrorism and to freeze the funds and
economic resources used by terrorists or provided by
their supporters.

Estonian legislation enables the full implementation
of all Security Council resolutions concerning the
fight against terrorism. Only two years ago, a court
case in Estonia showed that terrorism financing as a
phenomenon was not just an abstract, distant problem,
even in our region. It is a dynamic and continuously
evolving threat that requires vigilance and constant
attention. In that respect, in February this year our
Parliament passed the new International Sanctions
Act, which will further support our entrepreneurs'
compliance with the 2018 United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the need to
continue to invest towards technological solutions in
the financial sector as terrorist organizations adapt very
quickly. Our responses need to reflect the reality and
adjust constantly to stay one step ahead of the terrorists
in new emerging fields, such as cryptocurrencies.
As civil society becomes increasingly dependent on
digital technology, we must protect our civil society
organizations by ensuring that they are well aware
of the threat of terrorism financing. We must use the
existing channels of information exchange between the
public and private sectors.

Estonia is eager to continue participating in the
international fight against the financing of terrorism.

