Mr. Abdul Wahab: It is, indeed, a great pleasure
and honour for my delegation to address the Security
Council under the presidency of South Africa. My
delegation would like to thank the presidency and
Council members for the kind invitation extended to
the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC) to
participate in this important meeting.
In December 2005, the OIC adopted a New
Vision and outlined a Ten-Year Programme of Action.
The list of priorities in the Plan of Action includes
multilateral cooperation with regional and other
intergovernmental organizations to promote common
objectives.

Africa is central to the concerns of the OIC.
Twenty-seven member countries, comprising nearly
half of the OIC's membership, are from the African
continent. They are integral to the aspirations of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference. Consequently,
the advancement of the OIC is inextricably linked to
enhancing the development of the African region. In
this regard, a Poverty Alleviation Fund was established
in 2006 by the Islamic Development Bank - a
specialized agency of the OIC - which has targeted
initial capital of $10 billion to enhance the capacities
of the least developed member States. The focus, of
course, will be on African least developed countries.

The OIC fully supports and welcomes the
initiative to develop a plan for African regional and
subregional organizations, particularly with regard to
strengthening cooperation to develop the capacities of
the African countries and the African Union in
peacebuilding and conflict management.

Despite severe limitations, the African Union has
played an admirable role in multiple peacekeeping
operations on the African continent. The OIC
appreciates the support of brotherly States that have
contributed to those endeavours.

For its part, the OIC has been playing an active
role in mediating and defusing conflicts in several
places in Asia and Africa. Additionally, the OIC and
the Islamic Development Bank would like to develop
closer coordination with the United Nations
Peacebuilding Commission.

The humanitarian impact of an unresolved
conflict crosses not only borders but also continents.
The OIC believes that the essential lesson that must be
learned is that peacebuilding and conflict management
require political engagement and the bolstering of the
tried and true policy of multilateralism.

There exists a unique window of opportunity for
cooperation among the OIC, the United Nations and
the African Union. The OIC stands ready to promote
multifaceted cooperation with the United Nations, the
African Union and other relevant regional and
intergovernmental organizations.

