I would like to begin by thanking the Estonian presidency for organizing today's high-level video-teleconference on the protection of civilians in armed conflict. I also thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio Guterres, the President of the International Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Peter Maurer, and Nobel Peace Laureate and member of The Elders, President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, for their briefings. I also welcome the annual report of the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2020/366). We are at one of the most difficult junctures in human history. Due to the coronavirus-disease pandemic, the protection of civilians has become the foremost priority of every country, whether it be at peace or in conflict. The impacts of this invisible enemy threaten to reverse the achievements of years of rigorous diplomatic efforts aimed at sustaining peace. Poor and vulnerable countries had already been struggling when they had to take up the fight against this pandemic and strive to provide proper health services and economic relief to their citizens. In addition to this, there is a danger that the pandemic will support destabilizing factors that fuel frustration and create instability. The cases of gender-based violence and discrimination against the vulnerable segments of populations are already on the rise. In this context, we must ensure that the pandemic not be used as a pretext to inflict pain and suffering on civilians. The most vulnerable people, particularly children, women, the sick and the wounded, should be given special attention. Moreover, civilians' right to food and unhindered access to health and medical facilities should not be compromised under any circumstances. Above all, the principles of international humanitarian law and human rights law should be upheld in all circumstances. Nepal expresses its support for the international normative framework for the protection of civilians and underscores the need to reinforce existing standards and their effective implementation. The State has the primary responsibility for protecting its civilians and preventing violence against them. Perpetrators should be held accountable and brought to justice. The capacity of national Governments to develop and implement national policy frameworks on the protection of civilians should be strengthened. In this regard, States Members of the United Nations and regional institutions should share their experience and good practices with each other. Nepal's experience from its nationally led peace process has proved the significance of the promotion of social harmony, tolerance and understanding for ensuring the protection of civilians in conflicts and peace processes alike. The local community should be informed and involved, as they are directly or indirectly affected by conflicts and their aftermaths. Local community leaders, youth and women's organizations have a crucial role to play in strengthening the social fabric. Furthermore, the investments in education, awareness programmes and employment generation are the most prudent that can be made to protect civilians in the long run. Moreover, inclusive policies relating to all issues of social life, including in public governance, must be adopted and promoted. As one of the major contributors to United Nations peacekeeping operations, Nepal takes every measure to prevent the exploitation of civilians by keeping its peacekeepers highly professional, including through vetting, predeployment and in- theatre awareness training on applicable provisions of international humanitarian law and human rights law as well as through robust punitive measures for those convicted in sexual exploitation and abuse cases. In conclusion, I wish to highlight the importance of providing peacekeeping missions with proper and adequate resources for implementing their mandates, including their protection-of-civilians mandates, at this difficult hour. This will also help the peacekeeping missions support host Governments in their fight against the pandemic.
