Mr. Kasse (Mali): I should like first of all to
welcome the Minister for External Relations of Angola,
Mr. Joao Bernardo de Miranda, who is with us today. I
should like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
organized this very important open meeting today in
order to allow Ambassador Richard Ryan, Chairman of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 864 (1993) concerning Angola, to present
the final report of the Monitoring Mechanism on
sanctions against UNITA. We would also like to thank
Ambassador Ryan for his noteworthy statement, as well
as the members of the Monitoring Mechanism for the
work that they have accomplished. We congratulate
them.

The Monitoring Mechanism concerning Angola
has proved to be very useful, and we can now say that
the sanctions imposed against UNITA have seriously
undermined its ability to wage war on a large scale.
This result should encourage us in our resolve to
strengthen sanctions against UNITA as well as to
strengthen the current sanctions control and monitoring
system so that we can obtain better cooperation from
States.

The final report that we are considering today
covers the second stage of work of the Monitoring
Mechanisms on Angola Sanctions and contains
recommendations on specific areas on which I wish to
comment.

First, my delegation believes that arms-exporting
countries should strengthen their arms exports regimes
in order to allow for better verification of the
authenticity of relevant documentation and the issuing
country. We feel that the responsibility for the
proliferation and illicit distribution of small arms in
Africa also resides with producing and transporting
countries.

We support the proposed mechanism to improve
the provision of end-user certificates necessary for
arms purchases. We also encourage the establishment
of a system for rapid information exchange and for
verifying the validity of end-user certificates. An
exhaustive inventory of firms involved as
intermediaries for arms imports and exports would also
contribute to improved awareness of those involved in
that important aspect of sanctions.

For its part, the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) recently renewed its
moratorium on the import, export and manufacture of
light weapons in West Africa. We reiterate the appeal
launched to the international community to support
ECOWAS and the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) in their efforts to control the

movement of light weapons. We also believe - as
stressed by the ECOWAS ministerial delegation at our
meeting of 12 February - that improving air

surveillance, so as to give the States of the region the
means to control their airspace in order to reduce and
curb illicit arms trafficking, should be taken into
account.

Secondly, we are in favour of extending the
diamond certification system. Countries without the
financial and technical resources necessary to
implement the certificate of origin scheme should be
assisted as soon as possible in establishing it. We also
feel that a broader mechanism covering precious
objects would have the advantage of allowing us to
have a clear strategy with respect to all sanctions-
busters. We also support the Kimberley process, the
ultimate aim of which is to establish a standardized
diamond certification system.

Thirdly, with respect to secondary sanctions
against States that violate measures adopted against
UNITA, my delegation feels that we can impose
sanctions only once we have exhausted all other
recourses and means at the Council's disposal. We
welcome the idea of creating a follow-up system for
the implementation of sanctions. While waiting to learn
more about such a mechanism, we believe that any
such system should cooperate fully with regional
organizations, without which it will be very difficult to
implement and properly follow up the implementation
of sanctions. The opinions of regional organizations in
this field should be taken into account.

Fourthly, my delegation welcomes the
cooperation established between the Monitoring
Mechanism and the Executive Secretary of ECOWAS
and some of its member States, which has allowed us
seriously to address the issue of UNITA travel and
representation in ECOWAS territory. We strongly
encourage the continuation of this cooperation, which
was long sought by ECOWAS.

We must keep in mind that UNITA's financial
network remains the weak link in our Mechanism. Like
others, my delegation is aware of the critical need to
shed light on this issue and is determined to move
forward in this area in order to put a definitive end to
UNITA's military capacity. We believe that any
approach to this important matter requires the full
cooperation of States, especially those possessing the
most advanced technology and the technical means
necessary to expose UNITA's funds and financials
assets.

I cannot conclude without stressing once again
the need for the enhanced cooperation and total support
of the United Nations and the international community
for the preventive and peace-oriented efforts of the
subregional organizations, such as SADC and
ECOWAS, which are heavily involved in conflict
management and without which it will be very
difficult, despite the measures already undertaken, to
achieve the peace we all long for.

