Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to thank my neighbour to the
right, Mr. Robert Serry, United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
briefing on the situation in the Middle East, a region
that is at a critical moment on its way to finding a just
and lasting solution.

This meeting is taking place two days after the
adoption by the Security Council of resolution 1850
(2008) on the situation in the Middle East - the first
substantial resolution since May 2004. Thus, we can
only welcome the action of the Council and the joint
American-Russian initiative, which, we hope, will help
to give the Annapolis process new momentum and
safeguard its achievements.

Through the resolution, the Council has
reaffirmed its responsibility for and commitment to the
Israeli-Palestinian negotiation process. It has also
recalled the need for the implementation of the Road
Map by the two parties, while acknowledging the
significant effort of the Arab world through its 2002
Peace Initiative.

Although it does not address some important
aspects, the resolution had, and has, the advantage of
reaffirming the core issues in solving the situation in
the Middle East, namely and above all the
irreversibility of negotiation. That principle entails
renouncing all military solutions and a commitment to
negotiate not just for the sake of negotiation but to do
so with the aim of achieving the desired result, while
adopting the appropriate attitude to ensure the success
of the negotiations. In that context, the sealing off of
Palestinian territory, the ongoing pursuit of the
settlements policy and the cutting off of energy
supplies are all incompatible with the spirit of
negotiation.

The second fundamental principle entails the duty
of the parties to fully honour their obligations under
the Road Map and to refrain from any actions that
might compromise negotiations or undermine the
confidence that should prevail between the parties.
Although Israel's release of 250 prisoners is
encouraging, the targeted assassinations and impeding
of access to humanitarian assistance and the free
movement of Palestinians between Gaza and the rest of
the occupied Palestinian territories deviates from the
requisite atmosphere of confidence and further worsens
the sense of frustration among Palestinians, who are
the innocent victims.

The third fundamental principle pertains to the
call on the international community to contribute to the
establishment of environment conducive to
negotiations and to support the Palestinian
Government. Those two elements are crucial to the
success of peace efforts. States with special relations
with the parties or that can have a positive influence on
them are therefore called upon to encourage and
nurture the negotiating process. In that regard, the
members of the Quartet have a key role in eventually
providing decisive momentum to the negotiations. We
hope to see that momentum in 2009, ensuring that there
are tangible results on the ground for the Palestinian
people, who are the ones most affected by the ongoing
occupation. At the same time, it is absolutely necessary
for there to be inter-Palestinian reconciliation.
Everything must be done to ensure that as soon as
possible.

The fourth, and last, basic principle entails the
finalizing of a negotiated peace treaty. The call to
continue negotiations and to establish appropriate
conditions to conclude them is aimed at achieving a
peace treaty to resolve all issues, including the most
delicate and decisive. In that regard, the 2002 Arab
Peace Initiative continues to be important, meaningful
and relevant as a courageous, balanced and forward-
looking effort to which Israel is called upon to respond
with the same sense of courage and determination.

For its part, the Kingdom of Morocco, whose
King Mohammed VI holds the chairmanship of the Al-
Quds Committee, remains ready to make its
contribution to the success of negotiations to achieve
genuine peace in the Middle East, ensure Israel's
withdrawal from Arab territories occupied since 1967
and establish a viable Palestinian State with East
Jerusalem as its capital and living side by side with
Israel.
We hope that the affirmation in resolution 1850
(2008) stating that the Security Council remains seized
of the issue of the Middle East is not merely a matter
of rhetoric but instead the expression of the Council's
genuine willingness to assist in the negotiating process,

08-6603]
remain engaged in following developments, assessing
results and, if necessary, act to inject new momentum.
It is high time that the peoples of region regain peace
and security, that a viable Palestinian State finally
emerges, that the Golan is reintegrated with Syria and
that the entire region once again becomes a land where
all religions coexist and where there is fruitful
cooperation among all peoples.

