Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): 1 thank the Italian
presidency for highlighting the plight of refugees and
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
Grandi for his comprehensive briefing.

In the aftermath of the Second World War, most
countries agreed to protect refugees under the 1951
Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees.
However, this vision of a better world has eroded with
the unfolding of a global unprecedented humanitarian
crisis. We therefore need collective solutions, visionary
leadership and global cooperation on a massive scale.
Primary among these are the ending of conflicts,
persecution, terrorism and violent extremism that
force people to flee; the implementation of peace
agreements; upholding ceasefires, and allowing
humanitarian access.

The Astana platform supporting the Geneva
process to mitigate the situation in Syria is a good
illustration. The protection of civilians should be the
key responsibility of Member States which in conflict
areas must be helped with capacity-building in the
rule of law, good governance, security sector reforms,
promoting human rights and investing in development
to create political, economic and social stability.
It is therefore obvious that the protection of civilians
should be an integral element of all multidimensional
peacekeeping operations and political mission mandates.
In addition, protection experts must be strategically
positioned in all mission units and other mechanisms,
working closely with United Nations country teams
and the Governments of host countries, as well as with
police- and troop-contributing countries. Training must
be provided on the protection of refugees, women and
children. Care must be taken to see that refugees in
camps have adequate food and water and are not subject
to forced labour, sexual abuse and exploitation.

Understanding the root causes of displacement
is necessary to long-term development and to
strengthening the security-development nexus by
investing in poverty reduction, education, job creation
and basic services. Protection of civilians criteria
must also be part of relevant sanction committees, and
perpetrators must be brought to justice.

We call upon all Member States to carry out
all measures related to counter-terrorism, in full
compliance with international law. It is equally critical
to harmonize legislation and amend criminal codes
accordingly. Additionally, the fight against terrorism
must not lead to the killing ofcivilians or their expulsion,
causing them to flee to other countries. Hospitals,
ambulances, schools and critical energy, transport and
communications infrastructure need to be protected to
serve local populations. Intensive programmes should
be initiated to enable refugees and internally displaced
persons to return home.

Addressing the Security Council last month,
Secretary-General Guterres, quoting World Food
Programme statistics, indicated that "a l per cent
increase in food insecurity leads to a 2 per cent increase
in refugees" (S/PV8069, p. 4). Conflict in one country
places demands on its neighbours to provide food and
basic services to refugees. That can lead to further
instability, which affects the security of an entire region
and beyond. Therefore, only a region and subregional
approach would make concerted action across borders
possible. The magnitude of the refugee crisis is so
alarming that the international community has to step
up to increase support for UNHCR and the International
Organization for Migration (IOM). A determined effort
would enable the setting up of a strong refugee system
that offers asylum for legitimate claims and provides
basic survival kits and supplements, even to families
who host refugees. Nearly 84 per cent of refugees today
are hosted by middle- and low-income countries. They
need to be supported.

Likewise, we should open up safe routes for
refugees and initiative resettlement programmes.
Similarly, saving lives should be our key goal, so that no
one dies crossing a border or fleeing in a boat. Together
with investing in search and rescue operations and
helping those in distress, all countries are expected to
invesitgate and prosecute trafficking gangs that exploit
refugees and migrants.

We also need to fight xenophobia, racism and,
inter-ethnic tensions that lead to hostilities and
senseless expulsions of people. Kazakhstan has
lessons to share based on its experience of holding
three annual conferences of traditional and religious
leaders of all religions, and establishing an assembly
of Kazakh people that includes all ethnic and religious
denominations, particularly youth, in order to foster
unity and social harmony.

Kazakhstan, together with its neighbours, is
making every effort to develop and implement policies
that ensure basic human rights throughout Central Asia.
My country has a long record of excellent collaboration
with the relevant United Nations agencies, such as
UNHCR and IOM, as well as with the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation and others. To coordinate
regional and international efforts to deal with the
influx to, from and within Central Asia, Kazakhstan,
in cooperation with UNHCR and IOM, initiated in 2011
the regional consultative Almaty process in order to
create mechanisms to monitor irregular migration and
devise new, coherent, comprehensive and differentiated
policies. That regional initiative presently includes
seven member States and two observers from our part
of the world. It will expand in geographic scope with
the increasing flow of populations across the region.

Finally, Kazakhstan is strongly committed to
reaching concrete outcomes on the issue of refugees
with the United Nations and other Member States,
based on fundamental principles of human dignity,
justice and freedom.

