Ms. Tincopa (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank Mr. Pronk for his excellent
presentation. We think that the information he has
given us is very useful. We are concerned at hearing
that the implementation of the commitments under the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) is stagnant or
has made only very little progress. We would like to
urge all parties involved to comply fully with their
commitments under the CPA and not give priority to
some to the detriment of others.

I think it is important that we start to work
urgently on the issues of the sharing of power and
wealth, which are the cornerstone of the Agreement.
Another aspect that needs urgent political commitment
is the Ceasefire Commission.

The Sudan is growing economically and is
benefiting from the high price of oil. It is important
that the Government develop a policy of total
transparency in its handling of oil revenues and assume
its primary responsibility of guaranteeing the
development of all the people of the Sudan. That can
be done through policies and programmes to fight
poverty and in a framework of full respect for human
rights.

We agree with what the Secretary-General's
report says with regard to the fact that donors and the
international community should support the people of
the Sudan in facing the challenges of the peace process
and provide financial, technical and political assistance
to carry out the programme of the CPA.
It has been said that peace is indivisible. Some of
the progress that has been made under the CPA could
be severely affected if at the same time no progress is
made in implementing the Darfur Peace Agreement
(DPA). We appreciate and share the five conditions that
Mr. Pronk has put forward to get the DPA out of its
deep coma. We regret that the Government of the
Sudan does not wish to understand that the goal of the
peacekeeping operation in Darfur is nothing other than
to work cooperatively with its authorities for the
implementation of the peace and security agreements
and for the protection of the population in Darfur,
which at present is not protected at all.

Developments in the field show that this is
urgent. The deterioration of security conditions and the
restricted humanitarian assistance mean that millions
of people are at great risk, on the border of a
humanitarian crisis. In this context, it is important that
the Security Council, the regional organizations and all
interested countries continue to seek a way to convince
the Government to implement rapidly resolution 1706
(2006), in particular to support effective implement of
the DPA and protection of civilians.

We would also like to say that we support the
Secretary-General's recommendation to renew the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan.

We have a question for Mr. Pronk regarding the
lack of political will in the Ceasefire Commission.
What are the details behind this, and why have the
ceasefire commitments been constantly violated?

