The President (spoke in Chinese): I will now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.

I would first like to thank Special Representative
Salame' for his briefing and to welcome Ambassador
Skoog in the wake of his leadership of the visit to Libya
by the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011) concerning Libya.

China has been closely following the developments
in Libya and is concerned about the recent clashes that
have broken out. We call on the relevant stakeholders
to resolve their differences through dialogue and
negotiations. Libya is still dealing with multiple
challenges, such as the fragile security situation,
rampant terrorist groups and serious refugee and
immigrant problems. The international community
should therefore ramp up its support and help Libya to
restore stability and effective governance as soon as
possible. I also want to highlight the vital importance
of the following specific actions.

First, there must be a firm commitment to the
overall direction of achieving a political settlement of
the situation in Libya. The international community
should therefore respect Libya's sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity while resolutely
advancing a Libyan-owned and -led political process
through inclusive dialogue at the national, local and
other levels. The various Libyan actors should commit
to expanding their consensus, reducing their differences
and fostering mutual trust in the pursuit of political
solutions that are acceptable to all.

Secondly, efforts must be made to create a security
environment conducive to the success of the political
process. Countries and regional organizations with
influence should use it to get the relevant actors to
refrain from resorting to force. They should instead
be encouraged to achieve reconciliation through
confidence-building measures and establish a unified
national security agency as soon as possible. The
international community should step up its counter-
terrorism efforts and support the countries of the
region in playing an active role in fighting terrorism
and transnational organized crime.

Thirdly, the mediation role of the United Nations
must be strengthened. China supports Special
Representative Salame's leadership of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya in its efforts to
further implement the United Nations Action Plan
for supporting Libya in advancing the drafting of its
Constitution, revising the Libyan Political Agreement
and making the right preparations for the presidential
and parliamentary elections. We call on Libya's
neighbours, as well as the African Union, the League
of Arab States, the European Union and others, to
intensify their coordination and cooperation with the
United Nations in a joint effort to help Libya implement
the Action Plan.

Fourthly, sanctions, which are a means, not an
end, must be handled properly and should always serve
the political settlement of the relevant issues. When
sanctions are imposed on Libya, efforts should be made
to prevent any negative effects on Libyan civilians
and third countries. Neither the State of Libya's
overall interests nor the people's normal livelihoods
and humanitarian needs should be undermined. The
Sanctions Committee should begin considering without
delay how to properly respond to Libya's legitimate
concerns about the continuing depreciation and losses
incurred by its frozen assets. China supports any effort
conducive to stabilizing Libya and promoting a political
settlement of the Libyan issue, and we stand ready to
continue to play a constructive role in restoring security
and stability to Libya as soon as possible.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Libya.
