Mr. Powles (New Zealand): I should like to say at the
outset, Sir, how pleased my delegation is to participate
under your presidency in a debate of the Security Council
on this crucially important subject. We believe that the
complexities of post-conflict peace-building and the
challenges posed to the United Nations and the international
community generally deserve thorough consideration.

New Zealand has had recent experience of the
challenges of post-conflict peace-building during the current
operation in East Timor, as well as during our ongoing
substantial role in Bougainville, Papua New Guinea, and
elsewhere.

An important point to be made, we believe, is that
obviously no two post-conflict peace-building situations are
the same. It would not be helpful for the Council to seek to
define very detailed policy approaches which would be
applicable in all situations. Nevertheless, my delegation
believes that there are some key principles which do have
general application and deserve greater recognition.

Most important of all, we would place timeliness of
response at the top of any list of key principles.

In the case of East Timor, New Zealand and others
moved quickly, under effective Australian leadership, to
provide the military force necessary to re-establish security,
as mandated by the Council. United Nations agencies, led
by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA), responded reasonably promptly with
humanitarian relief. The World Bank and other major
donors also responded at an early stage with the
implementation of a donor coordination programme.
These responses were delivered in a reasonably timely
manner.

There has also been an urgent need to re-establish a
basic civil administration, a legal system, and the
foundation for a functioning economy. This has been done
with greater difficulty. Bureaucratic procedures such as
those used for recruitment for the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
seem to underlie some of the unfortunate delays.

While it would not be realistic to expect the
international community to rebuild East T imor's shattered
economy overnight, we have already seen many signs of
the social stresses inevitable in the period before
employment-generating projects get under way. We
believe this is recognized by UNTAET, the World Bank
and other international donors, but we would emphasize
the important contribution that timely responses in this
field, going beyond emergency humanitarian aid, make to
the peace-building effort.

One practical area that my delegation believes
requires more attention relates to the provision of civilian
police. Inevitably, appropriate numbers of civilian police
cannot be found as quickly as can military forces;
countries simply do not keep civilian police detachments
available for rapid deployment overseas. But the process
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of ex-
combatants can be fatally impaired if sufficient numbers
of civilian police cannot be deployed rapidly. We believe
that options for improving the availability of police to the
United Nations need to be urgently explored. However, a
timely response is possible only if good quick-response
systems for deploying key personnel, such as civilian
police, and for delivering the means to rebuild basic
civilian administration are already in place. Such
arrangements do not yet exist across the United Nations
system. This is the challenge that the United Nations
needs to address as a priority.

Identifying appropriate post-conflict roles for former
combatants is inevitably one of the most challenging tasks
in peace-building. Obviously, each situation will require
its own unique solutions. Our experience in both East
Timor and Bougainville underlines, however, the
importance of the early involvement of the local
population in the reconstruction process. Community

 

development can be instrumental in providing an
atmosphere in which hostile factions can work together. Of
course, women and men must participate equally in that
process.

In Bougainville, New Zealand has been pleased to
provide, by means of our Development Cooperation
Programme, support for the peace process, including the
restoration of civil authority and a variety of vocational
training programmes with a focus on reintegration. We have
found it possible to offer various training programmes in
which former antagonists learn new skills side by side. But
even so, in Bougainville the former combatants retain their
arms although, to their credit, those arms have not been
used against the uniquely unarmed peacekeeping force, the
Peace Monitoring Group. In this situation, further political
progress is clearly necessary to encourage complete
disarmament.

We have studied the comprehensive report the
Secretary-General has provided on this important subject.
Inevitably, his report focused on the subject from a global
perspective, while my comments today have been from the
perspective of my country's ongoing involvement on the
ground in East Timor and Bougainville. But I would like to
take this opportunity to particularly endorse the Secretary-
General's recommendations regarding the dreadful use of
child soldiers, and we would also emphasize the need to
address the specific situation of girl soldiers.

I would like to conclude by strongly endorsing the
final comment of the Secretary-General in his report:

"The international community's key role in this
process is to provide clear, consistent and determined
support to an overall peace process and to offer long-
term assistance with development." [S/2000/10], para.
1 19]

If there is one point we would add to that, it is the
crucial importance of timeliness of response.

