Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): Mr. President, on behalf
of the delegation of Ukraine I wish to thank you for
holding this important meeting and for inviting
Ukraine to participate. I would also like to wish the
Chinese delegation every success in fulfilling the
highly responsible duties of the Security Council
presidency.

Aligning ourselves with the statement of the
European Union, my delegation would like to share
some views in its national capacity.

Undoubtedly, Somalia's insecure and volatile
situation deserves our utmost attention, as it is
impacting not only that country's own people but the
entire region of the Horn of Africa - and, one could
say, the whole world. Although the very process of
bringing peace, stability and prosperity to the country
remains in the hands of the Somalis, the international
community can and, moreover, is obliged to assist
Somalia in completing that difficult task.

Given that the humanitarian crisis in the country
is worsening, the number of violent clashes and losses
of human life are growing and the Transitional
Institutions are so far unable to build constructive
dialogue with other stakeholders of the Somalia
political reconciliation process, the world community
is now being urged to come up with a new, more
holistic and comprehensive approach on Somalia. In
that connection, we welcome the recent adoption by
the United Nations Political Office for Somalia, the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
of the Joint Regional Strategy on Somalia, outlining a
common approach to the political, security,
humanitarian, institutional and financial challenges that
confront the peace process in the country.

In spite of the recent unilateral decision by the
Somali Parliament to extend its mandate for three
years, Ukraine is still hopeful that the Transitional
Federal Government will justify the trust placed in it as
a credible transitional authority in Somalia. However,
Ukraine would favour shortening the transitional
period and combining that with the reform of
transitional institutions and the continuation of the
constitutional process in the country. Thus we reiterate
to Ambassador Mahiga, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Somalia, our full support in
the fulfilment of his mandate.

Military efforts aimed at providing security in
Somalia are also of vital importance. Hence more
progress needs to be made in deploying the additional
AMISOM. troops, as has been authorized by the
Security Council. Ukraine pays tribute to the African
Union soldiers in Somalia, as the gains made by
AMISOM. are coming at a high cost.

One more increasingly disturbing factor in the
context of the situation in Somalia is the maritime
piracy that is taking place off its coast and in the
Arabian Sea area. Ukraine is in favour of reinforcing
the international naval presence in the western part of
the Indian Ocean and in the Arabian Sea. In this regard,
we commend the efforts of the European Union Naval
Force Atalanta and of the other maritime forces
operating in the area off the Somali coast.

Unfortunately, despite the tremendous amount of
work carried out by anti-piracy actors, this scourge is
far from being ended. The pirates' tactics have evolved,
and the overall number of their attacks has grown.
Most regrettably, the level of violence used by pirates
towards the crews of the vessels they attack has
increased dramatically. The average length of time
during which hostages are held by pirates has doubled
since 2009 and is now 190 days. In that context,
Ukraine calls upon all the actors involved, including
flag States and industry, to engage more actively in the
process of resolving the problems of seafarers and their
family members that derive from their being constantly
exposed to the threat of piracy. Although the
implementation of the industry-developed best
management practices has improved the security of
crews and significantly contributed to a reduction in
the number of successful hijackings, a long-term
solution to the problem that addresses its root causes is
still urgently needed.

Nevertheless, a sustainable solution to the
problem of Somali piracy is to be found on the ground,
not at sea, as all of us unanimously agree. In the
process of repressing pirates at sea, the international
community should more keenly explore ways of
building a regional naval and judicial capacity so as to
enable Somalia to police its own waters and bring
pirates to justice. We find reasonable the ideas put
forward by Mr. Jack Lang, the Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on Legal Issues related to Piracy off
the Coast of Somalia, in his recent report (S/2011/30, annex), including the proposal to establish a system of
Somalia courts comprising a specialized court in
Puntland, a specialized court in Somaliland and a
specialized extraterritorial Somali court outside the
country. Notably, Mr. Lang foresees the creation of the
necessary imprisonment facilities in Somalia, as the
lack of imprisonment arrangements has been referred
to as a major constraint on piracy prosecutions.

In our view, it is high time that the Security
Council took measures aimed at fighting Somali
pirates' impunity, on the basis of the work that has
been done to that end by the Secretary-General and his
Special Adviser, as well as by the Contact Group on
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. By doing so, we, as
States Members of the United Nations, would prove
our sincere commitment to cooperating in the
repression of Somalia piracy to the fullest possible
extent.

