Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): First of all, on
behalf of the Vietnamese delegation, I warmly
congratulate you, Mr. President, and the Turkish
delegation on your assumption this month of Turkey's
first presidency of the Council. In discharging your
important task, you and your delegation can rely on the
fullest cooperation of the Vietnamese delegation.

I would like to take this opportunity to convey to
Ambassador Vitaly Churkin and the Russian delegation
our sincere appreciation for their very effective
leadership of the work of the Council in May.

I thank the Presidents and Prosecutors of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for their briefings. We
thank the Tribunals for their very comprehensive
reports and for the amount of work they have been able
to accomplish, and note their commitment to
continuing their efforts to expedite the completion of
their mandates.
According to their most recent projections, both
Tribunals will be conducting first instance trials
beyond the end of 2009 and appellate proceedings after
2010. While acknowledging that there have been
unexpected and uncontrollable factors that have caused
the delay of trials, my delegation is concerned about
the continuing lateness in transferring accused to the
custody of the Tribunals, and about the fact that all
requests made by the ICTR Prosecutor for referrals to
Rwanda have been denied and that both Tribunals are
faced with difficulties in retaining their current, highly
qualified staff.

In resolution 1534 (2004), the Security Council
expressed its determination to review the
implementation of the completion strategies of the
Tribunals and to ensure that the time frames set out in
the completion strategies and endorsed by resolution
1503 (2003) could be met. While assessments and
decisions of the Council have been and will be made in
accordance with corresponding realities, we deem it
necessary to urge the Tribunals to take all necessary
measures to meet the requirements of the completion
strategies, and we call on all Member States to
cooperate fully with the Tribunals to help them achieve
an early completion of their work. We support all
efforts aimed at strengthening the competent national
judicial systems to facilitate the transfer of cases
involving intermediate and lower-rank indictees,
including the fugitives, from the Tribunals to national
jurisdictions.

During the past 18 months, the Informal Working
Group of the Security Council on international
tribunals, under the chairmanships of Belgium and
Austria, has been intensively discussing a possible
residual mechanism to replace the ICTY and the ICTR
in their post-completion period. We support the efforts
made by the Working Group in this regard and consider
them to be important inputs for further informed
decisions by the Council on the completion strategies
for the Tribunals.

In conclusion, we are at a critical juncture of our
joint undertaking for the smooth and effective
completion of the Tribunals' work. We need to ensure
that the two Tribunals receive all necessary guidance
and support, including sufficient resources to complete
their mandates and address their legacy issues as
advisedly as possible.
