Mr. IliicheV (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, as well
as the Special Representative of the African Union,
Mr. Moussa Nebie, and the representative of the
Community of Sant'Egidio, Mr. Mauro Garofalo, for
their detailed briefings.

We share the concerns about the continuing situation
of military and political tension in the country and the
fact that clashes between groups are increasingly ethnic
and confessional in nature. Of course, civilians are the
ones who suffer the most. The top priority of all parties
to the conflict should be to provide humanitarian
access to the victims. The authorities must create the
conditions for a safe and voluntary return of refugees
and internally displaced persons to their homes.

The already difficult situation is further complicated
by the fact that the authorities actually control only
the capital, Bangui, and the local Government bodies
are paralysed or lacking in the rest of the country. The
adoption of the national strategy for the restoration of
State authority on 8 September and the appointment of
prefects and subprefects are certainly steps in the right
direction, but much remains to be done to do.

With the signing in Rome, on 19 June, of a
peaceful political agreement between the Government
and armed groups, real prospects for normalizing the
situation in the Central African Republic have opened
up. We support the steps outlined in that document
towards stabilization and establishing a ceasefire
throughout the country, lifting restrictions on the free
movement of goods and people, releasing illegally
detained persons and ensuring that illegal armed
groups recognzie authorities elected in the 2015-2016
elections as legitimate. We believe it is necessary for all
parties to the agreement to undertake additional efforts
to quickly implement its provisions.

We support the steps being taken by Bangui to
reform the security sector and resume control over the
entire territory of the country. Those steps are aimed
at contributing, including with the support of the
international community, to resolving the issues and
tasks, many ofwhich werejustly mentioned in the recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/865), and they
contribute to implementing the national defence plan
approved by President Touadera on 4 September, which
includes the gradual transfer of responsibility for State
affairs in the country to the legitimate authorities.

We note the efforts by the Government of the Central
African Republic aimed at ensuring operational and
combat readiness and rapidly deploying two battalions
of its armed forces, which, as we understand it, should
form the backbone of the future unified armed forces
of the country. The Central African authorities will
need to work together to ensure that the justice system
starts working properly, with a focus on building
national capacities.

Temporary emergency measures by peacekeepers
and the delayed establishment of the Special Criminal
Court are not a panacea for the country's problems
in combating impunity. International experience has
shown that various courts with international support
are not very effective and are costly.

It is also important to create favourable conditions
for the implementation of the African Initiative for
Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic. Also, the road map for a Central African
settlement adopted in the Libreville on 17 July must
be fully implemented. In that connection, we stress the
importance of coordinating and harmonizing all the
peace initiatives related to the Central African Republic.

The Blue Helmets are playing an important
stabilizing role in the Central African Republic.
We are ready to carefully study the proposal of
the Secretary-General on increasing the military
component of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA), given the difficult situation in
the country. At the same time, we want to stress once
again that we must be careful in cooperating with
troop-contributing countries. It is unacceptable for an
entire contingent to be removed due to sexual abuses
committed by a few individual peacekeepers and to
have no substitute for the unit for an extended period
of time, which seriously undermines the operational
potential of the mission.

It is essential to take coherent steps to address
the challenges facing the Central African community
and to allocate funds from international partners and
donors, including the resources pledged at the Brussels
Conference for the Central African Republic in
November 2016. In that context, we encourage Bangui
to create a transparent and effective national system in
order to manage international aid.

Russia, as a participant in the international support
group on the Central African Republic, intends to
continue actively promoting the peace process in the
Central African Republic, where Russian air transport
resources have already made a significant contribution
to MINUSCA operations.

