Ms. Power (United States of America): I wish to
thank Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson and Assistant
Secretary-General Simonovie for their briefings.

The representative of the Russian Federation began
his statement extolling the so-called referendum as
embodying democratic procedures and having been
conducted without outside interference. Russia is
known for its literary greatness, and what the Council
just heard from the Russian Ambassador showed more
imagination than Tolstoy or Chekhov. Russia has
decided, it seems, to rewrite its borders, but it cannot
rewrite the facts.

The United States rejects Russia's military intervention
and land grab in Crimea. Those actions again violate the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine, Russia's
own binding agreements, international law, the expressed
will of most members of the Council and the letter and
spirit of the Charter of the United Nations. Two days ago,
President Obama and other world leaders put in place
sanctions in response to Russia's blatant disregard for global
opinion and the legal rights of Ukraine. We are prepared
to take additional steps if Russian aggression or Russian
provocations continue.

In this Chamber, when the crisis began, the Russian
Federation described its intervention into Crimea as a human
rights protection mission. It claimed that the recent change
of Government in Ukraine constituted such a danger to
ethnic Russians in Crimea that military action was justified.
Assistant Secretary-General Simonovie's briefing
once again illustrates that the crisis was never about
protecting the rights of ethnic Russians and was always
about one country's ambition to redraw its own borders.

Indeed, if there was ever a time to be concerned
about human rights in Crimea, it is now. Credible
reports indicate that cases of harassment have been
directed by Russian allies against ethnic Ukrainians and
Tatars. The Tatar community, which constitutes 12 per
cent of the population, is rightly fearful of again falling
victim to deportation or discrimination. The Crimean
First Deputy Prime Minister has recently announced
that Crimean Tatars will be evicted from some of their
land, which he claimed is needed for "infrastructure
projects". The body of Reshat Ahmetov, a Crimean
Tatar, was discovered Sunday. He had last been seen
at a protest in Simferopol on 3 March. Ahmetov's body
reportedly showed signs of torture.

Russian troops are reportedly storming apartment
buildings housing Ukrainian troops, border guards,
veterans and their families, threatening them and
demanding their immediate departure. In addition,
we are seriously concerned about activists, civil
society leaders, media restrictions and journalists in
Crimea. Accordingly, the United States supports the
rapid deployment of international observers in all
parts of Ukraine. We believe it is instructive that the
Government of Ukraine has repeatedly welcomed their
deployment, and the Russian Federation has not.

Again today in Vienna, Russia was the lone country
to block an Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe monitoring mission. There, Russia was
dramatically outnumbered. It was the lone dissenting
voice out of 57 countries; 56, it seemed, had a different
view. Russian officials say that they understand the
urgency, but they vote with their feet, relying on their
military forces and refusing to allow the deployment
of those who could help defuse the crisis and prevent
further violence. After hearing my Russian colleague's
assault minutes ago on the Assistant Secretary-
General's briefing, I see the logic of Russian obstruction.
Objective information is inconvenient to the Russian
tale. We call on all parties to support these observer
missions, including their access to Crimea.

We want to thank members of the Council for taking
a strong stance on Russia's intervention in Ukraine and
for making it clear that Russia stands alone in its failed,
illogical and mendacious attempt to justify actions that
cannot be justified. Five days ago, when the Council
accurately described the Crimean separatist referendum
as invalid, only a single hand rose in opposition. When
the Council declared that the referendum could not form
the basis for any alteration of the status of Crimea, only
a single hand rose in opposition. Now the referendum
has taken place, but the national and international legal
status of Crimea has not changed. A thief can steal
property, but that does not confer the right of ownership
on the thief.

In conclusion, let me just emphasize again that
what Russia has done is wrong as a matter of law, wrong
as a matter of history, wrong as a matter of policy,
and dangerous. What happened in Crimea cannot be
recognized as valid. We must stand together denying
recognition and imposing consequences for that illegal
act. In doing so, we must also be very clear that what
happened in Crimea cannot be repeated in other parts
of Ukraine.

