Mr. Sen (India): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
July 2005. The agenda of the Council for the month is
indicative of the important issues that the Council is
called upon to deal with. I have no doubt that those
issues will receive the most careful consideration under
your stellar leadership.

As we are taking the floor for the first time this
month, I would like to convey, on my own behalf and
on behalf of the Government and people of India, our
deep condolences and sympathy to the Government
and people of the United Kingdom for the tragedy that
has resulted from the terrorist attacks in London. Those
reprehensible acts are a crime not just against the
United Kingdom, but against all humanity. The horror
perpetrated in London will remain etched on the
collective consciousness of the world as a signal that
terrorism has become one of the greatest threats of our
times. It is not constrained by distance and resources,
nor restricted by boundaries, nor bound by any
civilized norms in wreaking devastation. The world
community must rise as one to respond decisively to
that collective challenge to the peace, security and
progress of all mankind.

I wish to thank you, Sir, for scheduling this open
meeting of the Security Council today. The regular
participation of the general membership in Council
debates on important issues under its consideration is a
step towards the desired goal of achieving greater
transparency and inclusiveness in the work of the
Council.

The theme of the debate today is one that has
been discussed on a number of occasions by the
Council under different nomenclatures. My delegation
has participated in several open debates on related
issues and our position on those is well-known. In
recent months, the consideration of this and related
issues under the rubric of reform of the United Nations,
based particularly on the report of the High-level Panel
on Threats, Challenges and Change and the Secretary-
General's "In larger freedom" report, has enabled a
fresh airing of views on the subject.

We believe that the topic of this debate belongs
more to the General Assembly, as it revolves around
more than one issue, such as the implementation of
humanitarian law, the rule of law in conflict situations,
and capacity-building of States in conflict or those
emerging from conflict. I believe, however, that you
have more than redressed the balance, Sir, through the
idealism and reason that you have brought to bear on
the consideration of those issues, which is a
characteristic of Hellenic civilization, and the method
of conducting the work that you have adopted. If you
will permit a Christian metaphor, this, I hope, will
remain as a rock on which the future working practices
of the Security Council will be built and will remain a
model for the future.

India has on several occasions expressed its
reservations on intrusive monitoring and finger-
pointing while dealing with specific human rights
situations in individual countries. That principle
applies equally in cases of violation of humanitarian
law. We remain convinced of the essential validity of
an approach that is based on dialogue, consultation and
cooperation leading to genuine improvements in a
situation where violations of human rights law and
humanitarian law are addressed without any external
interference.

We have on earlier occasions also made it clear
that any discussion which is used as a cover for
conferring legitimacy on the so-called right of
humanitarian intervention or for making it the ideology
of some kind of military humanism is unacceptable.
We believe that, in the case of humanitarian crises
manifested in the form of genocide and gross
violations of human rights and humanitarian law, no
amount of sophistry can substitute for the lack of
political will among major Powers.

There is, in fact, a very troubling pattern usually
ignored or not acknowledged. In several countries,
because of the suspicion now engendered that
humanitarian assistance is driven by political motives
and that those who take humanitarian action also take
sides, parties to a conflict have either targeted
humanitarian workers or those they work for, or
refused them access. Those fears can only be allayed if
humanitarian assistance returns to its roots and
humanitarian action is seen as apolitical, neutral and
offered at request, in accordance with the guiding
principles so clearly enunciated by the General
Assembly in its resolution 46/182.

We are not certain if an investigation of the
reasons behind countries' relapsing into conflict would
serve much useful purpose. There may be a variety of
reasons that drag countries into a state of armed
conflict. It is well-known that transitional situations are
complex and country-specific. However, the single
most effective instrument for helping countries not to
relapse into conflict, to our mind, would be
development. It is widely acknowledged that
development assistance to post-conflict countries can
help to stabilize the situation and provide the time
needed for building national institutions.

General Assembly resolution 59/250 on the
triennial comprehensive policy review of operational
activities for development of the United Nations
system urged the United Nations agencies and the
donor community, in coordination with national
authorities, to begin planning the transition to
development and taking measures supportive of that
transition, such as institutional and capacity-building,
from the beginning of the relief phase. The resolution
stresses the need for transitional activities to be
undertaken under national ownership through the
development of national capacities at all levels to
manage the transition process. We feel that the United
Nations system as a whole must look at the issue of
national development as a priority in post-conflict
situations. The effort should be to develop national
capacity and promote national ownership.

Countries in post-conflict situations would also
benefit from sharing experiences and expertise from
other developing countries. South-South cooperation
modalities, including triangular cooperation modalities,
should form an important component of the
development of post-conflict countries. The use of
information technologies and knowledge-management
systems, as well as the exchange of expertise, should
be facilitated to enable post-conflict countries that have
emerged from conflict to take advantage of the
experience of other developing countries.

There is a general understanding among the
membership today that the international community
can no longer remain silent in the event of gross and
egregious violations of human rights or of genocide. A
humanitarian crisis can also be the result of famine,
drought, natural calamity, infectious disease and a host
of other factors. Under the provisions of Chapter VII of
the Charter, the Council has the authority to intervene
where it deems necessary. Yet there continue to be
doubts about the political objectivity of decisions that
empower States to act against others in the light of
humanitarian crises.

