Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): Let me
thank the Chairs of the Committees established pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), 1373 (2001)
and 1540 (2004), Ambassadors Wittig, Singh Puri and
Sangqu, for their comprehensive briefings today and
their effective leadership of those Committees.

It is important to remember why we come together
for these regular meetings. The threat from terrorism
and proliferation to international peace and security
remains significant. The three Committees under
discussion today are on the front line of the work of
the United Nations in addressing those threats. But the
work of the Committees is only as strong as the action
taken by Member States to implement their obligations.
We should therefore redouble our efforts with Member
States to ensure that dangerous people and entities have
their assets frozen and their movement restricted, that
States work to tighten their borders and import and
export controls, and that legislation is put in place so
that those who commit or support terrorist acts are
prosecuted. Only in that way can we ensure that the
fight against terrorism succeeds, and that the next
attack, be it in Mumbai, Peshawar, London or our host
city of New York, is prevented.

Over the past few years, we have seen the
development of the Ombudsperson system as a part
of the United Nations Al-Qaida sanctions regime.
That development has been conspicuously successful.
We welcome the Ombudsperson's conclusion, in her
fourth report to the Security Council, that the process
has "operated in conformity with the fundamental
principles of fair process which it was designed to
address" (5/2012/590, para. 30). The United Kingdom
thanks Kimberley Prost for the exemplary way in
which she fulfils her mandate. We will continue to
work with members of the Sanctions Committee, the
Ombudsperson and other interested parties to consider
further enhancements to the Ombudsperson process.
We will redouble our efforts to further improve the
implementation and effectiveness of that regime.

The United Kingdom also pays tribute to the
consistently excellent work accomplished by the
sanctions Monitoring Team. Their work has made a
significant contribution to enhancing our understanding
of the threat, engaging effectively with countries
concerned and helping to set the framework within
which the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee operates.

The third biennial review of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy reminded us that
the whole of the international community, and every
part of the United Nations system, must work together
to address this challenge. The Committee has also
done a great deal of work with the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate to improve the
way it communicates with States. Getting a clear
understanding of progress against benchmarks set out
by the Committee is essential to determine what more
needs to be done to assist those States in need of help.
We look forward to next week's special meeting on
combating terrorist financing.

The threat that terrorists may acquire weapons
of mass destruction has been a growing concern for
the international community over the past decade.
Resolution 1540 (2004) represents the resolve of the
international community to stop the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction by non-State actors. But
the effective implementation of resolution 1540 (2004)
requires commitment and cooperation by all States.
The United Kingdom encourages all States to report
their efforts to the 1540 Committee. National reporting
to the Committee has a direct impact on terrorists who
may be trying to acquire weapons of mass destruction.
It also has a positive impact on State security through
better border management, improved legislation and
safer controls over dangerous materials. We encourage
States to view the submission of 1540 national reports
as an effective way to improve national and global
security. The Committee, as supported by the new
group of experts, is well placed to provide assistance
and expert advice.

Finally, I say to the three Chairmen that, because
of the changing nature of terrorism and proliferation,
the work of their three Committees is never truly done.
As the threats evolve, so we must adjust and adapt.
The work of States supported and guided by the three
counter-terrorism and non-proliferation Committees is
critical. As the Chairs come to the end of their terms
heading those important Committees, they can take
credit for leading that work.

