Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the GUAM-participating States -
the Republic of Azerbaijan, Georgia, the Republic of
Moldova and Ukraine.

Since the attack of 11 September 2001, which
visited upon us an unthinkable dimension of terrorism,
many countries, cities and towns, including Bali,
Riyadh, Jakarta, Russia, Madrid, London, Sharm el-
Sheikh, Dahab and - repeatedly - Iraq, as well as
many other sites all over the world, have fallen prey to
a brand of terrorism that operates in global networks.
Those tragedies prove that no State is immune from the
threat of terrorism. It is only through the concerted
efforts of the international community as a whole that
we will be able to effectively withstand that challenge.
Only a strong coalition of nations based on shared
principles and values and, of course, on the Charter of
the United Nations, can - as we must - resolutely
rebuff the terrorists' aspirations and plans.

The Al-Qaida/Taliban sanctions Committee, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) have made a fruitful contribution to fighting the
scourge of terrorism. We believe that they are
accomplishing their various mandates. The Committees
should continue their efforts to increase cooperation
and coordination among themselves and their experts
in monitoring the implementation of the respective
Security Council resolutions, as well as with regard to
information-sharing and visits to various countries

The GUAM. countries welcome the efforts of the
1267 Committee to further improve the Al-
Qaida/Taliban sanctions regime, and commend the role
of the 1540 Committee and its group of experts to
prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. We consider the Counter-Terrorism
Committee's activities in providing the information on
available assistance programmes to be one of its main
contributions to the fight against terrorism. We expect
the Committees to continue their work, as mandated by
the Security Council.

In our view, the CTC is unique. The character and
scope of its mandate and working methods represent an
important innovation and open possibilities for inter-
State cooperation. I would like to take this opportunity
to express GUAM's full support for the Counter-
Terrorism Committee's programme of further
activities. It is important that the Committee continue
to provide all possible assistance to the multinational
anti-terrorist coalition by strengthening, inter alia, the
capacities of the regional organizations and groups, as
many speakers have underlined today.

In this regard, let me stress that GUAM. has
actively participated in the consolidation of the efforts
of the international community in the fight against
terrorism. In particular, GUAM. has made its own
contribution to the special meetings of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee with international, regional and
subregional organizations held over the past several
years.

At the recent GUAM. summit, which took place
on 22 and 23 May in Kyiv, Ukraine, the heads of State
of the Republic of Azerbaijan, Georgia, the Republic of
Moldova and Ukraine declared the establishment of a
new international organization for democracy and
economic development, which will retain the name
"GUAM". By signing the Kyiv GUAM. summit
communique, its members stressed the following
priorities for the international organization in the
future: the strengthening of the values of democracy,
the rule of law, human rights and freedoms, stability
and security, combating international terrorism and
other lofty goals.

The participants in the summit had a high
assessment of the existing level of interaction in
combating terrorism, organized crime, drug trafficking
and other dangerous types of crime. They expressed
their determination to provide a political, legal and
organizational basis for overcoming the challenges of
international terrorism, separatism, intolerance and
extremism.

GUAM. attaches great importance to the
strengthening of its legal framework. In that regard, the
Presidents of the GUAM. States parties welcomed the
joint statement of the law enforcement authorities of

S/l'V.5446

 

GUAM. member States signed at Kyiv during the
summit on 22 May 2006 and also the signing by the
heads of those countries' border services of a protocol
concerning cooperation among the operational bodies
of the border services.

GUAM. is continuing to carry out two projects in
the area of counter-terrorism and border security: the
project on the establishment of the GUAM. virtual
centre for combating terrorism, organized crime, drug
trafficking and other dangerous crimes; and the project
on the creation of the GUAM. inter-State information
management system.

Terrorism is a reprehensible malady of the
present day. If we let it flourish through our hesitation,
it has the potential to undermine the very pillars of our
civilization. The United Nations and its Security
Council constitute the basis for our collective efforts to
fight this threat as a transnational phenomenon. GUAM
stands ready to further enhance its capacities in order
to make its contribution to our common goal. We thus
look forward to the speedy adoption and
implementation of a global strategy against terrorism to
promote comprehensive, coordinated and consistent
responses at the national, regional and international
levels, as mandated by the world summit.

