Mr. Henze (Germany): The constantly deteriorating
situation, the great human suffering and the fate of more
than one million refugees in the Great Lakes region have
for quite some time been a matter of deep concern to my
Government.

My Government fully supports the decision the
Security Council is about to take to authorize the
establishment for humanitarian purposes of a temporary
multinational force. It fully shares the sense of urgency that
has guided the actions of the Security Council so far.
Germany will therefore vote in favour of the draft
resolution.

Allow me on behalf of my Government to commend
the Canadian Government for its brave initiative to organize
and command such an operation. I also wish to pay tribute
to all the nations that are ready to commit themselves to
take part in this operation.

My Government, like others, is of the opinion that all
efforts undertaken by the international community in the
region of the Great Lakes should also address prominently
the underlying causes of the conflicts, in particular the
problem of the continued presence of hundreds of
thousands of refugees and internally displaced persons in
eastern Zaire and elsewhere in the region. For that reason,
we welcome the fact that the multinational force that is to
be authorized will not only facilitate the immediate return
of humanitarian organizations and the effective delivery of
humanitarian aid to those in need, but will also facilitate the
voluntary and orderly repatriation of refugees by the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) and the voluntary return of displaced persons.

In this context, my Government also welcomes the
announcement by the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Kofi Annan, yesterday that
the Secretariat intends to start to plan in a timely manner a
follow-on operation which, as foreseen in Security Council
resolution 1078 (1996) part C, and paragraph 12 of the

 

draft resolution before us, will help, inter alia, to continue
assisting UNHCR with the protection and voluntary
repatriation of refugees and displaced persons, including
through the establishment of humanitarian corridors.

Germany remains committed to providing funding
for the urgently needed delivery of humanitarian
assistance. Together with the United States of America,
we have been the most significant donor of humanitarian
assistance in the region. In addition to considerable
bilateral contributions, Germany has also contributed more
than 30 per cent of the budget for the humanitarian
assistance delivered by the European Union.

It is our conviction that the international community
will have to assist in finding lasting and sustainable
solutions to the underlying causes of the conflicts in the
region of the Great Lakes, beyond the urgent action on
which the Security Council is about to take a decision.
This requires not only a guarantee of the security of the
refugees at their points of arrival, but also a real chance
for those who were not involved in the genocide to be
fully reintegrated into their respective home communities.

Germany therefore remains committed to efforts
aimed at improving conditions for the return of refugees
to their country of origin, in particular by enhancing the
economic and social situation there through rehabilitation
and development aid and by assisting in the protection of
human rights.

There can be no solution if the countries of the
region do not cooperate. It is, above all, their
responsibility to bring about peace in the region and to
create the conditions for economic and social
development. We welcome the decisions taken at the
Nairobi Regional Summit as a first step and continue to
urge the countries to meet at the regional conference to
lay the foundation for lasting peace and stability.

