I would like to extend our warm welcome and appreciation to Ms. Louise Mushikiwabo, Secretary-General of the International Organization of la Francophonie (OIF), and Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant Secretary-General of the United Nations, for their invaluable briefings. We also thank Mr. Zohrab Mnatsakanyan, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Armenia and current Chair of the Ministerial Conference of la Francophonie, for his insightful presentation. We commend the Niger on its initiative to hold today's open debate. The United Nations today would not be the same without regional and subregional organizations. Many have been developed in parallel with the 75-year history of the United Nations across a broad agenda of mutual interests and concerns within their respective regions. It is therefore only natural to see cooperation between them recognized very early in the United Nations Charter and subsequently strengthened throughout many resolutions as well as in practice. Viet Nam highly values and welcomes the complementary role of regional and subregional organizations, including the OIF, with its 50 years of rich experience, to the work of the United Nations as a whole and particularly to the Security Council. The OIF brings together 88 members and observers that share not only French as a common language but also a strong determination to work together towards international peace and security, among other things. This ambition has been well reflected through the participation of its many members in the Security Council mandates of peacekeeping, conflict prevention and promotion of the women and peace and security agenda. We highlight in this regard the ongoing cooperation between the OIF and the Peacebuilding Commission, the Department of Peace Operations and the Department of Operational Support, and we welcome the attention given to the role and participation of women personnel. The OIF has also played an important role in raising awareness and increasing resources for these activities. Our ever-changing world is facing a growing number of complex and cross- cutting challenges. Several OIF members and observers have been challenged by ethnic and religious conflicts and attacks or threats of terrorism. Difficulties arising from resource constraints, lack of French-language knowledge by youth and connectivity initiatives among the Francophonie community are also affecting the work of the organization. Against that backdrop, the United Nations and the OIF should make concerted efforts to promote multilateralism and find peaceful solutions to conflicts on the basis of international law, contributing to the alleviation of hotspots on the Security Council's agenda. For instance, the OIF may consider creating a network of francophone members in West Africa and the Sahel to share experience and best practices in the implementation of United Nations programmes such as the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and the recent Support Plan for the Sahel. The United Nations and the OIF could also seek to enhance triangular cooperation with the African Union and other regional organizations to resolve conflicts in that region. The OIF has been well known for its commitment to promoting multilingualism. That approach within peace operations is very much welcomed, especially given that approximately half of peace missions have been deployed in French-speaking countries such as the Democratic Republic of Congo and the Central African Republic, so as to facilitate a better understanding and engagement with the local community. In this aspect we see great potential for the OIF and the United Nations to further cooperate, with the allocation of adequate resources, on language and expertise training programmes for both United Nations and local staff and teachers in order to increase the effectiveness of peace operations. As a member of the OIF and the Security Council, Viet Nam fully supports and stands ready to work with other Member States to strengthen existing cooperative mechanisms and identify new synergies between the OIF and the United Nations for the common objectives of global peace, security and development.
