It is an honour to address the Council for the second time this month, under the Indonesian presidency, on important matters and to highlight the progress my country has made towards inclusive politics. We welcome the adoption of resolution 2540 (2020), which, I believe, provides our Government with essential assistance and facilitates Somalia's development policies in the areas of political inclusiveness, governance, the economy and security. Though there may be subtle differences in how Council members assess the current situation and priorities, we are all united in recognizing the important role that the United Nations continues to play in promoting peace and stability in Somalia. We believe that this resolution is aimed at ensuring that the support and assistance of the United Nations to Somalia, particularly that of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM), can be truly effective. We are also confident that the Security Council, the international community and all other development partners for Somalia's future will continue to support our current national reconstruction efforts, which must be Somali-driven and must be seen as Somali-driven. We therefore call for upholding Somalia's sovereignty and caution against foreign intervention in Somalia's affairs, especially its elections. With key political stakeholders in Somalia agreeing on an election model, now more than ever we ask the Security Council and our international partners for their dedicated support in promoting our efforts to conduct free, fair and credible elections in 2020-2021. The logistics for our election, including operational activities and security require both time and significant funding. We therefore seek the timely, adequate technical and financial support of the relevant institutions and bodies mandated to organize and oversee federal elections, including the National Independent Electoral Commission. Despite all the progress that the Federal Government of Somalia has made in recent years, the UNSOM mandate seems to be transforming in a way that is not proportionate with the efforts and the proven achievements that the Federal Government has been making on the ground. That has caused the Mission's actions to become reactive to events, with little ability to provide political support and technical assistance on critical outcomes that are fundamental to Somalia's State- building agenda. We therefore offer two suggestions to make UNSOM reflect realities on the ground and respond accordingly in an effective manner. First, the Federal Government of Somalia reaffirms the Security Council's decision, through resolution 2540 (2020), for the Secretary-General to conduct an independent assessment to forge a new path forward to ensure that the international community supports the security environment in Somalia beyond 2021. We also firmly believe that the time has come to reassess the mandate of the United Nations in Somalia with a view to formulating a Mission that is more flexible and responsive to the rapid changes and is properly aligned with Somalia's priorities at this critical juncture. Secondly, in the interest of maximizing the utility of the Secretary-General's quarterly reports, we suggest that they be redesigned to contain less narrative and fewer details about specific events and more in-depth analysis of major issues, as well as recommendations and conclusions.In conclusion, we welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution 2540 (2020) and appreciate the support and constructive engagement of the Council. In these times of unprecedented global crises, including the coronavirus disease pandemic, we are determined to take all necessary measures to tackle the complex challenges we face and must continue our unremitting efforts in that regard.
