Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I would like to
thank Assistant Secretary-General Keita for her
valuable briefing.

Ukraine, like others, strongly condemns last week's
armed clashes between Government and opposition
forces in the south of South Sudan, resulting in many
civilians and soldiers from both sides being killed.
We are also outraged by the instance of shooting at
personnel from the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS).

We took note of President Kiir's order to South
Sudan's security organs to tighten the current level of
security in Juba and throughout the country. We hope
that the order will help to ensure the safety of the South
Sudanese citizens during the winter holidays.

There is a risk that the onset of the dry season in
South Sudan may lead to renewed fighting between
the Government and rebels. It is therefore vital that
the unilateral ceasefire declared by President Kiir is
upheld. For its part, the Sudan People's Liberation
Army in Opposition must also cease all hostilities and
engage in political dialogue.

The recent armed clashes all but underline the
urgency for parties to engage in the political process,
which is the only way to achieve lasting peace in
South Sudan. In this context, we welcome the approval
by the South Sudanese cabinet of the constitutional
amendment bill, which would pave the way to
establishing institutions and mechanisms provided for
in the 2015 agreement. Ukraine looks forward to swift
certification of those amendments by the Transitional
National Legislative Assembly.

All efforts on the national level must go hand in
hand with those of the region, which Ukraine fully
supports. In this regard, we took note of the five-point
approach proposed by the Chair of the Joint Monitoring
and Evaluation Commission, President Festus Mogae,
aimed at ending the conflict in South Sudan, and
Ukraine looks forward to the outcome of the meeting
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
currently under way in Abidjan.

While Ukraine welcomes the recent tangible
progress in the deployment of the Regional Protection
Force, we are concerned by ongoing obstructions faced
by UNMISS and humanitarian organizations. This
situation requires redress as soon as possible, given
that the Mission and humanitarian actors need to have
unhindered access throughout the country, especially
in the areas affected by renewed armed clashes.

Finally, I would like to reiterate Ukraine's strong
readiness and commitment to contributing to peace and
reconciliation in South Sudan, including through our
participation in UNMISS.
