Mr. Kataoka (Japan): Mr. President, at the outset
let me join previous speakers in offering sincere and
heartfelt condolences to the Russian people and, in
particular, to the families of the victims of the tragic
accidents which occurred yesterday.

With the approach of the presidential election in
October and the parliamentary elections next year, the
Bonn process is reaching its final stage. The rebirth of
Afghanistan as a democratic State is at stake in those
elections. I would therefore like to welcome the
President's initiative to organize this meeting in order
to provide the Security Council and the United Nations
membership as a whole with an opportunity to
reconfirm their commitment to Afghanistan at this very
critical moment in the process.

I should like to comment on three points which I
consider important for the success of the process. The
first relates to the elections. The registration of more
than 10 million voters - 41.4 per cent of whom are
women - clearly demonstrates the strong
determination of the Afghan people to create a new
nation through the democratic process. We certainly
welcome that sign of progress.

We also appreciate the fact that many presidential
candidates in appointing their vice-presidential
candidates, are giving due weight to achieving ethnic
balance with an eye to promoting ethnic reconciliation.
We pay tribute to the Joint Electoral Management Body
and all others concerned for their efforts to date to
prepare for those elections. We are delighted at the
signing of memorandums of understanding with
Pakistan and Iran with regard to out-of-country
registration and voting, and we request the further
cooperation of these countries for the successful
conduct of voting in their respective territories. In
order to facilitate the successful holding of elections,
Japan, for its part, will continue its support and
assistance.

Secondly, it goes without saying that free and fair
elections require that the security of voters be
guaranteed. In that connection, we are much concerned
over the security situation in Afghanistan, which has
deteriorated since last year as a result of the subversive
activities of residual Taliban and Al Qaeda elements,
clashes between warlords and the narcotics trade. Now,
the security of aid workers and people engaged in
electoral preparations is gravely threatened. The
unstable security conditions in the south and south-east
in fact cause delays in the voter registration process,
which demonstrates the continued determination of
extremist groups to impede the electoral process.

Japan strongly condemns the activities of such
groups, but at the same time is much encouraged but
the decision of NATO to send additional troops to
Afghanistan. We look forward to the improvement of
the security situation with the rapid deployment of
those forces.

Thirdly, with respect to the DDR process, despite
the efforts of the Afghan Government and the
assistance of the international community, the number
of soldiers who have entered the DDR programme so
far remains at only 20 per cent of the total target for the
programme, a situation which is far from satisfactory.
Modification of that target number and of the timetable
for DDR is currently under consideration, based on the
decision to organize the presidential and parliamentary
elections separately and on experience with the
programme up to this point.

Japan, as the leading country in the DDR process,
together with the United Nations, continues to make
efforts to support direct negotiations between leaders
of the transitional Government and regional
commanders, implement the commander-incentive
programmes and promote the reintegration programmes
so that momentum for DDR can be maintained even
after the presidential election.

All parties concerned must realize that they will
never be permitted to achieve their objectives by force.
They must abide by law and due process. In that
regard, we welcome the decision taken in July by
President Karzai to declare the following to be illegal:
rearmament after DDR; the remobilization of
discharged soldiers; maintaining armed militias; and
the possession of heavy weapons outside the
framework of the Ministry of Defence and the new
National Army.

It is also essential that the international
community continue to be united in its determination
not to create a power vacuum after DDR. To that end, it
must accelerate the formation of the National Army
and police force and the deployment of the
international forces.
For the United Nations and for the international
community as a whole Afghanistan is a major
touchstone to demonstrate what we can do for countries
in need of assistance in the nation-building process in
the aftermath of conflict. The Bonn process is still
fragile and the security situation remains precarious,
but with the support of the international community
and, above all, the strong determination of the Afghan
people, we have now reached the stage of organizing
presidential elections. We remain strongly committed
to the national reconstruction of Afghanistan and are
confident that the upcoming elections will serve as a
first step towards an enduring and positive cooperative
relationship between Afghanistan and the rest of the
international community.

