Mr. Pascoe: Since I last briefed the Council,
political and diplomatic initiatives aimed at
rejuvenating peacemaking in the Middle East have
continued to evolve in a mostly positive fashion.

The Secretary-General, who returns today from
his second trip to the region, is actively encouraging
those local, regional and international initiatives.
However, the forward momentum we are witnessing on
the political-diplomatic level is threatened by the
deteriorating security situation on the ground,
especially the continuing violence experienced by
Israelis and Palestinians alike. Leaders on all sides
must do their utmost to prevent this latest upsurge of
Violence from escalating further.

Let me first turn to the major political
developments for the period, beginning with the
formation of the National Unity Government. After
being approved by an 83-to-3 vote in the Legislative
Council, the Palestinian National Unity Government
was sworn in on 17 March, in accordance with the
programme agreed at Mecca. The Quartet, reiterating
respect for the agreement and Palestinian democracy,
has encouraged progress in the direction of its three
principles, while indicating its intention to assess the
Government's commitment not only by its platform
and composition, but also by its actions.

President Abbas and Prime Minister Olmert met
in Jerusalem on 15 April. They discussed immediate
humanitarian and security issues, including efforts to
build confidence through action on security reform and
implementation of the Agreement on Movement and
Access. They reportedly also exchanged Views on
aspects of a future Palestinian State and a time frame
07-31853
for achieving it, and agreed to meet again soon. We
encourage them to build on those discussions, which
were agreed to during Secretary Rice's March visit to
the region, and the Secretary-General has urged
continued efforts in that regard.

Following the reaffirmation of the Arab peace
initiative at the Arab League Summit, a follow-up
Ministerial Committee meeting in Cairo on 18 April
established working groups to engage international
partners and Israel and created greater public
awareness of the potential of the Arab peace initiative.
The Secretary-General welcomed the engagement of
the League of Arab States and stated that he looked
forward to meeting with the Ministerial Committee that
has been formed to promote that process. Prime
Minister Olmert has welcomed the initiative as a
"positive approach".

At the invitation of the Israeli Knesset Foreign
Affairs and Defence Committee, a Syrian-American
businessman, Ibrahim Suleiman, visited Israel to brief
the Committee on unofficial efforts to draft elements of
a peace agreement between Israel and Syria. Both
Governments as well as the participants have
underlined that this was a private initiative.

I would also like to record that the Palestinian
Central Election Commission conducted registration of
61,400 new voters between 28 March and 2 April, with
technical assistance from the United Nations and under
the scrutiny of some 2,800 domestic observers and
party agents, who qualified the process as inclusive,
fair and transparent.

Despite a number of positive political
developments, we are deeply concerned at the overall
situation on the ground. In the reporting period, at least
43 Palestinians have been killed - 22 in intra-
Palestinian fighting and 21 by the Israel Defense
Forces - while over 200 Palestinians and at least 13
Israelis have been injured. According to reports from
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, the bulk of fatalities and injuries from
14 March through 17 April were attributed to 83
incidents involving Palestinian factional fighting or
family feuding and 69 incidents involving the Israel
Defense Forces and Palestinians.

In addition, according to United Nations figures,
between 14 March and 17 April, 54 rockets and
mortars were fired from the Gaza Strip into Israel.
Prime Minister Olmert noted last week that there had
07-31853

been a significant drop since mid-April in the rate of
rockets being fired, which appeared to be the result of
the continuing efforts of President Abbas with the
various factions. However, last weekend Israel carried
out a number of arrests in West Bank cities, during
which nine Palestinians were killed, and a rocket hit
the town of Sderot, underlining the dangers that those
attacks still pose. Israel has reported that over 24
rockets and mortars were fired from Gaza on the
morning of 24 April. The military wing of Hamas has
claimed responsibility. The Palestinian Government
has called for the ceasefire to be respected, and the
Israeli Government has exercised restraint.

Israeli officials continue to express concern about
the alleged smuggling of weapons between Egypt and
the Gaza Strip and about the reported increase in the
payload and range of the rockets that are fired from
Gaza into Israel. In that regard, the efforts of the
Government of Egypt to maintain the ceasefire and halt
rocket fire are appreciated.

The lack of substantial improvement in the
security situation is a matter of great concern. The
obstacles to achieving progress recently led the new
Minister of the Interior to offer his resignation. It is
important that the Palestinian Authority acts to counter
the smuggling of weapons and rocket fire against Israel
and takes steps to implement the internal security plan
endorsed by the Palestinian Cabinet to restore law and
order. That is not only the overwhelming desire of
Palestinians but is also vital for continued international
engagement in Gaza.

In that connection, we continue to be deeply
concerned about the fate of kidnapped BBC journalist
Alan Johnston, and we reiterate the Secretary-
General's call for his safety and immediate release. We
were also greatly alarmed when a vehicle carrying the
Director of the operations in Gaza of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East and a senior United Nations
security official came under heavy attack on 18 March.
Those and several other incidents - including attacks
against Internet cafes, other business establishments
and the American International School in Gaza - have
led the United Nations to take further mitigating
measures to ensure staff security. That situation is
being kept under close review.

The release of Israeli Corporal Gilad Shalit is
also crucial to moving ahead. In that regard, it is
3
reported that various proposals for prisoner exchanges
have been discussed. On 16 April, Prime Minister
Olmert stated that he was open to a "reasonable
exchange" in order to free Shalit.

The Government of Israel must also play its part
to calm the situation, in particular with regard to the
Israeli settler community. Attacks in Hebron on
Palestinian children and a mentally disabled
Palestinian man, which were carried out by groups of
settlers, have been widely reported. Likewise, the
Government of Israel must ensure that measures for
Israeli security are not carried out at the expense of
innocent Palestinians. All security measures must be
proportionate. Continued operations into Palestinian
population centres in the West Bank - almost
inevitably with resultant civilian casualties - are
matters of great concern.

Despite the provisions of the Road Map that call
for a settlement freeze, the construction of new housing
units is taking place in some 75 of the 121 settlements
in the occupied Palestinian territory. Settlement
development continues on both sides of the barrier.
There is major ongoing construction in Maale
Adumim, Beitar Illit and Modiin Illit.

On 10 April, Israeli Defense Minister Peretz
ordered the eviction of settlers who had moved into
buildings in central Hebron in February, but that order
has not yet been implemented. Despite the obligation
of the Government of Israel under the Road Map, none
of the additional 101 outposts in the West Bank has
been removed. In addition, Israel continues to construct
the wall in the West Bank, ignoring the 9 July 2004
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice.
Despite commitments by the Government of Israel to
ease movement in the West Bank, a total of 547
physical obstacles to movement were in place as of
3 April 2007 - up from the 529 obstacles cited in our
last report.

For Gaza, access through Karni has improved
slightly since our last report. The crossing was open
every scheduled day, but only for 43 per cent of the
scheduled opening hours. Approximately 10 per cent of
the ultimate target set by the Agreement on Movement
and Access - 400 truckloads of exported goods per
day - was reached. Movement through Rafah
improved, as it was open 42 per cent of the time - up
from 27 per cent during the last reporting period. The
targets set out in the Agreement on Movement and
Access, to which Israel has committed, must be
reached if there is to be an improvement in the socio-
economic situation of the Gaza Strip.

United Nations staff members and other
humanitarian workers crossing from Gaza into Israel
are subjected to increasingly arbitrary treatment by
Israeli authorities. Internal searches of United Nations
vehicles and property, including laptop computers, are
conducted out of sight of United Nations staff. That
practice Violates United Nations security standards as
well as United Nations privileges and immunities. We
continue to work closely with all the relevant Israeli
authorities to correct the situation, but there has been
little progress thus far.

President Abbas and the new Palestinian Finance
Minister have continued to underline the precarious
state of Palestinian finances, including to senior
European and United States officials. Donor
Governments are studying various options.

There will likely be a requirement for the renewal
of the temporary international mechanism beyond its
current three-month mandate. I take this opportunity to
remind the Council of the Quartet's call for the
international community to support the mechanism,
which has disbursed some $330 million to date. We
also continue to urge Israel to transfer the customs and
value added tax funds that have been withheld from
Palestinians.

Meanwhile, immediate humanitarian issues must
still be addressed. United Nations agencies continue to
support populations affected by a sewage spill that
killed five persons in the northern Gaza Strip on
8April. Longer-term measures to rehabilitate the
sewage plant must urgently be implemented.

I should also draw to the Council's attention the
recent visit of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, to Lebanon, the
occupied Palestinian territory and Israel. During that
visit, the Special Representative obtained first-hand
information on the situation of children and discussed
concerns with senior Government officials. She will be
reporting in due course to the Security Council, the
General Assembly and the Human Rights Council.

I turn now to Lebanon, where the Secretary-
General has been encouraging dialogue to resolve the
political impasse. Intensive efforts to ease the political
stalemate ahead of the Arab League summit in Riyadh
helped to reduce tension but did not produce any
breakthroughs concerning a national unity Government
or the special tribunal for Lebanon. The Secretary-
General made Lebanon a priority during his first visit
to the region. More recently, Nicolas Michel, Under-
Secretary-General for Legal Affairs, visited Lebanon
and met with political leaders of all parties to discuss
the statute of the tribunal, in order to advance its
ratification in accord with the Lebanese Constitution.
The Secretary-General will continue his efforts to
encourage the implementation of all relevant Security
Council resolutions and to support Lebanon's
independence, sovereignty, stability and security.

Lebanon remains committed to moving ahead
with an important programme of political and socio-
economic reform, irrespective of domestic challenges.
At a recent meeting of the core group of countries that
have offered their support to Lebanon, Prime Minister
Siniora's Government presented a progress report on
the implementation of the reform package delivered at
the Paris III Conference for Lebanon. The report
showed allocation of donor pledges by sector and
provided an update on ongoing bilateral negotiations
for the disbursement of funds. However, thus far only a
small percentage of the pledges have been disbursed.
We encourage donors to work with the Government of
Lebanon to ensure the speedy implementation of the
Paris Conference's framework of assistance.

In south Lebanon, we are pleased to note that as
of 10 April, the total strength of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) stands at 13,000
peacekeepers. The Secretary-General visited UNIFIL
on 31 March and noted the vital role it is playing to
preserve calm along the Blue Line. That near-total
calm has held since the last reporting period.

However, Israeli air violations of the Line have
continued, with Israel claiming that those air violations
are necessary for security measures in the face of
continued breaches of the embargo on the transfer of
arms, while the Government of Lebanon maintains that
they are provocative actions that increase tension along
the Blue Line. The United Nations will continue to
assert, in the strongest terms, to both parties that one
Violation cannot justify another.

It is clear that the situation in the region is
fragile. There are a number of elements in play that,
taken together, could generate progress within the

occupied Palestinian territory, between the PLO and
Israel and between Israel and the Arab world. The
Secretary-General is committed to nurturing these
elements in close collaboration with his Quartet
partners. At the same time, we are increasingly
concerned that actions and inaction on the ground
remain real obstacles to progress and have the potential
to lead to paralysis or even a rapid deterioration. The
renewed violence of the past few days shows how
precarious the situation is. It is incumbent on the
parties and all regional and international players to
show restraint and to intensify their efforts to bring
about immediate progress on the ground and to
promote, as a minimum, the political will for the
parties to discuss their future together. We need to
move forward towards our shared goal of a just, lasting
and comprehensive peace, based on Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and
1515 (2003).

As the Council knows, in the last month, the
Secretary-General has visited the Middle East twice,
including Iraq, Egypt, Israel, the occupied Palestinian
territory, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Lebanon and, most
recently, Qatar and Syria. He has reported to the
Council on his priorities and observations, and will
continue to do so.

I should like to conclude this briefing by noting
to the Council that the United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, Alvaro
de Soto, has informed the Secretary-General of his
decision to depart the United Nations next month, after
25 years of service. In his distinguished United Nations
career, Mr. de Soto has advanced the cause of peace in
many places, including the Middle East, Western
Sahara, Cyprus, Myanmar and El Salvador, as well as
contributing to the development of United Nations
conflict resolution work and practice in many areas. I
am sure that the members of the Council share the
Secretary-General's deep appreciation for his
outstanding contribution to the United Nations and
wish him well in the future.

