Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to begin by
expressing sincere appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for having organized this open debate to facilitate
discussion on enhancing Africa's capacity in the area
of peace and security. This is indeed, as Commissioner
Chergui has said, a demonstration of China's continued
commitment to and support for Africa in the spirit
of the China-Africa partnership, which we very
much welcome.
We also thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres
for his presence here with us this morning and for his
briefing on the efforts being made to strengthen the
United Nations-African Union (AU) partnership. We
are also very glad to have Commissioner Chergui
with us and are grateful to him for sharing the AU
perspective on the topic under discussion today. I must
state that both briefings we have heard, that of the
Secretary-General and that of Commissioner Chergui,
were very enriching indeed. We are also extremely
pleased to have with us the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Senegal, whose presence is a demonstration of his
commitment and that of his country to peace and
security on our continent.

It is fitting that this open debate is taking place
following the 29th AU Summit, held in Addis Ababa,
which, among other things, deliberated on the state of
peace and security in Africa. The Summit exchanged
views on ways and means of strengthening the role
and capacity of the African Union in responding to
conflict and crisis situations on the continent. In this
regard, conflict prevention has been given the utmost
priority, and the Summit attached great importance to
the implementation of the African Union master road
map of practical steps for silencing the guns in Africa
by 2020, as reiterated by Commissioner Chergui in his
statement today.

Of course, enormous challenges exist that
undermine the prospects for realizing this noble
objective, and there is a need for greater mobilization
of efforts by States members of the African Union as
well as its regional mechanisms to reverse the tide of
conflicts ravaging various regions of the continent.
That is why addressing the root causes of conflicts as
well as undertaking effective security-sector reform
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes in countries emerging from conflict in
order to avoid relapse was strongly stressed during
the Summit.

There is also a recognition that if it does not
undertake the necessary institutional reforms and
ensure self-reliance in financing its strategies, including
in the area of peace and security, the African Union
will not be able effectively to contribute to achieving
sustainable peace and prosperity. It is in this context
that the 29th Summit held thorough deliberations on
accelerating institutional reforms and stepping up
efforts in financing the Union, particularly the Peace
Fund, which is considered a key factor for the success
ofpeace efforts on the continent.
Accordingly, important decisions were made
by the Summit, including endorsing the governance
structures and eligibility criteria of the Peace Fund as
well as the scope of operations to be submitted, on a
case-by-case basis, for authorization by the Council and
subsequent financing through United Nations assessed
contributions. This is one of the concrete outcomes of
the Summit that demonstrates Africa's commitment
to ensuring greater ownership and responsibility in
dealing with the peace and security challenges facing
the continent.

This is indeed a considerable asset for the
Council, which has the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
in accordance with the United Nations Charter. At a
time when the world is confronting new and emerging
challenges to international peace and security, the
United Nations cannot alone effectively respond
to the many existing conflict and crisis situations.
Enhancing partnerships with regional and subregional
organizations such as the African Union, in the spirit
of Chapter VIII of the Charter, is indeed the sensible
and logical approach needed to effectively respond to
the ever-changing global security dynamics and thus
improve collective security.

That is why we welcome the Joint United Nations-
African Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security, signed by the leadership of the
two organizations on 19 May. We believe that this will
contribute to addressing challenges relating to peace
and security in Africa across the full spectrum of the
conflict cycle.

On anumber ofoccasions, the Council has expressed
its determination to take effective steps to further
enhance the relationship between the United Nations
and regional organizations, in particular the African
Union. The adoption of resolution 2320 (2016) last
year i and we applaud that initiative by Senegal * is
a tangible testament to the Council's commitment to
strengthening the cooperation and partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union. It is in this
context that the Council acknowledged the need for
more support so as to enhance AU peace operations
and the predictability, sustainability and flexibility
of financing for the African Union-led peace-support
operations authorized by the Security Council.

As we discussed last month, a concrete proposal has
been developed jointly by the United Nations and the
African Union that provides options for authorization
and support of AU-led peace-support operations on
a case-by-case basis. Progress in the discussions on
this issue is extremely critical in supporting Africa
in building its capacity to deal with its peace and
security challenges.

The Council has had the right sentiments and
made encouraging gestures in terms of expressing full
support for the enhancement of the partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union, but now it
is time for it to match that expression of strong support
with concrete action by taking practical steps towards
the financing of AU-led peace-support operations
authorized by the Council. As the representative of
Italy said, this must be a time for implementation.

Finally, we once again express appreciation to
China for having provided this important platform
for discussion on this issue of paramount importance
to Africa, building on the important meeting we had
last month. We hope that we will be able to sustain the
necessary momentum over the next couple of months
with the upcoming presidency of Egypt and Ethiopia,
in August and September, respectively.

