Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq): Mr. President, allow me at
the outset to congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council this month. I
would also like to express our thanks to your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, for his distinguished
efforts during his presidency in the month of October.
Our high appreciation also goes to Mr. Ad Melkert,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Iraq, and to the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI) team in Iraq and New York for their
tireless work in assisting the Government and the
people of Iraq.

Having reviewed the report of the Secretary-
General on UNAMI's work in Iraq (S/2009/585), my
delegation would like to make the following
comments.

At the political and security levels, on
8 November the representatives of the Iraqi people in
the Iraqi Parliament were able to reach a consensus on
a final version of the 2005 Electoral Law, which was
adopted after extensive discussions marked by a spirit
of openness and dialogue. Their goal had been to reach
a final formula satisfactory to all representatives of the
political groups in the Iraqi Parliament within the
constitutional institutional framework. By reaching a
consensus on the Electoral Law, the Iraqi people and
their representatives in Parliament proved their ability
to reach an agreement on this issue, just as they had
previously reached an agreement on the Constitution,
elections and forming a national unity Government.

The endorsement of the Electoral Law initiates a
new phase of responsible competition and collective
work in Iraq, moving away from narrow loyalties in
order to serve the general interests of the country. In
this new stage, the Iraqi Government will employ
democratic mechanisms and free competition to realize
the aspirations of the Iraqi people to establishing a
pluralistic federal system that respects their rights,
safeguards their freedoms and strengthens national
unity.

The approval of the open-list election system in
the new Electoral Law represents an important step in
the development of the democratic process in the new
Iraq. The open-list system allows voters to choose
candidates that will represent them in Parliament
without having to vote for other candidates on the same
list. As a result, the selection of political
representatives will now be based on the individual
qualifications of candidates and not on the basis of
lists. The division of Iraq into multiple electoral
districts, pursuant to the administrative division of the
provinces of the country, will give voters an
opportunity to choose someone who belongs to the
same constituency to represent them in Parliament.
This will strengthen the correlation between the voter
and his or her representative in the new parliament.

The conclusion of a final formula for a special
parliamentary election in the Kirkuk province reflects
the determination of the Iraqi political forces to rely on
the Constitution and mutual understanding instead of
coercion to address this issue. The conclusion of this
election represents a further step in the process of
dealing with the issue of Kirkuk, a province that
remains a symbol of peaceful coexistence among all
components of Iraqi society.

The United Nations, the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq,
Mr. Ad Melkert, played an important role in assisting
Iraq and its parliament to reach an agreement on the
electoral law and, on behalf of the Iraqi Government, I
both congratulate them on this achievement and offer
profound thanks for their efforts. This achievement
stresses the importance of cooperation with the United
Nations and other international organizations in the
policies of the new Iraq.

On 19 August 2009, Baghdad suffered terrorist
attacks that targeted a number of sovereign institutions
of the Iraqi State, including the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs and the Ministry of Finance. These attacks
killed or injured 600 people, including many
government employees, diplomats and innocent
civilians. Had these terrorist acts achieved their full
objective, they would have led to the paralysis of the
State and its organs, which would have endangered
security and stability in Iraq and the region. Therefore,
on 30 August 2009, the Prime Minister of Iraq, His
Excellency Mr. Nuri Kamel al-Maliki, sent a letter to the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, to
bring this very important issue to his attention and to
request that he bring it to the attention of the Security
Council in order to establish an independent
international inquiry, because the scope and nature of
the crimes committed may require investigation outside
the jurisdiction of Iraq, and to bring those found guilty
to a special international criminal tribunal.

Furthermore, my Government has requested that
the Secretary-General nominate a high-level official to
assess the 19 August 2009 terrorist attacks and the
scope of foreign intervention and its impact on the
security and stability of Iraq. This request was
mentioned by the President of Iraq, His Excellency
Mr. Jalal Talabani, during his address to the General
Assembly at its sixty-fourth session, on 24 September
2009 (see A/64/PV.6), and was also mentioned in a
letter dated 25 September 2009 from the Foreign
Minister, His Excellency Hoshyar Zebari, addressed to
the Secretary-General. My Government has also
undertaken additional communications with the
capitals of friendly countries to explain the dimensions
of this request.
On 25 October 2009, Baghdad faced another
terrorist attack, targeting the Ministry of Justice, the
Ministry of Municipalities and Public Works and the
headquarters of the Baghdad Provincial Council,
resulting in a greater number of civilian victims,
including children in a kindergarten close to the
ministries. This attack proves that the terrorists and the
remnants of Saddam's regime are determined to disrupt
the political process in Iraq through the direct targeting
of Iraqi State institutions.

On 26 October 2009, the Minister of Foreign
Affairs, His Excellency Mr. Hoshyar Zebari, sent a
letter to the Secretary-General of the United Nations in
which he linked the terrorist attacks of 19 August 2009
and the terrorist attacks of 25 October 2009, indicating
that both attacks were carried out in the same manner
and with the same timing, that the same explosive
material was used in both attacks and that both targeted
key ministries of the State. These criminal attacks
emphasize that the objective of these operations is to
cripple the capacity of the Iraqi State and its
institutions and to disrupt the democratic political
process in Iraq. In his letter, the Foreign Minister also
emphasized Iraq's request to nominate a high-level
official to assess the scope of foreign intervention in
these terrorist attacks. Mr. Zebari emphasized that the
level of organization, complexity and scope of these
terrorist attacks could not be planned and executed
without the support of foreign Powers. The Foreign
Minister also requested in his letter to the Secretary-
General that this issue be brought to the attention of
the Security Council as soon as possible to enable it to
take action to deter terrorism and its sponsors.
Therefore, the Secretary-General decided to send a
team, headed by Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco,
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, to
Baghdad to consult with the Iraqi Government on
security and sovereignty issues.

My Government has welcomed the decision of
the Secretary-General to send an international team
headed by Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco to visit Iraq to
have preliminary consultations with Iraqi officials on
issues related to the security and sovereignty of Iraq
and on the information available to the relevant Iraqi
authorities regarding the terrorist attacks in Baghdad
on 19 August 2009. The Government of the Republic
of Iraq has promised to provide all possible facilities
for the international delegation to ensure the success of
the mission.
09-60820
During his visit, Mr. F ernandez-Taranco met with
the Prime Minister on 2 November 2009, and the Prime
Minister stressed during the meeting that

"terrorism requires an international stand, and we
request that the United Nations assist us in
stopping regional intervention in our internal
affairs, and, to stop the terrorist attacks which
target innocent people, we hope that your report
will be realistic. We would like to show you the
crime scene so you can pass on the details of the
incident clearly to the Secretary-General and the
Security Council members".

On 4 November 2009, the international team
headed by Mr. Fernandez-Taranco held a meeting with
the ministerial committee formed by the Council of
Ministers to follow up on the consequences of the
terrorist attacks against government institutions. My
Government believes that sending Mr. Oscar
Fernandez-Taranco and his team for consultations with
the Iraqi Government represents a first step, to be
followed by subsequent steps, leading to the fulfilment
of my Government's request to uncover those behind
the deadly bombings in Baghdad in August and
October.

The improved security situation has facilitated
the Iraqi Government's central plan of encouraging the
return of displaced Iraqis to their country. For example,
in the past three months, 370 displaced families have
returned to their homes in Baghdad and an additional
1,114 internally displaced families have returned to
their homes in the province of Diyala. More families
returned to their homes in other provinces also.

The Iraqis' enjoyment of their fundamental rights,
as stipulated in the Iraqi Constitution, is a cornerstone
of the ongoing political process. The official
spokesman for the Iraqi Government recently declared
that the Council of Ministers approved the
commitments and pledges made by the Iraqi
Government in the national report of the Republic of
Iraq, which will be submitted to the Human Rights
Council and which will show the reality of human
rights in Iraq. The report will also highlight the most
important challenges facing the Government in its
efforts to address the issues of human rights and will
include a five-year national plan for education about
human rights.

As part of the Iraqi Government's efforts to
strengthen the role of women in society and enable
them to play vital roles, 50 women lieutenants have
recently graduated from the police college to serve in
the Iraqi security forces, and the coming period will
witness the graduation of a second group, consisting of
100 women lieutenants.

In accordance with the Council of Ministers'
decision of 21 October 2009, on 12 November 2009
Iraq signed the Convention on Cluster Munitions. This
confirms the Iraqi Government's desire to pursue a
foreign policy based on respect for international
obligations and cooperation with the international
community in the areas of disarmament and
non-production of weapons of mass destruction.

At the social and economic levels, under the
direct auspices of our Prime Minister, His Excellency
Mr. Nuri al-Maliki, the Iraqi Government held an
investment conference on 20 and 21 October 2009 in
Washington, DC It was attended by a 300-member
Iraqi delegation bringing with them investment plans
for more than 750 projects in 12 vital sectors. During
the conference, more than 220 meetings were held with
foreign investors to discuss those projects, and Prime
Minister al-Maliki and United States Secretary of State
Hillary Clinton addressed the gathering.

On 30 April 2009, a conference on investment in
Iraq was held in London, during which the Iraqi
Government offered British and European investors
500 investment projects in 11 vital sectors. The Prime
Minister headed a large delegation to the conference.

On 5 November 2009, another investment
conference, held in Berlin, was attended by more than
200 delegation members. It was headed by the Minister
of Industry, His Excellency Mr. Fawzi Hariri, and was
attended by the head of the Investment Authority,
Mr. Sami al-Araji. Further investment conferences will
follow in other capitals throughout the world.

On 7 November 2009, the Second Annual Review
Conference of the International Compact with Iraq was
held in Baghdad to discuss the direction of Iraq's social
and economic policies over the next few years on the
basis of the priorities of the International Compact with
Iraq. In the final communique of the Conference, all
agreed that the International Compact with Iraq
represents an important instrument for providing
international support for Iraq in its political transition
and its economic reconstruction.
Oil exports rose to 1,956,000 barrels per day
during the month of September 2009, and the Iraqi
Government is working to increase exports to
2,150,000 barrels a day in 2010.

As part of the Iraqi Government's ongoing efforts
for the reconstruction of Iraq, the Council of Ministers
has approved a comprehensive plan to rebuild the
service sectors and infrastructure of the country, with
an estimated budget of approximately $65 billion.
Under the plan, the housing sector will be allocated
38 per cent of the budget, the agricultural sector 27 per
cent, the transportation sector 14.2 per cent, the water
and sanitation sector 8.4 per cent, the education sector
8.5 per cent, the health sector 5.7 per cent and the
communications sector 0.9 per cent.

On 26 October 2009, Iraq was re-elected to the
Economic and Social Council for the second time after
having received 182 out of 188 votes, which is another
achievement for Iraq in the United Nations.

At the regional and international levels, within
the framework of regional and international openness,
there were recently several high-level visits to Iraq.
These included the visit of Mr. Mahmoud Mohieldin,
Egyptian Minister of Investment, on 11 August 2009;
the visit of Mr. Ahmet Davutoglu, Foreign Minister of
Turkey, also on 11 August; the visit of Mr. Nader
Dahabi, Prime Minister of Jordan, on 3 September to
sign several memorandums of understanding; the visit
of Mr. Joseph Biden, Vice-President of the United
States, on 15 September to discuss bilateral relations
and developments in the security situation; the visit of
Mr. Alexander Saltanov, Deputy Minister of Foreign
Affairs of the Russian Federation, on 7 October to
develop bilateral ties; and the visit of Mr. Recep
Tayyip Erdogan, Prime Minister of Turkey, on
15 October to begin the preparations of the Supreme
Council for Iraqi-Turkish Strategic Cooperation.
Ms. Susan Rice, Permanent Representative of the
United States to the United Nations, visited Baghdad
on 24 October to discuss how to exempt Iraq in the
near future from the consequences of the provisions of
Chapter VII and to survey the destruction resulting
from the 19 August terrorist attacks against the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

The Iraqi Minister for Foreign Affairs received
the credentials of Mr. Mohammad Bakhsh Abbasi,
Ambassador of Pakistan, on 25 August, and those of
Mr. Murat Ozguc, Ambassador of Turkey; Baron Paul
von Malexan, Ambassador of Germany; and
Mrs. Bronislava Tomasova, Ambassador of the Czech
Republic, on 18 October. He received the credentials of
Mr. Sherif Shaheen, Ambassador of Egypt; Mr. Petter
Olberg, Ambassador of Norway; and Mr. Johan
Indekeu, Ambassador of Belgium, on 9 November
2009.

In turn, Mr. Jalal Talabani, President of Iraq,
headed the Iraqi delegation participating in the
meetings of the sixty-fourth session of the General
Assembly, and Vice-President Tariq al-Hashemi headed
the Iraqi delegation participating in the summit of the
Standing Committee for Economic and Commercial
Cooperation held in Istanbul on 10 November. Prime
Minister Nuri al-Maliki visited Washington, DC, on
20 October. The Minister for Foreign Affairs headed
the Iraqi delegation participating in the work of the
first ministerial meeting of the Supreme Council for
Iraqi-Turkish Strategic Cooperation on 18 September.
The Foreign Minister also headed the Iraqi delegation
participating in the meetings of the Iraqi-Egyptian
Joint Committee on 2 November, at which several
memorandums of understanding were signed between
the two countries.

During their meeting with the Secretary-General
in September, the Prime Minister and the Minister for
Foreign Affairs affirmed that Iraq no longer poses a
threat to international peace and security and has
fulfilled many of the international obligations imposed
on it over the years, including those related to the
situation between Iraq and Kuwait.

In paragraph 67 of his report on the review of
resolutions pertaining specifically to Iraq (S/2009/3 85),
the Secretary-General stated:

"It is important to recognize that the Iraq of today
is very different from Iraq prior to 2003. It is my
hope that the Security Council will consider this
report with a View to taking appropriate decisions
that would help Iraq to fulfil its outstanding
obligations in a timely manner."

On that basis, the Government of my country hopes
that the Security Council will shoulder its duty and
enable Iraq to restore its international standing to that
which it held prior to the adoption of Security Council
resolutions beginning with resolution 661 (1990).

In conclusion, I would like to stress my
Government's gratitude for the role played by UNAMI
in Iraq and for the support provided by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General at the Iraqi
Government's request and on the basis of mutually
agreed mechanisms. I would like also to thank the
Secretary-General and the members of the Security
Council for their support for Iraq and the Iraqi people
in their struggle against terrorist groups and their
allies, the remnants of Saddam's regime.
