Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): We thank Under-
Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix; African Union
(AU) Commissioner Smai'l Chergui; and UN-Women
Executive Director Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka for
their comprehensive briefings on their joint visit to
South Sudan.

The delegation of Kazakhstan commends them
for their efforts to promote to promote the meaningful
participation of women in the peace process and
congratulates them on the successful first-ever joint
trip to South Sudan. We also thank the Government of
South Sudan for facilitating this visit. We welcome the
increased collaboration between the United Nations and
the African Union, as well as between the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and UN-Women, aimed at
enhancing the women and peace and security agenda as
an important tool for conflict prevention and resolution
in South Sudan.

The signing of the revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan on 12 September was a significant step
towards peace in the country. We highly commend the
concerted work of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), the AU and the United Nations,
as well as the mediation efforts of Ethiopia, the Sudan
and Uganda, which helped to secure the peace deal.
This is a good example of the cherished notion of
African solutions to African problems. We have high
expectations that this historic agreement, signed after
five years of fighting, will lay the foundations for
durable peace and stability in the country and finally
put an end to the human suffering.

However, it is deeply worrying that the humanitarian
and human rights situation in South Sudan remains very
difficult. Civilians, especially women and children,
continue to bear the brunt of the crisis, suffering
violence and displacement. Food insecurity is at a
critical level. The hostilities between the Government
and the opposition, as well as violations of the status-of-
forces agreement, persist. The latter relate in particular
to restrictions on movement, interference with the
implementation of mandated tasks for the protection
of civilians, and the monitoring and investigating of
human rights.

We thus call on all parties in South Sudan to
demonstrate genuine political will to implement the
Agreement, stop the ongoing violence by bringing
their forces under control and strictly comply with
international humanitarian law. The parties need to
implement a permanent cessation of hostilities and take
all appropriate measures to ensure the safety, security
and freedom of movement of the personnel of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).

The Council, in turn, needs to remain united in
supporting the parties in South Sudan, UNMISS,
IGAD and the AU in implementing the provisions of
the Agreement. The international community should
also make every effort to build trust and confidence
between the parties and provide adequate and sustained
funding for humanitarian assistance, peacebuilding and
economic development.

Women and young people play an important role
in implementing the Agreement. It is therefore critical
to build women's capacity, improve their access to the
country's political leadership and, most of all, empower
them to be engaged in early-warning, mediation and
confidence-building processes among local populations.

True progress on women's empowerment in South
Sudan, as in many other countries, requires a total
social transformation involving the State, the judiciary
and the educational system, grass-roots communities,
religious leaders and civil society. It is evident that lack
of access to high-quality, inclusive education is the
main obstacle to achieving women's empowerment in
South Sudan. Efforts must also be made to strengthen
women's economic security and promote their economic
empowerment. Adequate and sustainable financing
aimed at ensuring that UNMISS has sufficient gender
expertise, authority and capacity is equally important.

To conclude, Kazakhstan pledges its unfailing
support to efforts aimed at achieving peace and stability
in South Sudan and reaffirms the special contribution
of women to making it a reality.

