The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Kenya, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Olago
Owuor (Kenya) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Council welcomes the announcement
of progress in the negotiations, overseen by Kofi
Annan, between Mwai Kibaki and Raila Odinga
on 1 February, including the adoption of an
agenda and timetable for action to end the crisis
in Kenya following the disputed 27 December
elections. The Council welcomes the African
Union communique, commends the efforts of the
African Union, President Kufuor of Ghana and
United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
and emphasizes its full support for the Panel of
Eminent African Personalities, led by Kofi
Annan, in assisting the parties in finding a
political solution. The Council deplores the
widespread violence following the elections,
which has resulted in extensive loss of life and
serious humanitarian consequences.

"The Council expresses its deep concern
that, despite the commitments made on
lFebruary, civilians continue to be killed,
subjected to sexual and gender-based violence
and displaced from their homes. The Council
emphasizes that the only solution to the crisis lies
through dialogue, negotiation and compromise
and strongly urges Kenya's political leaders to
foster reconciliation and to elaborate and
implement the actions agreed to on 1 February
without delay, including by meeting their
responsibility to engage fully in finding a
sustainable political solution and taking action to
immediately end violence, including ethnically-
motivated attacks, dismantle armed gangs,
improve the humanitarian situation and restore
human rights. Recalling the need to avoid
impunity, the Council calls for those responsible
for Violence to be brought to justice. It expresses
its concern at the political, security and economic
impact of the crisis in Kenya on the wider region.

"The Council expresses its strong concern
at the continuing dire humanitarian situation in
Kenya and calls for the protection of refugees and
internally displaced persons. The Council further
expresses its concern at the safety of
humanitarian workers and United Nations
personnel and calls on all parties to facilitate their
work and ensure their safety. The Council
welcomes the decisions, following consultations
with the Government of Kenya, of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General on the
Prevention of Genocide to dispatch missions to
Kenya. It calls on Kenya's political leaders to
facilitate the work of these missions and looks
forward to being informed by the Secretary-
General of their findings.

"The Council further requests the Secretary-
General to report on how the United Nations can
further support the mediation efforts in Kenya
and on, as necessary, the impact of the crisis on
the wider subregion and United Nations
operations in the subregion."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2008/4.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5p.m.
08-22998

