Mr. Walubita (Zambia): Allow me, first of all, to
deliver to you, Sir, to the Secretary-General, and to all the
members of the Security Council, warm and fraternal
greetings from President Chiluba and the people of
Zambia.

Let me begin by thanking you and all the other
members of the Security Council for allowing my
delegation to address this body today. The purpose of my
address today is to put on record the concerns of my
Government about allegations that have been made by the
Government of Angola that Zambia is providing logistical
and military support to UNITA in order to perpetuate the
war and the suffering of the Angolan people. To this
effect, the Government of Angola has issued threats to
wage war against Zambia and other alleged supporters of
UNITA.

It is a matter of public knowledge that Zambia has
played a pivotal role in the liberation struggle of southern
Africa, as well as in the search for the peaceful resolution
of conflicts in the region. Given the fact that Zambia was
among the earliest countries to gain independence in the
region, we provided sanctuary to virtually all the
liberation movements that were fighting for the
independence of their respective countries. These include
both the MPLA, which constitutes the current
Government of Angola, and UNITA, which is presently
fighting against the Government.

 

We took this decision fully aware of the consequences
entailed by such a heavy responsibility. Indeed, the cost of
this undertaking in human and economic terms has been
enormous to my country. Many of our nationals lost their
lives and our economic infrastructure, such as roads and
bridges, were destroyed by hostile colonial and minority
regimes that surrounded us.
In spite of these threats to our young independence
and sovereignty, Zambia steadfastly continued to provide
sanctuary to liberation movements because of our strong
conviction that our own peace and security could not be
guaranteed so long as the neighbouring countries remained
under colonial and minority rule.

It is in this spirit that Zambia, together with the
international community, invested 14 months of its time,
energy and resources to facilitate the negotiations between
the MPLA and UNITA that culminated in the signing of the
historic Lusaka Protocol on 20 November 1994.

I have given this historical background to demonstrate
that Zambia has always been an ardent advocate of peace.
It is therefore most unfortunate that Zambia stands accused
today by the sister Republic of Angola of undermining the
peace and stability that the international community through
the United Nations and, indeed, the Angolan parties
themselves, worked so hard to achieve.

My country finds it curious that these allegations are
being repeated even today, in spite of the fact that most of
them have already been jointly investigated with Angola. In
addition, the United Nations Security Council sent
Ambassador Mahugu of Kenya, the then Chairman of the
committee on Sanctions against UNITA, to investigate the
allegations, while the Organization of African Unity sent
Ambassador Daniel Antonio, the Assistant Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, on a similar mission. All the
above investigations cleared Zambia. However, because of
the persistent accusations by the Government of Angola,
Zambia has extended an invitation to the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan, to once again send a mission to Zambia
to investigate the allegations.

It is a matter for regret that the Angolan peace
process, as embodied in the Lusaka Protocol, has collapsed,
owing to UNITA's failure to comply fully with the
provisions of the Protocol. The conduct of UNITA in this
regard is totally unacceptable, and has been condemned by
Zambia. The collapse of the peace process is all the more
lamentable in View of the fact that two thirds of the
Protocol has been implemented. It is our view that,
notwithstanding the current obstacles, the Lusaka Protocol
still remains the best framework for a peaceful settlement
of the Angolan conflict.

With the amount of time, energy and resources
already invested, and with the progress made so far, it
would be a great tragedy for the international community
to abandon the Lusaka Protocol. Therefore, as the Council
considers the winding down of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Angola, every effort should be made
to ensure that a vacuum is not created which could lead
to the worsening of the security situation in the southern
African subregion. Such a situation would have an
adverse impact on the security of my country. In fact,
since the resumption of hostilities in Angola, there has
been an increase in the flow into Zambia of illegal
military weapons, which are being used for criminal
activities. In addition, there has been an increase in the
influx of refugees from Angola to Zambia.

The Government of Zambia is also concerned that
these serious allegations by Angola are being made at a
time when our mediation efforts in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo have reached an advanced stage.
The allegations, therefore, are likely to undermine
Zambia's mediation of the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

I wish to conclude my statement by assuring
members of the Council that, notwithstanding the
allegations by Angola, the Government of Zambia is fully
complying with Security Council sanctions against
UNITA. I also wish to reaffirm my country's unwavering
commitment to peace and stability in the entire southern
African region.

Zambia and Angola are sister countries, and we will
endeavour to resolve our differences through bilateral
means.

