Mr. Sharma (India): We welcome your initiative,
Sir, in calling this meeting. Because of your wise
injunction against prolixity, I shall address only the
recommendations in the Secretary-General's report. On
the supporting arguments, I will only say that we
should be wary where we advance the indefensible to
protect the defenceless.

Having visited this ground twice before in the
Council, our tour can be a brisk one. Recommendation
1 asks the Security Council and the General Assembly
to provide reliable, sufficient and sustained funding for
ad hoc international tribunals and related bodies. This
is odd. First, the Secretariat must know that funding is
one of the few areas which the Council has not yet
appropriated under its broad definition of security;
secondly, the General Assembly has already taken on
the costs of the two ad hoc Tribunals, splitting them
equally between the regular and the peacekeeping
budgets. What, then, remains to be done?

When the Secretariat asks for more, we should
carefully weigh whether these Tribunals give value for
the money they already have. This year, they will cost
$182 million. As an order of comparison, the United
Nations regular budget will spend $10 million this year
on the International Court of Justice; $39 million under
the budget line "Economic and social development in
Africa"; and $21 million on the programme of
technical cooperation.

Recommendation 2 reflects a continuing
confusion over the nature and powers of peacekeeping.
If a peace agreement has provided for amnesty, a
peacekeeping operation sent to monitor its
implementation cannot overturn any of its provisions
and start hunting for suspects. That would violate the
United Nations neutrality and its mandate. The United
Nations can refuse to get involved if it believes an
agreement is flawed, but cannot try to either correct or
override it through a peacekeeping operation or
through mandates drafted by this Council.

Recommendation 4 is hard to sustain under
international law. The Security Council has been given
no role in the implementation of the Geneva
Conventions. The Conventions do not contain a right of
unimpeded access. They acknowledge the exigencies of
war. The right which the Secretariat demands violates
international humanitarian law and the Security
Council has no power to grant it. Apart from anything
else, the denial of access need not and usually will not
constitute a threat to international peace and security,
the only trigger for Council action.

Recommendation 5 might very well appeal to the
Council when New York is snowed in. However,
though the Council has selflessly assumed many chores
not given to it by the Charter, it should jib at being
turned into a scout for the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs.

Recommendation 6 seeks to draw general
conclusions from exceptional experience; nor does
experience encourage the general conclusion. The
Secretariat asks the Council to further develop the
concept of regional approaches to regional and
subregional crises. In the past, the Council has often
either sheltered behind regionalism to avoid having to
take action or subcontracted its powers and abdicated
its responsibilities to some regional organizations.
These are concepts that should be abandoned, not
developed.

Recommendation 7 encourages the Council to
support the development of clear criteria and
procedures for the identification and separation of
armed elements from civilian refugees. Nothing in the
supporting arguments gives us an inkling of what the
Secretariat has in mind. To our perhaps simplistic way
of thinking, a person with arms is an armed element
and can be identified as such unless he or she has
hidden the arms away. Separation is a different matter;
it goes to the heart of the debate on the knotty question
of post-conflict disarmament. The development of
criteria, even ifit can be done, is unlikely to help.

We note that the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees have agreed to deploy
joint assessment teams to an emerging crisis area. This
surprises us. Refugee crises do not necessarily need a
peacekeeping operation and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations has no role where there is
none. Departments should not overstep their mandates.

Recommendation 8 addresses a need but will not
work if the past performance of the Secretariat is a
guide. In all peacekeeping operations, the United
Nations only interest is to cater to Western journalists
and to a Western audience. The needs of the local
population or of the peacekeeping operation are not
only of marginal interest; they are prone to be
sacrificed on the altar of this higher need. If this
mindset does not change, this mandate is liable to be
used much more in search of stories that will attract
Western attention. The protection of civilians would be
incidental.

Recommendation 9 is well-meaning, but it is
clear that the problem has not been thought through. A
dialogue can be held with armed elements that have
become part of a peace agreement. If, however, there is
no agreement, it is difficult to see how the United
Nations as an institution would engage armed groups in
a dialogue only on the provision of humanitarian
assistance and protection.

Recommendation 10 is somewhat too romantic. It
is hard to believe that the Revolutionary United Front
would have stopped hacking off arms and legs in Sierra
Leone or that the Taliban would have stopped shooting
men for forgetting not to shave if they had known that
these indulgences were banned in the Geneva
Conventions.

As to recommendation 11, we hear the Security
Council plans to take 15 members of the Economic and
Social Council into a day-long embrace. The
Secretariat wants the General Assembly to be
represented, not even by a selection of its members, but
by the President. Apart from the fact that the President
of the General Assembly does not have the powers
attributed to him here, where would he get the
information from, on the basis of which he would, as
the Secretariat urges, alert the Council to situations in
which action might be required? The President would
have this information and a mandate only if the
Assembly had adopted a resolution on the issue urging
action by the Council and authorizing the President to
play a role.

Recommendation 12 urges the Security Council
to continue investigating the linkages between illicit
trade in natural resources and the conduct of war, and
to take appropriate action. As with the international
tribunals, it is perhaps time to take stock before the
Council takes further action. For instance, the panel of
experts for the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
asked that the United Nations Forum on Forests define
and lay down the parameters for what they describe as
"conflict timber". If the assumption is that the trade in
illicit natural resources is a cause of war or of the
violation of the human rights of civilians, it is facile
and perhaps misleading. If the Council made
mandatory a marking and tracing system for small arms
and light weapons, more innocent civilian lives would
be saved than through the elaborate controls now being
devised for the trade in minerals and natural resources.

Recommendation 13 is too broad in sweep for
practical application. It is impossible either to predict
that there will be massive violations of human rights in
any given conflict or to anticipate what the instruments
used will be. In effect, this recommendation implies a
trade embargo being automatically imposed on all
parties to a conflict, including on legitimate
Governments resisting insurrections.

This being April, we are not surprised that annex II
to the report mixes memory and desire, but I wonder if
we needed to disinter the recommendations of 1999.
The exhumation does not add much more of interest.
Recapitulation 1 of annex II is on steps to strengthen
the United Nations capacity to deploy peacekeeping
operations. We support this, but believe a well-trained
and properly equipped national brigade, committed
under the Standby Arrangement System, would be
much more effective than the multinational formation
the Secretariat favours. The report fondly highlights the
High Readiness Brigade, but in the one mission to
which it has deployed so far, it needed two and a half
months to get there; it may have been high, but it
certainly was not ready.

With regard to recapitulation 6 of annex II, as I
said to the Council in 1999, there is no indication here
that the consent of a Member State is required before
international military observers can be deployed. The
implication is that, wherever internally displaced
persons or refugees are to be found, the Council would
automatically act under Chapter VII and order the
deployment of international military observers, even
over the objections of a Member State. Since observers
would need protection, an international military
presence must necessarily be set up at the same time.
The implications of this do not have to be spelled out.

Recapitulation 9 of annex II gives its blessings to
a Commission on humanitarian intervention set up by a
Member State, no doubt with the best intentions.
Elsewhere, attempts are made, on spuriously religious
grounds, to try to sanctify terrorism as holy war, under
a false doctrine of religious intervention. Just as we
would not expect the Secretariat to bless those
initiatives, we expect it not to act as a publicist for any
other State or group of States, or to endorse national
preferences.

To sum up, we do not know if the report has
advanced the cause of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. The Council has taken pragmatic steps
in recent years to do what it can, through peacekeeping
operations, where appropriate, and through other means
within its competence, to try to give some protection to
civilians affected by armed conflict. We encourage it to
continue on that path in this vital and human
responsibility.

In conclusion, I should like to say that, in your
statement earlier today, Mr. President, you observed
that the Council did not act on many of the
recommendations in the Secretary-General's report of
1999, as they were outside the Council's mandate and
competence or because of practical difficulties in
implementing them. In making its recommendations in
the future, the Secretariat will no doubt bear your wise
counsel in mind.

