Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): At the outset, I would like
to express my appreciation to the Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process for his informative
and insightful briefing on the current situation in the
Middle East. I also thank the Permanent Representative
of Israel and the Permanent Observer of Palestine for
their statements.

It is disheartening to see the Middle East riddled
by raging armed conflicts, political impasse and dire
humanitarian crises, from the collapse of negotiations
on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict to the fully-fledged
Syrian armed conflict, with its effects on all of Syria's
neighbours, in particular Lebanon, Jordan and Iraq.

With regard to the Israel-Palestine conflict, we
join in welcoming a new glimmer of hope in the peace
process. We commend the tireless efforts of the United
States Government through its Secretary of State, John
Kerry, in bringing the Israelis and Palestinians to an
agreement on the resumption of the peace talks.

We call on both parties to seize this unique
opportunity and to make history for generations to
come. We hope that those countries that may have
influence on both parties will redouble their efforts to
encourage Israel and Palestine to come to the negotiating
table with a sense of flexibility and open-mindedness.
In that context, however, it is important that both sides
refrain from any activities that may undermine a two-
State solution.

In Gaza, the calm brokered by Egypt in November
2011 has largely held but remains fragile. We condemn
the recent rocket attacks into Israel during the month
of June. We express our appreciation to the Israeli
Government for allowing Palestinian fishermen to fish
within six nautical miles of the Gaza shore, extended
from the previous three-mile limit. We encourage
the Government of Israel to add further miles as a
confidence-building measure that could not only
improve the livelihood of Palestinians but also improve
the relationships between Palestine and the State of
Israel.

The situation in Syria remains deeply alarming, as
the violence escalates. The humanitarian crisis continues
to worsen, with a third of the Syrian people now in need
of urgent assistance and a quarter of them displaced.
Syria's neighbours, as generous and hospitable as they
are, have reached their limits in hosting the now over
1.8 million registered refugees. While we recognize
the impact on host countries, we stress the importance
of keeping borders open for refugees fleeing violence,
consistent with international humanitarian obligations.

We were alarmed by the recent report of the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry
to Syria (A/HRC/23/58), released last month, and we
express deep concern at the continued human rights
violations, mass destruction, sexual violence, arbitrary
detention and reported accounts of murder and torture,
in violation of international humanitarian law. We wish
to send a clear signal to all those who are involved in
committing crimes that they will be held accountable.

We regret to see that the Security Council, whose
primary responsibility is to maintain international
peace and security, has so far failed to take the
necessary action aimed at saving the Syrian people.
The militarization of the conflict in Syria will only
accelerate the killings and violence and the emergence
of Al-Qaida-linked groups. For Rwanda, the conflict
will be ended only through a comprehensive and
inclusive political process. We reiterate our support to
Lakhdar Brahimi, Joint Special Representative of the
United Nations and the League ofArab States for Syria,
and commend the work he has done for a peaceful
settlement of the Syrian crisis.

In the same spirit, we look forward to the
"Geneva II" conference, and we encourage both the
United States and the Russian Federation to agree on
the pending issues, so as to allow for the convening of
the conference as soon as possible.

Regarding Lebanon, it is clear that the war in Syria,
including the unprecedented refugee crisis, is putting
a growing strain on the Lebanese economy, political
dynamics and security. The current humanitarian crisis
and its long-term implications, as well as the continuing
political deadlock, requires close international attention
and support.

Lebanon has seen repeated incidents of shelling
from Syria into Lebanese territory, and Syrian armed
groups have carried out attacks against the Syrian armed
forces from Lebanese soil. In that regard, we are deeply
concerned at the increased involvement of foreign
fighters in Syria, notably the Lebanese Hizbullah. We
reiterate our call to the Lebanese parties to refrain from
taking part in the Syrian conflict, in accordance with
the disassociation policy and the Baabda Declaration.

In conclusion, Madam President, let me reiterate our
conviction that a stable and peaceful Middle East, with
nations living side by side in harmony, is an objective
that we can achieve should all parties commit to lay
down their arms and resolve to settle their differences
politically, with a view to exploring the tremendous
opportunities offered by the Middle East, a region with
huge economic potential. It is therefore imperative for
the countries of the region, the Security Council and
other stakeholders to work collectively to preserve
stability and contribute to laying peaceful foundations
for a better future in the Middle East, to which so many
of its peoples aspire.

