Mr. Chavez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to commend the United Kingdom presidency for
proposing an exchange of views in the Council on
peacebuilding in post-conflict situations.

May I first make a few comments about national
ownership of the peacebuilding process. For Peru, each
conflict has its own internal as well as international
dynamic. Despite the underlying similarities in
economic or social structures in some conflicts, there
are ethnic, tribal, constitutional or historical
characteristics that mean that there are no two identical
cases or similar groups of relevant actors. Therefore, in
order to tackle the post-conflict process more
effectively, we have to recognize those features and not
follow a single format.

International actors must be aware that a genuine
process of ownership of the process of transition and
peacebuilding will be more sustainable in the context
of security - political, social, legal and economic - if
there is social legitimacy providing inclusivity. For
that, in addition to political elections, it is necessary to
verify practices, rules and institutions for adopting and
implementing agreements and for resolving disputes.
That will make it possible gradually to extend the
jurisdiction of the State, to affirm a legitimate authority
with the right to use force, to consolidate central
control of the territory with reformed security
institutions, and to establish policies to provide public
services, to administer natural resources, to encourage
investment and to increase budget resources so as to
arrive at self-sufficiency. Above all, the process must
respect the rule of law and protect human rights as
basic obligations.

As regards international cooperation, from the
outset it must essentially be directed to strengthening
the political system, the conflict resolution system and
the training of professional civil servants. At the same
time, we must highlight that quick-impact projects are
relevant for creating greater awareness and eliciting the
support of the local population. The participation of
international financial institutions and local and
international entrepreneurship are essential for the
success of the process.

All this implies a medium- and long-term
commitment, which means that the participation of the
international community, with the agreement of the
State concerned, may take place over several years and
in many priority areas and, in some cases, in great
depth. All that requires a strategic vision of the
peacebuilding process, especially because processes
are never linear - they may be regressive, or there
may be new circumstances that effect the legitimacy or
advances achieved in peacebuilding. That requires,
therefore, strategic association among the political,
social, educational and economic forces in the State
being consolidated and the relevant international
actors.

In a society that is rebuilding, it must be clear
that the international assistance it receives is designed
to strengthen the exercise of its own sovereignty, with
full respect for international law and the principles of
the United Nations Charter. It must be equally clear
that there is a time limit to the provision of aid and that
it must follow a programme with clear objectives to
measure its progress and viability.

For those who are cooperating, the strategic
association must respect political as well as social,
economic and historical characteristics and must be
based on a long-term commitment on the basis of
indicators of progress. In the case of regional or
international bodies and institutions of the United
Nations system, that long-term commitment requires a
convergence of actions and an additional effort for
coordination. It may be necessary for regional
organizations or the United Nations to lead the
international peacebuilding effort to guarantee
legitimacy, transparency, coordination and the correct
follow-up of the reconstruction process.

The organizations must, therefore, be endowed
with a great capacity for analysis, evaluation and
planning so that they can react to sudden changes in
the situation in the field that might endanger the
peacebuilding process. Similarly, there must be a
capacity to recognize the changes that the work of the
Government and the international actors is producing
on the ground so as to adjust policies and possibly the
agreed goals. We believe that the Secretary-General
can contribute with a description of the current
situation and proposals on enhancing the work of the
Organization, its organs, funds and programmes for
more concerted action.

My delegation wishes to highlight the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission, reiterates its support and
hopes the Commission will continue to contribute to
peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau, Sierra Leone, Burundi
and other States that ask it for help. We will continue
to support constructively the leadership of the United
Nations and the Commission in those efforts.

