Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): I would first of
all like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this
briefing on the final report of the Panel of Experts created
by resolution 1237 (1999) of 7 May 1999.

I would also like to welcome the presence at this
meeting of the Minister for External Relations of Angola
and of Minister of State Peter Hain of the United Kingdom.

Naturally, I also wish to thank Ambassador Fowler,
Chairman of the Security Council Committee created
pursuant to resolution 864 (1993), for his very detailed
introductory statement, as well as the members of the Panel
of Experts, whose final report we are considering today.

In the context of the initial consideration of the matter
before the Council today, I wish to make the following
preliminary comments.

First, Mali deplores the continuing conflict in Angola,
which has lasted some 25 years and for which UNITA is
primarily responsible. The Angolan people have suffered
too much as a result of the war. The time has therefore
come for the international community to put an end to it.
From this standpoint, the report we are considering today
proposes rigorous measures aimed at cutting off sources of
illegal revenue obtained by UNITA from the sale of
diamonds, reducing its access to petroleum supplies and
limiting its procurement of arms and ammunition. In this
regard, I wish to pay tribute to the tireless efforts of
Ambassador Fowler to facilitate a political settlement to the
Angolan crisis by restricting UNITA's ability to continue to
pursue the military option.

Secondly, the report before us today shows that,
notwithstanding the sanctions, UNITA has been able to
evade their impact through the existence of a complex
network that has made it possible for it to sidestep the
sanctions and have at its disposal a formidable war
machine. Various actors, including Governments, have been
cited. In this regard, I would like to lend my delegation's
support to the proposal made by France concerning the
follow-up to be given to the experts' recommendations.

Thirdly, the report under consideration also establishes
that despite violations, the sanctions have begun to bear
fruit. It is clear that the serious difficulties being
experienced by UNITA with regard to fuel supplies are
the result of the beneficial effects of the sanctions.

In this connection, I would like to underline that, in
solidarity with the struggle of the Angolan people, Mali
is resolved to seek the further strengthening of sanctions
against UNITA. It is for this reason that my delegation
exhorts all Members of the United Nations to look closely
at the conclusions and recommendations contained in the
report. We also take the view that it is important for the
international community to lend its support and provide
the necessary assistance to Angola's neighbours so as to
support their efforts to secure better monitoring of the
sanctions.

