Mr. Abdellah (Tunisia) (interpretation from French):
I wish at the outset, Sir, to express our satisfaction at
seeing you preside over the Security Council this month.
Your great skills and extensive experience ensure that
effective work will be accomplished in the area of
international peace and security. I should like also to
congratulate your predecessor, Ambassador Zbigniew
Wlosowicz of Poland, for his excellent work last month.

The Security Council's consideration today of the
situation in Somalia provides us with an opportunity to
emphasize the need for an increasingly sustained
commitment on the part of the international community to
promote the restoration of a lasting peace in that country.

Two agreements were reached among the majority of
the Somali factions: the October 1996 Nairobi agreement
and the Sodere agreement of 3 January 1997. This is
without a doubt one of the promising developments that
have recently taken place in Somalia. These agreements
show the signatories' awareness and, we sincerely hope
their desire to halt the fratricidal war waged by the various
factions and to make it possible for Somalia to rejoin the
international community.

In this connection, we are pleased that the parties to
the Sodere agreement have affirmed their determination

"to place national interest above selfish clan interests
and personal greed and ambition".

This is an encouraging sign that, together with the
establishment of a National Salvation Council, opens up
real prospects for the rebirth of the Somali State.

In this connection, my delegation wishes to pay a
tribute to all regional actors, particularly Egypt, Kenya,
Ethiopia and Italy, as well as regional and international
organizations and institutions that are working to establish
conditions conducive to a settlement of the conflict.

It is essential that such efforts continue and intensify
with a view to consolidating achievements. In this
connection, the League of Arab States, the Organization
of the Islamic Conference and the Organization of African
Unity emphasized at their recent ministerial meetings the
importance of involving all Somali factions in the peace
process under way. The factions refrain from any action
that could rekindle hostilities and unleash the old demons
of confrontation, and they must promote dialogue and the
peaceful settlement of their differences.

This would encourage the factions that have as yet
not signed the Sodere agreement to do so. Were this to
happen, we could then hope that the National
Reconciliation Conference envisaged in that agreement
would enjoy the participation of all the camps
representing the Somali people in order to establish a
broad-based Government of national unity.

At another level, mediation and good offices, both
regionally and internationally, should be coordinated. In
this connection, as the Secretary-General has suggested in
his report dated 17 February 1997 on the situation in
Somalia, it would be useful to appoint a high-level
Special Envoy for the country, whose mission would be
to provide liaison among the regional actors and support
their mediation efforts.

We believe that the United Nations has a paramount
role in the continued mobilization of the international
community to create a climate conducive to normalizing
the situation in the country. The Security Council has the
necessary authority to support those in favour of peace
and persuade reluctant factions to come to terms. The
arms embargo decreed in resolution 733 (1992) must be
strictly observed by all States.

Regional activities to promote national reconciliation
must be supported in various ways by the international
community. We fully support the Secretary-General's
proposal to set up a trust fund to implement the Nairobi
and Sodere declarations.

We would also like to refer to the precarious
economic and humanitarian situation of the Somali people
at this time. One must emphasize that consolidating
progress through national reconciliation requires
improving the standard of living of the population.

 

According to the most recent report of the Secretary-
General, there may be a nutritional catastrophe if the
drought continues in the country.

In this context, the role of the personnel of United
Nations bodies, non-governmental organizations and
humanitarian organizations is helpful in various ways.
Working to meet the needs of the people in the best way
possible, they continue to carry out their activities in
frequently dangerous conditions.

The Somali factions should facilitate the performance
of these humanitarian activities and ensure the proper
conditions for the reconstruction and economic recovery of
the country. For its part, the international community must
provide the necessary assistance to consolidate and
strengthen the progress that has been made to date in
Somalia.

