Mr. Tanin: As reflected in the details of the report
before the Security Council (S/2019/46l), the situation
in Kosovo, and between Belgrade and Pristina, is again
at a fragile moment. Today's meeting coincides with
a significant anniversary. It has been 20 years since
the Security Council last adopted a full resolution in
response to the conflict (resolution 1244 (1999)). Over
those 20 years, there has clearly been progress and
change in a myriad of dimensions, in Kosovo, in the
region and in the world.

At the same time, we should make an additional
reflection. In the absence of a genuine and necessary
process of engagement between the parties to this
conflict, the situation does not simply remain tenuous,
but could slide backwards. Often it has done so.
Productive engagements between Belgrade and Pristina
have not taken place since autumn 2018, and, while
much attention is focused upon day-to-day disputes and
provocations, these are not the only factors complicating
efforts to return to negotiations.

The imposition of a 100 per cent import tariff on
Serbian and Bosnian goods by Pristina last November
continues, despite a near-unanimous call by the
international community for its removal. Belgrade's
position is that lifting the import tariffs is a minimum
condition for resuming talks within the format facilitated
by the European Union. Pristina leaders have also set
out public conditions, though not always with unity of
voice, and while a Pristina negotiating team has been
created, its full responsibilities await clarification. To
resolutioneduce these complex nuances into a single
assessment: multiple inconsistent public signals have
hampered all efforts to ensure the full engagement of
both parties in a single or definitive process.

In such circumstances, leaders from all sides must
exercise their responsibility to steer this complex
situation clear of any serious escalations. Engagement
in good faith, without threats or ultimatums, is
necessary for re-establishing the conditions for the
resumption and continuation of political dialogue.
I hope that all parties engaged may be able to work
collectively to ensure that the planned meeting in July
in Paris is used by the parties to return to substantive
matters, in particular those that directly affect the lives
of people and communities. Engaging more actively
with a wider array of stakeholders, demonstrating a
commitment to advancing the interests of populations
hoping for better opportunities, and meaningful and
equal participation of all segments of the society are
elements essential to achieving a measure of political
process, but unfortunately each appeared to be lacking
in the efforts we observed during this past period.

One of the significant developments since the end
of the official reporting period was the organization
of elections in the four Kosovo Serb-majority
municipalities in northern Kosovo. Following the
resignations of the mayors of these municipalities in
response to Pristina's increase of the import tax on
Serbian and Bosnian goods, the President of Kosovo
called an extraordinary election, which took place on
19 May. The election proceeded peacefully. According
to Kosovo's Central Election Commission, the elections
resulted in a clear victory for the Serbian List candidates
who already held power in the relevant municipalities,
and who received above 90 per cent of the vote.
Restricted electoral competition and limited political
participation in Kosovo Serb communities were issues
underlined by some of the diplomatic representatives
monitoring the election process.

On the morning of 28 May, the Kosovo police
conducted a special operation - concentrated mainly
in the northern municipalities - targeting smuggling
and organized crime suspects, under warrants issued
by the Pristina Basic Court. The operation led to the
arrest ofa number of suspects, including local officials.
Suspects and Kosovo police officers were injured in the
course of the operation. During this operation, two staff
members of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), based in Zubin Potok,
a municipality in the north, one international and
one locally recruited, were arrested and injured, in
separate incidents. It is a United Nations responsibility
to determine objectively the circumstances affecting
its staff, which we have already undertaken in a
systematic manner, in full accord with United Nations
practice and with the imperative to determine the facts
expeditiously. This point is particularly important
for Council members to know, given the extent of
unverified information and speculation that have since
appeared in the public domain.

Today, I would like to put on record just a few other
pertinent points.

First, there has been a failure to observe our staff
members' relevant immunities to arrest and detention.
United Nations property was also improperly searched
and seized, in contravention of all relevant laws and the
Organization's immunities.

Secondly, despite our requests and a normally
productive working relationship with authorities in
Pristina, the situation at present is that the authorities
have shared very little relevant or factual evidence
with the United Nations about the arrest and injury
of our staff. Simultaneously, Kosovo authorities have
issued statements in the press, and in correspondence
directed to States Members of the United Nations, that
contains information lacking an adequate evidentiary
basis, contrary to much of our understanding so far, and
avoids matters essential for an objective enquiry.
Thirdly, the day after the transfer of our
international staff member outside Kosovo to receive
required medical treatment, he was publicly declared
persona non grata, upon which occasion I received in
parallel a communication from Pristina authorities
stating the same. As already stressed, the doctrine of
persona non grata does not apply to, or in respect of,
United Nations personnel.

Fourthly, I am alarmed that both staff members
were apparently subjected to excessive force and
mistreatment upon their arrest by police, causing
injuries requiring hospitalization. That is a matter that
will form an essential component of the enquiry that we
have initiated.

During those events, I was obliged to call
repeatedly for the immediate release of United Nations
staff, as well as respect for their rights and immunities.
That would not have been necessary had the authorities
respected the immunity of UNMIK personnel and
communicated with the Mission in a more forthright
and timely manner. Nonetheless, we remain hopeful
that communication from the highest levels of Pristina
authorities will improve as we work to clarify the
precise circumstances of 28 May.

I also wish to make Clear that our Mission stands
fully behind all efforts of the Pristina institutions to
combat organized crime networks and eliminate public
corruption. That struggle, as I emphasized in my
public statement on 28 May, must also sit within the
framework of the international rule of law and human
rights principles, which are guarded by the United
Nations, and foremost by this Council.

Regardless of events such as the ones on 28 May,
UNMIK continues to focus its efforts and resources on
the objectives of peace and stability in Kosovo and the
region. We will do so effectively only with the direct
support of the Council.

Internally, I consistently review our Mission's
priorities and will need the Council's support to ensure
that we continue to fulfil our role in the most efficient
and appropriate way. Our approach is guided by the
Secretary-General's prevention agenda, epitomized
by the Mission's focus on trust-building among
communities. In that, we work closely with all actors
who are engaged in good-faith efforts to transform the
environment from one of contained conflict into one of
peace and progress.

In collaboration with the United Nations Kosovo
team, and our other international partners on the
ground, we continue to empower trust-building actors,
including in the areas of language rights and human
rights more broadly, youth empowerment, gender
equality, justice and intercommunal dialogue. We
have followed a road map created during the United
Nations Kosovo Trust-Building Forum, held in May
2018, utilizing public spaces in Kosovo to underline
the priority of reconciliation expressed by Kosovo's
leadership. The debates that we are fostering are
designed specifically to tackle the most sensitive areas of
public concern, including the political decision-making
process, religious tolerance, empowering the younger
generation in the daunting challenge of overcoming the
past and ensuring a more just and peaceful future for
the next generation.

We are pursuing our goal of being directly engaged
with Kosovo institutions to help the implementation
of human rights initiatives and legislation. Although
largely drowned out by the news stories of the same
time frame, on 24 May, the Working Group on Missing
Persons met in Pristina, agreeing on several very
practical steps jointly to uncover further information
needed to address still-unresolved cases. The same
Group will soon submit a report documenting the
actions since 2004, during which identifications in over
3,300 cases were accomplished.

We consistently seek innovative avenues to
promote trust, together with all our partners. We hope
that the institutions from both sides will continue to
join us in that effort. The third United Nations Youth
Assembly, co-organized by UNMIK and UNICEF,
with the vital participation of the Secretary-General's
Envoy on Youth, produced specific recommendations
for young people from across Kosovo to engage their
Government and non-governmental institutions. The
Global Open Day on Women, Peace and Security in
Pristina, in collaboration with the European Union
(EU), highlighted the need for the greater inclusion
and engagement of women, including in the highest
political processes.

I would also like to take the opportunity to
welcome the initial contribution to the trust fund
established to support the Ashkali, Egyptian and
Roma communities. The Secretary-General has urged
additional contributions, which are essential to respond
adequately to the needs of those vulnerable groups.

UNMIK will continue to work closely with our
international partners, particularly the EU and the
Kosovo Force, as well as with the many bilateral actors
who are investing their resources in Kosovo's stability,
community reconciliation and economic development.
Our international partners have invested substantial
resources in Kosovo and the region, and the parties
have expressed their desire to move ever closer to the
European Union. I therefore call upon the parties to do
their part and assume responsibilities for delivering
on the objectives of normalizing relations and helping
to bring not only a more lasting stability but growing
prosperity to the region.

In closing, on behalf of all UNMIK staff, I wish
to thank the Council for its support and reiterate our
assurance that we will continue to implement the peace
and security mandate with which it has entrusted us.

