Mr. Fedotov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The Russian delegation welcomes the
signing of the Basic Agreement on the Region of Eastern
Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium. This document
makes possible a peaceful political settlement of the
problems in this region of Croatia, which is inhabited to
a considerable extent by Serbs. Thus, there has been
created a real chance to avoid a repetition of the tragedy
that occurred earlier in Krajina, where hundreds of
thousands of peaceful civilians lost their homes and
became refugees.

The Agreement was made possible by the parties'
realism and sense of responsibility, as well as the
considerable contribution of international mediators and
States members of the Contact Group. It provides for
restoration of the security guarantees that were
undermined for the entire population of the region during
the years of conflict, securing for the Croats, Serbs and
representatives of other nationalities, in equal measure,
basic human rights and freedoms, adequate conditions for
the return of refugees, and normalization of life together
in general.

It should be pointed out that recently - before the
signing of the Agreement - there was particular
heightening of tension in Sector East. The fact that events
did not develop in line with the worst-case military
scenario was due largely to the United Nations
international force, including the Russian contingent,
which performed this difficult peacemaking mission so
commendably for several years. Russia is prepared to
continue its contribution to ensuring peace and security in
the region. We also support the continuation and
expansion of international participation in efforts to
ensure human rights in Croatia.

The Agreement that has been achieved also removes
the basic obstacles to the full normalization of relations

 

between the Republic of Croatia and the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia, which is of decisive significance for a
comprehensive settlement of the crisis in the Balkans. In
this regard, we believe that the draft resolution before the
Council, which was submitted on the initiative of the
Contact Group, is appropriate and timely. In our view, the
United Nations must play an important role in the
promotion of the peace process, including the creation of a
Transitional Administration and an international force.

