Ms. Banks (New Zealand): First, I should like to
thank Prime Minister Jose Ramos-Horta and Special
Representative Atul Khare for their presentations. I
also thank the Secretary-General for his report on the
situation in Timor-Leste (S/2007/50) and note our
appreciation for the valuable contribution that
Mr. Khare has made in the short time that he has held
his position.

New Zealand acknowledges the many efforts that
have been made over the past year by the Timorese
people, their leaders and the international community
to return Timor-Leste to a more secure and stable path.
New Zealand has participated actively in those efforts
through its contributions to the international security
forces and to the United Nations Mission and through
bilateral channels. New Zealand's contribution to the
international security forces currently consists of a
light infantry company numbering 142 personnel,
involved in patrol and security operations in and about
Dili. We agree with the Secretary-General's assessment
that while the overall situation has improved, the
security situation remains volatile. We consider that the
functions being provided by the international security
forces remain essential, and that coordination and
cooperation between those forces and UNMIT is
working well.

New Zealand strongly supports extending
UNMIT's mandate for 12 months. It is important to
signal an intention to sustain the commitment of the
United Nations to Timor-Leste over the long term, both
for practical reasons and for the reassuring message
that would give to the people of Timor-Leste, a
commitment that Prime Minister Ramos-Horta has
asked the United Nations to make. The bulk of the
work required to implement the mandate set out in
Security Council resolution 1704 (2006) still lies
ahead. UNMIT needs to be able to make progress in
those elements of its mandate that have a longer time-
frame. We are also concerned that over two thirds of
UNMIT civilian staff positions have not been filled,
and we believe that the initial six-month mandate was a
contributing factor.

Looking ahead, New Zealand supports the
Secretary- General's intention to report back to the
Security Council following the elections, with possible
adjustments to UNMIT's mandate and strength.

The forthcoming presidential and parliamentary
elections are an immediate focus. All parties in Timor-
Leste should ensure that the electoral processes and
framework meet international standards of credibility.
UNMIT and the wider international community have
an important guiding and supporting role to play. New
Zealand is assisting in a variety of ways, including
through the provision of voter education and media
training assistance from the New Zealand Electoral
Commission and through the United Nations
Development Programme's multi-donor support
programme.

New Zealand urges UNMIT and the Government
of Timor- Leste to progress the comprehensive review
of the security sector as a high priority. Security sector
reform is an integral part of strengthening Timor-
Leste's State and Government institutions and would
help to improve the maintenance of stability and law

and order, as well as restore public and international
confidence. We believe that, in order to succeed, the
process needs to be inclusive and involve all actors,
especially civil society. The review must encompass all
aspects of the Timorese security sector: the Falintil-
Forcas Armadas de Defesa de Timor-Leste (F-FDTL),
the Ministry of Defence, the Policia Nacional de
Timor-Leste (PNTL) and the Ministry of the Interior.
The basic roles and functions of all those bodies must
be questioned and evaluated to ensure that Timor-
Leste's security needs can be met now and in the
future.

Similarly, addressing the significant challenges in
the justice sector is another high priority. New Zealand
supports the Secretary-General's proposed
comprehensive judicial review. Every effort needs to
be made to counter perceptions of impunity. That
applies also to the events of the past year, and the
follow-up to the Commission of Inquiry report.

I offer our encouragement to Prime Minister
Ramos-Horta and to the Government and the people of
Timor-Leste. Our friends in Timor-Leste, especially the
leaders and parliamentarians, have the primary
responsibility for taking the country forward in a way
that promotes trust and respect. Mr. Khare and UNMIT
have a crucial and supporting role, and we call for
every effort to be made to provide UNMIT with the
staff and tools needed to do the job.

