Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): Senegal
thanks Japan for convening this meeting and is pleased
to see Mr. Taro Kono, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Japan, presiding over this debate on the issue of
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMD). We also thank Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres for his briefing, which has contributed to
our debate.

We are again gathered in this forum to discuss the
issue of non-proliferation in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. Each time we have met, my country,
Senegal, has reaffirmed its firm condemnation of the
many acts of defiance that that country has perpetrated
against the wishes of the international community in
general, and in particular those of the Security Council,
including 17 ballistic-missile launches - two of which
were intercontinental - and a sixth nuclear test in
September, which the North Korean Government itself
presented as a hydrogen bomb test on a previously
unparalleled scale.

We are certainly facing a new scenario. Following its
most recent successful intercontinental ballistic missile
test on 28 November and continuing methodically to
pursue its programmes in the area of nuclear weapons
and missiles, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
has displayed, more than ever before, its determination
to acquire a military nuclear capability, if it has not
already done so.

Senegal sees that as a serious threat to the
international non-proliferation regime, considerably
exacerbating tensions, which are already high in the
Korean peninsula and beyond. It also poses a serious
threat not only to the people of the peninsula and the
region, but also to the safety of air navigation in that
part of the world, which is particularly characterized by
density in population and air traffic activity.

In that context, it is the Security Council that faces
a serious challenge, because, despite all the resolutions
and sanctions adopted and other measures taken against
the activities of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea, that country is far from abandoning its nuclear
ambitions and has gone as far as to question the very
competence of the Council to address the issue posed
by its illegal military programme.

Clearly, the recent adoption of resolutions 2371
(2017) and 2375 (2017) has not changed anything.
Therefore, the question arises: what more do we
have to do to encourage that country to respect its
international obligations in a clear, irreversible and
verifiable way? To answer that question, and while
taking into account our collective belief that there can
be no military solution to the crisis, my country calls
for a global, peaceful and negotiated solution through
an open and frank dialogue. We urge the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea to return to its previously
held position, which it regrettably chose to leave, and to
pursue the Six-Party Talks.

Senegal calls on the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea to respect its international obligations. We
emphasize that the targeted measures that have rightly
been taken in the latest Council resolution against
North Korea to meet the challenge of that country's
nuclear and ballistic programme must be part of a
comprehensive political strategy, as the only viable
option is for the parties to engage in an open dialogue
for the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula, with
the active support of the international community, so as
to create the conditions for the peaceful coexistence of
the countries and peoples of the region.

That means that Member States must redouble
their efforts and fully apply the obligations set forth in
the various resolutions, because the absence of a real
political will or the lack of action on the part ofMember
States would result in the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction. Senegal believes that we must
work to strengthen the primacy of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) through
its universalization and the fulfilment of previously
agreed commitments.

We are convinced that working towards the
universalization of the NPT and the implementation of
its relevant provisions, as well as resolute action aimed
at ensuring the entry into force of the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, would mark decisive
milestones towards general and complete disarmament.

