Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Allow me, at the outset, to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the Council presidency and
to wish you success in your work. I also express our
gratitude to your predecessor, Ambassador Tafrov, for
his successful guidance of the work of the Council in
September. We are also grateful to the Secretary-
General for his important statement made today in the
Council.

In the first year of its existence, the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) has proven itself to be a
reliable and key link in the emerging system designed
to counter new threats and challenges. We are grateful
to the Chairman of the Committee for his
comprehensive briefing on the achievements of the
body he has headed in its first year. We view positively
the results of the Committee's work and the positive
momentum of its ongoing activity. Everyone is well
aware that most of the credit for that goes to
Ambassador Greenstock personally and to his team. We
must also mention the heroic work of the Secretariat
staff and the Committee experts. We express our
heartfelt gratitude to them, and we sincerely regret that
we must part now with three experts, who are leaving
the Committee.

Due in large part to the dynamic work of the
CTC, we are witnessing a process to establish, under
the auspices of the United Nations, an unparalleled
global structure to counteract the threat of terrorism.
The Committee must play a pivotal role in ensuring
that it speaks in a single voice and eliminates
potentially weak links. In that context, of great
importance is the organic linkage of the main areas of
activity, an objective analysis of anti-terrorist measures
adopted by various countries, and the establishment of
a system designed to provide advisory and technical
assistance to States so that they can implement their
obligations under resolution 1373 (2001).

We believe that the Committee's intention is
correct with regard to placing special emphasis, in its
future work, on interaction with regional and
subregional organizations in the anti-terrorist domain.
It is likely that the interaction between the CTC, the
Anti-terrorist Centre of the Commonwealth of
Independent States and the regional anti-terrorist
structure of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
will yield promising results.

We support the recently approved CTC
programme of work for its fifth 90-day period.
Concluding consideration of the second round of
States' reports on resolution 1373 (2001) by the end of
this year seems to us an ambitious objective. Achieving
that will allow the Committee to compile a detailed
atlas of vulnerable places and to concentrate on
providing assistance to countries that need it.

In that connection, it is important to maintain a
balance between determining ways and means that the
CTC will use and making recommendations to
eliminate weaknesses that have been identified. The
general view asserted in the Council that the CTC is
not a punitive body and that it will adhere strictly to its
agreed mandate is crucially important to the
effectiveness of those efforts.

In the Counter-Terrorism Committee we are fully
aware of the Security Council's readiness and ability to
exercise its Charter authority to protect international
peace and security in the face of the threat of terrorism.
The Russian Federation will continue to make all
efforts necessary to ensure that the activity of the CTC
is effective and constructive.

In conclusion, regarding the Council's activity in
the area of anti-terrorism generally, we wish to note
that the Council must redouble its efforts to help States
implement resolution 1390 (2002), which provides for
a wide range of measures against international
terrorists and their sponsors. We have serious concerns
regarding the fact that, as of the end of September of
this year, only 70 Member States had reported on their
steps to implement that resolution, even though all the
reports should have been submitted to the Council in
April. The situation with regard to reports submitted to
the CTC is preferable.

