Mr. Feltman: In the six weeks since I last briefed
the Council, on 26 January (see S/PV.7368), there have
been a number of significant developments related to
the conflict in eastern Ukraine. The most pivotal was
the signing, in Minsk on 12 February by the Trilateral
Contact Group and rebel representatives, of a package
of measures for implementing the Minsk agreements.
The agreement, the result of tireless diplomacy on
the part of Chancellor Merkel, President Hollande,
President Poroshenko and President Putin, provides a
road map for lasting peace in eastern Ukraine.

Recognizing that fact, on 17 February the Council
unanimously adopted resolution 2202 (2015), thereby
providing the peace process in eastern Ukraine with a
binding international framework for further engaging
all sides to find an urgent and lasting solution to the
conflict. However, as we converged in this Chamber on
that same day (see S/PV.7384), the fight for Debaltseve
reached its climax, with hundreds, if not thousands,
of innocent civilians caught in the crossfire. As
Ambassador Tagliavini, one of the signatories to the
12 February Minsk agreement, remarked to the Council
on 27 February (see S/PV.7395), the rebels' unabated
attacks for control over that strategic area were in clear
violation of the agreement they had signed only five
days before.

Since 18 February, the situation appears to have
calmed. However, as we are all well aware, the ceasefire
remains fragile, not yet having taken hold firmly across
the region. Sporadic violations are reported frequently,
including in the south near Mariupol and, once again,
near Donetsk airport.

The Special Monitoring Mission of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
has monitored some withdrawals of heavy military
equipment from the line of contact but, due to a lack of
access and freedom of movement for its monitors, the
Mission remains unable to verify the true extent of that
process. It is also yet to receive baseline information
regarding the sides' inventory, routes for withdrawal
and where the weapons will be stored. As per the
commitments undertaken by the parties in Minsk, full
and unfettered access must be given to the OSCE and
the withdrawal of heavy weaponry must commence
urgently, transparently and comprehensively.

We are aware that there will be no significant
traction on the political track unless the prerequisite
ceasefire and withdrawal of weapons are fully
implemented. The history of this conflict has taught us
that the window of opportunity to make those processes
irreversible is limited.

Eastern Ukraine still appears to be in limbo as we
await the full implementation of the Minsk package
of measures. The road ahead will be difficult, but it
is critical that all concerned strictly adhere to, and
commence the good-faith implementation of, that
agreement. We welcome the continued efforts of the
leaders of Russia, Ukraine, France and Germany, as
well as the crucial role played by the OSCE.

Let me also take this opportunity to touch briefly
on President Poroshenko's 17 February statement
noting that Ukraine will be requesting a possible
deployment of a United Nations-mandated peace
mission to Ukraine. Subsequent to that, Ukrainian
Foreign Minister Klimkin held discussions with the
Secretary-General, Under-Secretary-General Ladsous
and me on this issue. We informed the Foreign Minister
that it was a decision for the members of the Security
Council and that the Secretariat would be guided by the
Council's decision. To date, no formal request has been
received from Ukraine.

With reference to the OSCE briefings to the Council
on 27 February and the call for the United Nations to
do more, the Secretariat continues its close cooperation
with the OSCE on what more could be done to support
the OSCE's difficult and complex mandates.

