Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): The
adoption of resolution 2334 (2016) is an important and
in many ways historic moment in the history of the
Security Council. It is the first resolution adopted by
the Council on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict in eight
years. It is the first time that the Security Council has
expressed itself so clearly to state the obvious fact that,
little by little, Israel settlement building undermines
the possibility of building a viable and independent
Palestinian State living side by side in peace and
security with Israel. It was therefore necessary for the
Security Council to recall the collective and unanimous
devotion of the international community to the two-
State solution and to clearly lay out the threats to that
solution. Unless we act resolutely to that end, the two-
State solution will disappear like a mirage in the desert.
There is no credible alternative that could meet the
legitimate aspirations of both parties.

Over the past few decades, Israeli settlement-
building has undoubtedly accelerated, which only fuels
tensions on the ground and exasperates the international
community. Settlement-building, which is illegal under
international law, is part of a deliberate policy aimed at
presenting the population, including the international
community, with a fait accompli in the West Bank and
East Jerusalem. It proceeds in various manifestations,
including the expansion of settlements beyond the
Green Line, including in East Jerusalem; the de facto
annexation of Zone C; forced transfers of population;
the demolition of Palestinian homes and structures;
restrictions of access and movement; and the building of
the wall beyond the 1967 border. This policy is not only
illegal under international law, but also threatens the
prospects for the creation of a viable and independent
Palestinian State, which is the best guarantee for Israeli
security and a lasting solution to the conflict. That is
the message that France sought to send today by voting
in favour of the resolution.

While settlements are the main threat to the two-
State solution on the ground, unfortunately it is not the
only one. Acts of violence and incitement to violence
and terrorism also undermine the chances of seeing
two States - Israel and Palestine - peacefully coexist
one day. They destroy trust and dialogue between
peoples who must find a way to live together. In that
regard, resolution 2334 (2016) strongly reiterates its
condemnation of all acts of terrorism, incitements to
violence and all deliberate attacks on civilians. it calls
on the Palestinian Authority to continue to do its utmost
to discourage terrorist actions.

Identifying and naming the threats to a two-
State solution is important but not enough. It is also
necessary to work on recreating, after a two-year
impasse, the conditions for resuming negotiations.
Like the Palestinians, the Israelis have a vital interest
in peace, which can be based only on a two-State
solution. That is the aim of the French initiative to try
to relaunch the peace process. In that respect, following
the important ministerial meeting of 3 June, France
decided to organize an international conference on
15 January 2017 in Paris, whose goal will be to introduce
the contributions of the international community to
relaunch the negotiation process and conclude and
implement a peace agreement. We all know, of course,
that only the Palestinians and Israelis themselves can
achieve peace through direct negotiations.

The resolution that we have adopted today and
the Paris international conference represent two sides
of the same coin, both aimed at reiterating our shared
attachment to the two-State solution and creating
conditions conducive to that end. We hope that the
resolution and the French initiative will be the first
important steps towards relaunching a credible political
process that we will need to pursue collectively in the
weeks and months ahead. In sum, the resolution is
certainly not the end of the road. It is an important and
potentially historic step on the difficult and demanding
path to peace and security in the Middle East. Let
us assume together the heavy responsibility that is
incumbent on all of us on that path.

