Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): We join others in
thanking Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Leila Zerrougui for her insightful briefing. We
also extend appreciation to Ms. Josephine Mbela for
her informative update.

On the political front, Kazakhstan positively notes
the progress made by the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in the process of preparing for
the elections on 23 December, in accordance with
the electoral calendar. This nationally owned process
should be held with respect for the sovereignty, political
independence, territorial integrity and unity of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

We call on the Congolese authorities to continue
executing measures to create conditions conducive to
holding credible and transparent elections, with the
meaningful participation of women in the process.
Further efforts must be made by all key political actors
to establish a constructive and inclusive dialogue to
achieve political progress, and to build confidence
in the electoral process. The recent nomination of
the joint opposition candidate for the upcoming
presidential elections was a positive sign of constructive
engagement. We further reiterate the importance of
all parties implementing the political agreement of
31 December 2016.

We commend the committed determination of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
assume full responsibility for organizing the elections.
In this regard, we welcome the measures taken by the
Congolese Government to supply the Independent
National Electoral Commission with the means of
transportation necessary for the timely deployment
of electoral materials throughout the country. We
also note the peaceful nature of the demonstrations
authorized by the Government that were held recently
in Kinshasa, and call on all parties to continue to
engage in a tolerant and constructive manner. It is also
important to provide security for the elections at all
stages, which is a prerequisite for credible and peaceful
elections. In that regard, we encourage the Congolese
authorities to ensure the capacity and coordinated work
of the national security forces, with the support of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).

Although the elections are an important step in
stabilizing the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, we would like to stress the importance
of addressing the root causes of the conflict through
enhanced support of the international community and
regional partners.

On the security front, we are deeply concerned
by the continuing activities of armed groups in the
east of the country, particularly in Beni, which pose
a major challenge to the protection of civilians. We
strongly condemn such attacks on civilians, including
the abduction of children. Enhancing the response
capability of the Forces armees de la Republique
democratique du Congo is therefore crucial.

With regard to the epidemic situation, we would
like to note that while collective measures to tackle
the Ebola outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo are working, the epidemic remains dangerous
and unpredictable. It is occurring in an area of active
conflict, so physical insecurity is a persistent challenge
and complicates the ongoing response efforts. We
pay tribute to the dedicated staff of the World Health
Organization, MONUSCO, the Ministry of Health and
all partners who are fighting a dangerous outbreak
in extremely difficult conditions. It is obvious that
further effective response measures on the part of the
international community are needed.

