Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We express our gratitude to the Chairs of the
Committee on sanctions against Al-Qaida and the
Taliban, the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and
the 1540 Committee, Ambassadors Mayoral, Loj and
Burian, respectively, for their substantive statements
and for their efforts to enhance the international system
to counter the global threat of terrorism.

The Russian Federation believes that it is
necessary to continue the endeavour to expand the
coordination of the activities and cooperation of the
three Committees in the light of the goals set forth in
the 2005 summit outcome document (General Assembly resolution 60/1). Above all, it is important to
ensure an overall thrust aimed at developing the

Sll'V.5446

 

effective dialogue being pursued by the Committees
with States, in line with implementation of their
mandates. On the one hand, more effective monitoring
of the implementation of relevant Security Council
resolutions is important. On the other hand, everything
needs to be done to ensure that States can, in a timely
manner, find and make use of the necessary resources
to build their counter-terrorism capacities.

Today's briefings have yet again confirmed how
important it is to build upon achieved results from the
standpoint of interaction among the Committees,
exchange of information, joint participation of experts
in country visits and the design of reporting
mechanisms that are more acceptable to States.

With respect to the activities of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, the Russian Federation supports
the work programme presented by Ambassador Loj and
the priorities it lays out. We note the considerable
contribution of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED) to the work of the
Committee to implement resolution 1373 (2001). We
welcome the Committee's efforts to further enhance the
reporting regime. We also welcome the adoption of the
CTC's new arrangement for the preliminary assessment
of States' implementation of the provisions of the
resolution. This significantly assists the Committee in
focusing on targeted work with States, in assessing
more objectively and in depth their progress in meeting
the requirement to build their counter-terrorism
capacity and in determining potential areas where
technical assistance might be needed.

We welcome the continued development of the
CTC's practice of country visits, including the use of
varying formats for field missions, the expansion of
their thematic scope and the practical thrust of the
experts' recommendations. In this regard, it is our hope
that the Committee will devote the necessary attention
to developing ways to work with States on the outcome
of visits, including mechanisms for direct liaison
between States and potential donors. For our part, as
the country presiding over the Group of Eight (G-8),
we actively support the effort to strengthen the
interaction of the CTC with the G-S's Counter-
Terrorism Action Group.

We welcome steps to continue to develop the
Committee's cooperation with international, regional
and subregional organizations, including the outcome
of the April seminar in Auckland. Here, while we must
devote attention to developing cooperation with
individual regional organizations, it is important not to
overlook the overall global context for the CTC's
interaction with such organizations or the possibility of
using their experience and capacities in the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). From that
standpoint, we welcome the practical preparations
undertaken by the CTC for the fifth special meeting
with international, regional and subregional
organizations.

We continue to view the 1267 Committee and its
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team as
one of the effective and capable Security Council
counter-terrorism mechanisms. It is necessary to
continue work to strengthen the anti-Taliban sanctions
regime by enhancing the guidelines for the work of the
1267 Committee. We take note of the recent initiatives
of a number of States on this matter. We look forward
to an interactive and fruitful discussion of this issue in
the 1267 Committee and are prepared to take part in it.
Here, we would particularly like to underscore our
certainty that, to enhance the effectiveness of this
sanctions regime, it is most important to enhance
national procedures for taking decisions on placing
new names on the sanctions list. The commitment of
Member States to full and conscientious
implementation of their obligations is key to the
success of our common efforts to counter the true,
changing threat to international peace and security
posed by the Taliban, Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities.

We attach great importance to the effective work
of the 1540 Committee aimed at preventing weapons of
mass destruction from entering black market networks
and, above all, from being acquired by terrorists.

The Russian Federation was one of the initiators
of the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004) and of
April's extension of the Committee's mandate for
another two years. In timely fashion, we have
presented our national report and additional
information to the Committee. Ensuring the full
implementation of the provisions of resolution 1540
(2004) by all States continues to be our priority, and we
are actively pursuing that goal, both in the 1540
Committee and in the context of our presidency of the
G-8.

We support the proposals made in Ambassador
Burian's statement to reinvigorate the activities of the

S/l'V.5446

 

Committee, including by providing the necessary
assistance to needy States, holding regional seminars,
cooperation with relevant international, regional and
subregional organizations and more active use of the
capacities of field missions of the CTC and the 1267
Committee to explain the importance of the timely
submission of reports. It is our view that the collection
and analysis of national reports do not exhaust the
entire range of goals laid out in resolution 1673 (2006).
A major painstaking effort has still to take place to
develop and strengthen monitoring systems for the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, an
effort in which the Russian Federation will continue to
be involved most actively.

