Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Chief Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), for the briefing on her eighteenth
report to the Security Council. We have heard the
statement made by Elhag Ali Osman, Permanent
Representative of the Sudan.

Pakistan is not a party to the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, but we do recognize the
rights and obligations of the States parties to the ICC.

During its term as a non-permanent member of the
Council, Pakistan has consistently supported a peaceful
and viable resolution of the conflict in Darfur through
an inclusive political process, one that respects and
upholds the unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Sudan. We have noted from the Prosecutor's report
that the trial of Abdallah Banda will start on 5 May
2014, and that the defendant will appear voluntarily
before the Court.

It is mandatory for all States to protect the right
to life of their citizens. The Government of the Sudan
must therefore continue to take all the necessary
measures to investigate human rights violations in
Darfur and bring violators to justice. We welcome the
steps taken by the Government of the Sudan towards
the implementation of the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur and the establishment of the National Human
Rights Commission. The international community must
continue to fight impunity by utilizing a full range of
justice and reconciliation mechanisms, including truth
and reconciliation commissions, national reparations
programmes and institutional and legal reforms. The
relationship between the ICC and the Security Council
should be managed correctly and skilfully so that the
independence of the Court is not compromised. The
Court and the Council should have the necessary space
to maintain statutory distance between them. The
utilization of peacekeeping mandates for the objectives
of the ICC mentioned in the report, for instance, should
not blur the distinction between the jurisdictions of the
Court and the Council.

A sustainable and viable peace in Darfur can be
realized only through a broad-based, multipronged
approach. Our efforts should provide impetus to an
inclusive political dialogue, prevent attempts to derail
the political process, through a policy of incentives and
deterrence, promote justice and reconciliation, create
a conducive security environment and address the
human rights and humanitarian aspects of the conflict
in Darfur. We agree with the Prosecutor that regional
and subregional organizations and arrangements
contribute to accountability. That is best done by
enhancing the capacity of national justice systems.
In that regard, we support the efforts of the United
Nations and the African Union (AU), particularly
the AU High-level Implementation Panel, towards
achieving peace, stability, justice and reconciliation
in Darfur. In addition, the League of the Arab States
and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation should be
closely associated with those efforts.

Overall, the security and political situation in
Darfur shows a mixed record of progress and setbacks.
We welcome the initial steps taken by the signatories
of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur towards
implementing the Darfur development strategy and
the work undertaken by the Darfur Regional Authority
in developing various projects. It must be insured that
those projects a tangible impact on the lives of ordinary
people in Darfur. It is equally important that all pledges
made at the Doha donor conferences be fulfilled at the
earliest possible time. Simultaneous progress on both
those tracks will strengthen the prospects for peace
in Darfur. The Council should continue to encourage
the engagement of the Joint Chief Mediator with the
non-signatory armed opposition groups. Incidents
similar to the killing of Mohamed Bashar should not be
repeated. Similarly, the Council should send a strong
political message to prevent the armed groups outside
Darfur from further destabilizing the region.

Recently, inter-tribal clashes over natural resources
have become a major security challenge in Darfur.
We urge the Government of the Sudan to intensify its
efforts to address the deep-rooted causes of conflict and
friction in the region. Progress on all provisions of the
Doha Document, particularly those related to land and
property issues, will help improve the situation. The
international community will have to take bold decisions
to provide economic relief to the Sudan in order to ease
fierce competition over resources. An essential first
step is to lift the debilitating bilateral sanctions against
the Sudan that adversely impact ordinary people and
indirectly fuel disputes over resources.

The people of the Darfur region have faced a long
conflict that has cast its shadow over the lives of an
entire generation.

The conflict must not go on forever. We must help
the people of Darfur reconcile their quest for peace and
justice with the goal ofa lasting political solution.

