The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba,
Fiji, India, Israel, Liechtenstein, Samoa, Switzerland
and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion, Without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to hear briefings under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure by Ambassador Cesar Mayoral,
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities; Ambassador Ellen Margrethe
Loj, Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism; and the representative of
Romania in his capacity as Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004).

It is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to document S/2005/663, which contains the
text of a letter dated 21 October 2005 from the
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
transmitting the Committee's seventeenth 90-day work
programme.

At this meeting, we will hear briefings by the
Chairman of the 1267 Committee, the Chairman of the
1373 Committee and the Chairman of the 1540
Committee.

I now give the floor to Ambassador Cesar
Mayoral, Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities.


