Italy aligns itself with the statement submitted by the European Union (see annex 25) and would like to add a few remarks in its national capacity. We welcome the organization of this open debate and appreciate the initiative launched by Denmark for a study, conducted by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, on this important subject. Human rights violations are both a root cause and a consequence of conflicts, and respect for human rights, democracy and the rule of law is key to ensuring sustainable peace and security. As the Secretary-General recalled in The Highest Aspiration: A call to action for human rights, "[t]here is a well-documented correlation between a society's enjoyment of and commitment to human rights ... and its resilience to crises." It is therefore an important achievement that human rights have constantly been addressed in Security Council's mandates and represent a hallmark of United Nations peace operations. As the Secretary-General's Action for Peacekeeping initiative clearly states, "lasting progress in strengthening security, national reconciliation, the rule of law, human rights and sustainable development needs to occur in parallel". Peacekeeping missions can effectively contribute to the realization of human rights. Most of the missions authorized by the Council carry out human rights tasks through their human rights components, by supporting political and peace processes, promoting conflict resolution and ensuring the protection of civilians. Their contribution in reporting violations, monitoring compliance, protecting and assisting vulnerable people and helping State institutions in building their own capacities is essential. It is therefore crucial that human rights components be adequately funded and have the capacity to carry out their tasks. The Security Council should ensure that United Nations peacekeeping operations have clear and realistic mandates that include the protection of human rights. The General Assembly, for its part, should allocate adequate resources. Our efforts in strengthening the impact of peacekeeping operations on the protection of civilians must continue, in fulfilment of the commitments we undertook in the framework of the Action for Peacekeeping initiative. To that end, peacekeepers must be adequately trained and equipped in order to fully implement their protection-of-civilians mandate. As the top western troop-contributing country for peacekeeping operations, Italy promptly endorsed the Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians, and we invite other Member States to follow suit. We believe that effective protection of civilians requires properly trained troops, adequate equipment and strong political commitment. Since 2005, Italy has trained, through the Centre of Excellence for Stability Police Unit in Vicenza, more than 10,000 police personnel, many of whom are deployed in peacekeeping operations in Africa. We will continue to play our part in providing training and offering capacity-building to military, police and judicial officers from all over the world. Italy also supports the incorporation of gender policies and women's rights perspectives into United Nations peace operations as a cross-cutting dimension in the implementation of their mandates, including through the deployment of gender advisers. Our experience on the ground, especially in southern Lebanon, shows that the interaction between female peacekeepers and local women populations is always productive and conducive to a better environment. The creation of uniformed women's networks must also be seen as a mechanism through which dialogue with female organizations in the host country can be successfully fostered. Prevention should always be prioritized, in particular with regard to vulnerable groups, such as children. Child protection should be mainstreamed into the mandates of all United Nations peacekeeping operations, starting from targeted specialized predeployment trainings of peacekeepers, a practice that Italy is spearheading and supporting at the Centre in Vicenza. We must also ensure that child protection adviser positions in United Nations operations are duly staffed and resourced, so that they have the means to monitor, report and respond to grave violations. The COVID-19 pandemic is a human crisis of unprecedented scale, seriously affecting the health and profoundly disrupting the livelihoods and overall well-being of people all over the world. In addition, it is gravely impacting the enjoyment of human rights. United Nations field missions, through their human rights components, can meaningfully contribute to responding to that challenge. It is our duty as Member States to fully support that endeavour.
