Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Michel
Kafando, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Burundi, for his briefing.

Bolivia is pleased that the referendum on 17 May
was held in a calm atmosphere with no major incidents
and in an inclusive manner, with all political parties
participating. We also believe that the Arusha Peace
and Reconciliation Agreement should continue to be the
cornerstone of this process. We reiterate that an inclusive
dialogue and respect for the Agreement constitute a
firm foundation for dealing with the country's crisis.
In that regard, we noted the fact that some important
aims of the Agreement on national reconciliation,
democratic principles, social cohesion, the distribution
of power, women's participation in politics, sovereignty
and the rule of law and regional integration have been
incorporated into the new Constitution. We encourage
Burundi to continue working to create conditions
conducive to a peaceful environment and a climate
of trust for the next elections, scheduled for 2020, by
strengthening a spirit of tolerance, taking conciliatory
measures and resuming a dialogue with the opposition.

Bolivia appreciates and supports the Special
Envoy's efforts to see the inter-Burundian dialogue
continue in an atmosphere of inclusion. We appreciate
the facilitation efforts led by the former President of
Tanzania Benjamin Mkapa and the current President
of Uganda, Yoweri Museveni, in accordance with
the Arusha Agreement. In that regard, we believe
that the road map proposed by Mr. Mkapa should be
implemented in order to reach a consensus. We are also
grateful for the efforts of the East African Community
(EAC), the African Union Special Representative in
Burundi, the Chair of the Burundi configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission and the United Nations
country team. We encourage them to continue their
good offices and to work to coordinate their efforts
in order to improve their cooperation and continue to
support the EAC-led mediation, which should remain
at the head of the process.
Burundi's contribution to peace and security
through its deployment of troops should also be
taken into account, since it is a demonstration of its
institutional capacity. The international community
should support Burundi in building its capacities, which
are closely linked to its socioeconomic development
and continuing humanitarian challenges. We encourage
the international community to continue providing
financing for the humanitarian response programme
in Burundi. We want to highlight the fact that more
than 35,000 refugees have voluntarily returned and
urge the Government to continue to prepare for the
voluntary return of the hundreds of thousands of others
who are still in neighbouring countries. In order to
overcome these challenges, it is essential to establish
an atmosphere of trust, which will involve lifting any
unilateral sanctions, in accordance with the call by the
Heads of State at the July Summit of the African Union.
Such sanctions have damaging consequences for the
lives of groups in vulnerable situations and a negative
impact on the implementation of the Sustainable
Development Goals.

Lastly, the Security Council, and the international
community in general, should give constructive support
to the dialogue and take action in areas where there is
still a lack of convergence, in the interests ofa peaceful
settlement based on respect for Burundi's sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity.

