Mr. Mezode (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): I would like first of all to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. You have been
demonstrating great leadership in the exercise of your
functions. I would also like to congratulate your
predecessor.

I also want to welcome your excellent initiative to
convene this public meeting of the Security Council on
the subject of cooperation between the United Nations
system and the Central African region in the
maintenance of international peace and security. I am
particularly pleased because my country has benefited,
and continues to benefit, from the support of the United
Nations system.

The Central African Republic has, indeed,
experienced many crises, in the settlement of which the
Security Council has been involved. The first of these
stemmed from recurring political and military mutinies
by a portion of the army in 1996 and 1997; the second
from two coup attempts. The first of these was a
military ethnic attack that took place in May 2001 and
had tragic consequences; the second took place in
November 2001, and it almost led to a conflict
involving the entire subregion.

With regard to the crises in 1996 and 1997, I will
simply say that the support of the international
community was decisive, first through the Inter-
African Mission for the Implementation of the Bangui
Agreements, and then through the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINURCA),
whose positive actions are being continued in an
outstanding manner by the United Nations
Peace-building Office in the Central African Republic
(BONUCA).

The Council will recall that MINURCA worked
effectively in the peacekeeping process and in the
successful organization of the legislative and
presidential elections of 1998 and 1999. Following the
positive developments brought about by MINURCA
and continued by BONUCA, the then head of
Government decided to come to New York on a
working visit on 15 and 16 May 2000, when a special
meeting was organized at the initiative of the
Secretary-General.

In his speech, the head of Government made the
following observations. First, the work of national
reconstruction remained fragile and limited in its
effects due to two recurring factors: lack of security,
related to a particularly unstable subregional
environment; and the spread of poverty, the result of an
economy unable to generate sustainable growth
because its foundations had been decayed by the
scourges of corruption, poor administration and
diseases such as HIV/AIDS. Secondly, the country's
security situation was the most disabling handicap to
the process of peace and democracy, as well as poverty
eradication, because of the profound military-political
cr1s1s.

A presentation was submitted requesting support
under two headings: support for the restructuring of the
defence and security forces and support for the
financing of our autonomous development, including
the reintegration of military personnel to be
demobilized and of young and adult arms traffickers, as
well as support for the host communities. But today we
must also look to the recruitment of young Central
Africans, who must be educated in a republican spirit.
At that time, the amount required was calculated to be
approximately $47 million over a period of four years
in the first area and $8 million in the second area. That
amount would have to be increased today. That
presentation convinced the Security Council, which
made an appeal for support of the Government's plan
of action in the area of peace, security and stability and
for relaunching the economy of the Central African
Republic, the only solution for generating sustainable
resources to meet the cost of sovereignty and to ensure
social peace. I have reiterated this here and in the
General Assembly on many occasions.

The coup d'e'tat of 28 May 2001 was
unanimously and harshly condemned by States and
international organizations. We acknowledge that. But
on the ground, it was necessary to save the institutions
of the Republic. In accordance with the Constitution,
the President of the Republic, our head of State,
launched an appeal. One country, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, spontaneously responded, sending
equipment to the loyalist troops so that they could
resist and repulse the attackers. They also sent a
contingent to protect the President, who in the opinion
of all observers was undeniably elected by universal
suffrage. That action was welcomed by all.

With respect to the coup d'etat of November 2001
and its consequences, summit meetings were held by
various regional and subregional organizations. The
Community of Sahelo-Saharan States (CEN-SAD) met
on 3 December 2001 and decided to create a force to
maintain peace and security in Central Africa,
following consultations between the United Nations
and the Secretary-General of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU). On 4 and 5 December 2001, the
Central African Economic and Monetary Community
(CEMAC) took note of the conclusions of the
Khartoum Summit. On 16 January 2002, the
Brazzaville Summit decided to create an ad hoc
commission on the Chad-Central African crisis. The
eighth ministerial-level ordinary session of the Central
Organ of the OAU Mechanism for Conflict Prevention,
Management and Resolution met at Tripoli on 26
January 2002 and urged the Security Council to
consider the possibility of urgently deploying a
peacekeeping force to consolidate peace and security in
the Central African Republic. Finally, on 2 October
2002, there was the Summit of CEMAC heads of State
and delegation on the Chad-Central African crisis. That
Summit's communique was the subject of a statement
(S/PRST/2002/28) by the Security Council at its
4627th meeting, held on 18 October 2002. We are
happy to note that the Council welcomed the final
communique. You should know, Mr. President, that I
bear a message for you in that connection.

I would like to note that the outcomes of all those
special and regular meetings affirmed the need for the
creation of a mechanism for the prevention,
management and resolution of conflicts and the need to
make it operational. But it is often difficult to make
such mechanisms operational because they lack the
required resources.

My second observation concerns the existence of
those mechanisms within the various regional,
subregional or continental organizations, such as the
African Union, CEN-SAD and the Economic
Community of Central African States. Some of those
mechanisms have sometimes been criticized for a
certain inertia, which is due to the fact that the relevant
documents have not been ratified. As for the Council
for Peace and Security in Central Africa (COPAX), the
National Assembly of the Central African Republic
will be discussing it during its present session.
However, I would like to add that those mechanisms
must work in concert to be more effective, because the
task is immense.

With respect to the international economic and
financial organizations, as well as the international
community at large, I would like to recall that the
Central African Republic is a post-conflict State. There
was very real destruction to social and economic
infrastructure and loss of human life following the
mutinies and the recurring coups d'etat. Observers who
have visited the Central African Republic since 1997
can bear witness to that. The various post-conflict
Governments of the Central African Republic have
always expressed their firm resolve to emerge from
conflict, but the fact that we are a post-conflict country
is not always taken into account when the situation in
our country is assessed. However, the Security Council
constantly calls for the international community and
international development institutions and
organizations to focus attention on the Central African
Republic. We are grateful for what has already been
done. But it is possible to do a little more, it being
understood that in the medium and long term it is the
Central Africans alone, in partnership, who will bring
about the development of their own country.

The task of socio-economic reconstruction today
needs a stable and peaceful environment so that the
fight against poverty can produce results through the
dynamic of lasting sustainable development. Peace,
democracy and stability must be founded on a peaceful
social situation. To claim otherwise would be
unrealistic. The Central African Republic does not for
the moment have the resources to alleviate the social
situation: the payment of salaries, pensions, grants and
so on. Those observations recurrently appear in the
reports of the Secretary-General on the situation in the
Central African Republic. It would be a grave risk not
to integrate those observations into the framework of
strengthening of cooperation between the United
Nations system and Central Africa in the maintenance
of peace and security.

The United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa met
in Bangui last August. Today we are pleased to hold
the presidency of this Committee and will continue to
do so until the next meeting, which will again be held
in Bangui. We hope that positive results will be
achieved through the recommendations and resolutions
of the past meeting. Participants understood the efforts
made by my country to contribute to preserving peace
in the subregion. I hope that in six months their
meeting will help them to gauge the progress achieved.

