The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of the Ukraine.

Ukraine shares the concerns of the international
community with regard to the refugee crisis in West
Africa and the urgency of resolving this issue. We pay
tribute to the great efforts of the Government of Guinea
to accommodate continuous flows of refugees. We
agree that the highest priority should be given to
implementation - with the active involvement of the
region and the international community at large - of
the concepts of safe access to and safe passage of
refugees. In support of addressing the regional
dimensions of the crisis, my country takes an active
part in the United Nations peacekeeping operation in
Sierra Leone and stands ready to strengthen its
contribution to the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) and to continue its support for
international efforts aimed at bringing peace to other
parts of Africa.

I would like to inform the Council that in addition
to more than 500 Ukrainian personnel, together with
the crucially important heavy equipment already on the
ground, tomorrow, 9 March, a Ukrainian helicopter
unit, with the authorized strength of 110 personnel, will
be additionally deployed with UNAMSIL.

Today's very useful discussion is very pertinent
to the open debate on the follow-up of the Security
Council meeting held yesterday. Apart from a special
focus on the challenges that the international
community and the Security Council is facing in
Africa, it highlighted once again the need for closer
interaction between the Security Council and other
bodies of the United Nations system, and in this
particular case with the United Nations Office of the
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). An
important conclusion can be drawn, namely that
UNHCR's efforts in West Africa would be more
effective if they were carried out in the context of
broader political support from the region. On the other
hand, in past years the Security Council itself started to
pay greater attention to the regional dimension of
conflicts in Africa.
The situation in West Africa is a case in point
where the Council simply cannot ignore the
interrelation of conflicts. Mr. Lubbers' briefing clearly
concluded that humanitarian action alone cannot be a
substitute for political steps by Governments and the
Security Council in areas in which they have an
essential role to play in preventing, containing and
resolving conflicts, thus resolving the problems of the
refugees. I believe that the observations made by the
High Commissioner call for a very precise role on the
part of the Security Council in meeting the challenge of
refugees in West Africa. The urgency of the matter
requires that the Council give them most careful
consideration and provide an appropriate practical
response. I think that in this context we may need
another frank discussion in the Council to ensure a
proper follow-up and to move on to real action.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

I shall now give the floor to Mr. Lubbers to
respond to the comments and questions raised.

