Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I would
like first to thank Ambassador Nishida for his quarterly
report and for the outstanding work he has done as
Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006). His briefing has reminded us
of the reality of the Iranian nuclear dossier. It shows
the magnitude and diversity of Iranian practices to
evade sanctions.

Serious violations are on the increase. After the
Manchegorsk, the Hansa India, the Francop and the
neighbouring case of the ANL Australia, we now have
two new cases of arms violations contravening
resolution 1737 (2006) and, most likely, in the case of
the RDX explosives, a violation of the embargo on the
export of dual-use items under the resolution. A
considerable flow of arms and other dangerous
material that has again come to light, with confirmed
itineraries between the port of Bandar Abbas and
Latakia, in particular. New routes have been identified
in Africa that are cause for concern. Once again, this is
undoubtedly only the tip of the iceberg.

In this regard, I welcome the fact that the
Member States concerned have been able to intercept
these cargos and to make notification of these cases of
violations. These notifications show that Member
States are indeed implementing the resolutions. They
are evidence that Iran continues to flout its
international obligations and to threaten international
and regional peace and security. They also show that
sanctions have an impact, as Iran has to make use of
increasingly complex routes and schemes.

We can only underscore the gravity of this type of
smuggling, and in that regard I underscore the concerns
expressed by the Chairman of the Committee in his
report. These violations pose a threat to our collective
security and to regional security in regions that have no
need of any such additional threat. They require the
greatest vigilance on our part.
 

As a result, we hope that the Panel of Experts
recently appointed by the Secretary-General will
investigate these cases of violations in depth, pursuant
to its mandate; study Iran's evasive techniques, in
particular in the transport sector; and on that basis
provide recommendations to the Committee.

I referred earlier to the recent establishment of
the Panel of Experts. This is good news, and my
country welcomes this. A meeting of the Committee
with the experts will be held later today, but as of now
I wish to underscore the importance of their work to
ensuring the effective implementation of the resolution.
It is essential that the Panel be able to study the
national implementation reports concerning violations,
issue periodic recommendations for improving the
sanctions provisions, and develop outreach activities.
We encourage all States to cooperate fully with the
Panel.

We also welcome the fact that the Committee has
continued its awareness-raising activities by its recent
adoption of information hand-outs detailing the
contents of the resolutions and the respective roles of
the Committee and the Panel.

I touched on violations that have been brought to
the attention of the Committee and the concerns these
have raised. These concerns have been confirmed with
regard to the Iranian nuclear programme in the latest
report of the Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) of 23 November. The
report underscores that Iran continues to refuse to
honour its international obligations and to conform to
the demands of the Security Council and the IAEA
Board of Governors.

Iran is pursuing its uranium enrichment activities
at 3.5 and 20 per cent, as well as its heavy water
projects, despite the repeated demands of the
international community and, we note, in the absence
of any veritable civilian use. Iran refuses to cooperate
with the IAEA in order to shed light on the nature and
full extent of its activities. In particular, Iran continues
to refuse to answer the IAEA's questions regarding the
militarization of its nuclear programme. The Director
General states in his report that questions concerning
these alleged uses remain unanswered.

The measures adopted by the Security Council
are not an end in themselves. Their purpose is to
convince Iran to negotiate in conformity with the dual
approach of the E3+3 partners. The Geneva meeting
 

held on 6 and 7 December was in this regard the
outcome of the numerous calls for dialogue and the
repeated efforts of Ms. Ashton and the E3+3 partners to
resume dialogue with Iran.

However, the meeting would not have taken place
without the pressure of the international community,
which increased further still with the adoption of
resolution 1929 (2010). In Geneva, the E3+3 partners
reiterated their common concern about the Iranian
nuclear programme described by the IAEA, the
expectations of the international community, and Iran's
obligations. They also stressed their resolve to find a
negotiated solution to the Iranian nuclear crisis.

We now hope that Iran will make use of the
weeks remaining before the January meeting in
Istanbul in order to consider the situation in the light of
the messages it received in Geneva; adopt irreversible,
specific measures to respond to the concerns of the
international community; honour its international
obligations; and finally accept to consider our requests
for dialogue and cooperation in order to begin
discussions with the E3+3 partners in a constructive
spirit.

