Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I should like to congratulate the
United Kingdom for having convened this important
debate under its presidency. I should like to thank
Mr. Ladsous, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Ms. Yoka Brandt
and Mr. Gregory Ramm for their respective briefings.
I also welcome the participation of the Deputy Prime
Minister ofLuxembourg in this debate and congratulate
Ambassador Lucas on her commitment to this important
issue on the agenda of the Security Council.

The protection of children in armed conflict is a
major challenge for the international community, given
the size and seriousness of the crimes perpetrated
against human rights, international law and international
humanitarian and refugee law. That challenge compels
all of us to act in a concerted, coordinated and effective
manner.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/245)
is an exhaustive and very useful document of the
actions and initiatives taken by countries affected by
issues related to child protection and the prevention
of children's involvement in armed conflict. It also
enables us to assess the challenges and constraints
that the countries concerned are dealing with in
establishing criminal responsibility for the perpetrators
of such crimes, strengthening punitive measures for
the guilty and ensuring that such crimes do not recur.
Signings of peace agreements and the implementation
of national action plans and programmes preventing
child recruitment by armed forces and groups have
made it possible to relaunch investigation processes and
criminal proceedings against the perpetrators of such
crimes.

The atrocities endured by children in armed conflict
have a devastating psychological and socioeconomic
impact on the victims and their families. Strengthening
access to support and social reintegration services will
enable those children to successfully reintegrate into
their societies and communities. In the view of my
delegation, the establishment in July 2011 of a human
rights due diligence policy should help to strengthen
existing mechanisms. The Secretary-General's report
indicates that in some situations refugee children have
been forced to rejoin armed groups as soldiers. That
situation poses major challenges for United Nations
efforts.

Prevention strategies demand a global, integrated
approach that addresses normative aspects as well
as institutional ones. That applies particularly to the
establishment of laws that criminalize the recruitment of
children, strengthen awareness mechanisms for families
and communities and, ultimately, the establishment
of national re-education, training and job-creation
programmes that can offer children better prospects
through education and training. Implementing such
strategies also requires a participatory approach through
the involvement of public authorities, civil society,
non-governmental organizations and national human
rights and human rights protection organizations.

The protection of children in armed conflict
is also dependent on collective, coordinated action
supported by the United Nations system through
technical assistance and the strengthening of countries'
capacities. In that regard, my delegation supports the
Secretary-General's recommendation that donors be
invited into the discussion in order to mitigate funding
inadequacies and ensure that action plans that have
been signed or are under negotiation are effectively
implemented.

Morocco commends United Nations efforts in the
area of the protection of children in armed conflict
and hopes that the guidelines established jointly with
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations will be
regularly updated, particularly those dealing with
the terms of reference of the mandates for the child
protection advisers. Fighting child recruitment in armed
conflict is primarily the responsibility of the parties to
the conflicts, who have the duty to protect children.
Respect for the dignity of children is also a collective
responsibility. Coordinating the efforts of every sector
of the United Nations system involved should also be a
priority.

