Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I
thank Mr. Annabi for his excellent and comprehensive
update. I am glad that he reminded us that this is the
fourth anniversary of resolution 1244 (1999). His
overview shows clearly that a lot has been
accomplished in those four years, but clearly also that a
lot more remains to be done and that there are
problems ahead.

Regarding one of those problems, it pains me to
begin my intervention on Kosovo with, again, a
condemnation of violence, as we had to do in April,
when we condemned the attack by the so-called
Albanian National Army on a railway bridge. Now we
have the violent murders that others have already
referred to in Obilic. The killings appear to have been
motivated by the early success of the Serb return
programme there, and thus are to be particularly
condemned, because this goes to the heart of what the
international community and the Kosovars are trying to
accomplish. We support the measures taken by the
Special Representative to bring the perpetrators to
justice and to encourage close cooperation among all
involved to ensure security in Kosovo.

I also want to note that President Bush signed an
executive order on 28 May, revoking the national
emergency as declared in 1992 and 1998 executive
orders with respect to the Socialist Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, and, with that new order, taking additional
steps with respect to persons who obstruct
implementation of the Dayton Accords, the Ohrid
Framework Agreement or Security Council resolution
1244 (1999). This puts in place additional national
measures on our part to combat extremism in the
region.

We cannot, however, allow violence by a small
minority to undermine what has been achieved and
what is still to be achieved. Progress has been made on
a number of fronts - on the transfer of non-reserved
competencies to the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government, or strengthening the presence of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) in Mitrovica and on needed
economic reforms. We are pleased to hear that an
expert from the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) has arrived to begin work on
UNMIK's plan for implementing the benchmarks and,
as we have promised, my Government will provide
funding for an additional expert to assist in that effort.

We continue to believe that the implementation
plan is a critical step in reinforcing the benchmarks
process and that "standards before status" must be
more than just a slogan. More progress must be made
on practical issues, if we are to overcome suspicion and
build the trust and reconciliation that will be required
for resolution 1244 (1999) to be fully implemented.

On the economic front, we believe that the
privatization process must move forward without
further delay. The promulgation of the land use
regulation was the last step needed to allow first
tenders to be offered under UNMIK's privatization
plan for some 350 socially-owned enterprises.
Privatization is the best hope for generating economic
activity in Kosovo. Regardless of future decisions on
its final status, Kosovo must not be left without
economic means. It is important that property rights be
both clearly established and enforced uniformly for
each owner or claimant. We note the creation of the
Special Chamber for adjudicating owners' and
creditors' claims and trust that it will provide a fair and
transparent venue for dispute resolution with Serbian
companies or others. As long as it does not delay the
ongoing privatization process, work should begin
immediately to set up a claims register that accepts
submissions in Serbia in order to protect the rights of
claimants there and provide full information to
potential buyers.

In order for us to be able to target and address
such issues as soon as possible, the United States
strongly urges UNMIK, the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government and the Government of Serbia and
Montenegro to foster and persist in creating a
constructive dialogue. We know that this is difficult,
but it is the only way to resolve the issues that remain
before us and the only way to create a stable future. My
Government is looking for ways to promote that
dialogue in a variety of ways and in a variety of
forums. We will continue our efforts in the months
ahead to help build trust and encourage the
relationships needed to make Kosovo work.

