Mr. Gertze (Namibia): As this is the first time
this month that I take the floor, Ijoin colleagues in
congratulating you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October. I furthermore wish to express our appreciation
to you for convening this very important meeting on
the centrality of preventive diplomacy and conflict
prevention and resolution in Africa. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General and our briefers for their
comprehensive, insightful and detailed briefings on the
issue at hand.

Upon its establishment, in 1945, the Security
Council was charged with ensuring international
peace and security. Since then, Council members have
authorized numerous peacekeeping missions, including
in Timor-Leste, Lebanon, Haiti, Cyprus and my own
country, Namibia. The Namibian experience is proof
that those missions are designed to help countries
navigate the difficult path from conflict to peace. Next
year we will celebrate 30 years ofthat treasured peace in
Namibia, and we thank the United Nations for its role in
bringing that peace to my country. The implementation

of Council resolutions is also key to solving conflicts.
I take this opportunity to recall that unresolved issues
require the full support of the Security Council to
ensure the full implementation of its resolutions.

The nature of conflicts has changed since the
Security Council was created. The role of the Council
must therefore also adapt. The Council must at all times
guard against not simply being reactive. It must be
proactive. It must play a stronger role in preventing wars
and conflicts from occurring. Misery, human suffering,
starvation, intolerable living conditions and human
rights abuses are among the early warning signals for
which we must all look out. Success in that requires
strong cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, which are more familiar and in tune with
the situations in their respective regions. I would also
like to add that we must focus on external factors as
well, such as climate change and food insecurity. Those
are early warning signals of problems to come as far as
peace and security are concerned.

The signing, in April 2017, of the Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security provides guidance for
deepening cooperation between the two organizations
at all levels in peace and security. That vital partnership
has since then gone from strong to stronger. In that
regard, Namibia firmly supports the call by the African
Union (AU) and the African members of the Security
Council for predictable financing, through United
Nations-assessed contributions, for AU-led peace
support operations authorized by the Security Council.

The strengthening of the United Nations-AU
partnership was concretely demonstrated in recent
months with the signing ofpeace agreements, notably in
the Central African Republic and South Sudan notably.
The Sudan is also an excellent example of the power
of preventive diplomacy and conflict prevention and
resolution. The upcoming Security Council visit to the
African Union headquarters, where consultations will
be held with the AU Peace and Security Council, also
demonstrates the importance of the United Nations-
AU partnership.

The need to prioritize preventive diplomacy and
mediation in approaching crises and conflict situations
was continuously emphasized during Namibia's
chairmanship of the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) from August 2018 to August
2019. Concrete examples of that policy include the
successful and peaceful elections held in both the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Madagascar.
SADC has been assisting in finding a political solution
in Lesotho, and we are optimistic that through dialogue
that sisterly country is moving in the right direction.
SADC fully supports the need to enhance the AU's
prevention capabilities and tools, in the context of the
AU's aspiration of achieving its Silencing the Guns by
2020 initiative. We cannot overemphasize preventative
diplomacy, mediation and negotiations in peacebuilding
and reconstruction.

I also wish to emphasize the importance of women
negotiators and mediators in peacebuilding processes,
as espoused in the AU Agenda 2063. It was in 2000,
during Namibia's presidency of the Security Council,
that the Council unanimously adopted the landmark
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security. That resolution formally drew global attention
to the unrecognized, underutilized and undervalued
contributions of women in preventing war and in
peacebuilding and engaging individuals and societies
to live in harmony. According to the International
Peace Institute, when women participate in peace
processes, the resulting agreement is 35 per cent more
likely to last at least 15 years. That number alone should
encourage parties to ensure that women are part of the
conversation. We, as the international community, can
only benefit from recognizing the fundamental role of
women in peace and security. To that end, Namibia will
be launching an international women's peace centre,
and we welcome commitments by other Member States
on concrete deliverables in the coming years, such
as Commitment 2025 on women's inclusion in peace
processes by Finland and Spain.

To conclude, I would like to underscore Namibia's
commitment to preventive diplomacy and conflict
prevention and resolution. My delegation furthermore
recognizes the ongoing peace efforts on the continent,
and we commend the efforts of the United Nations
and the AU, as well as subregional organizations and
regional economic commissions. We firmly believe that
taking a more proactive approach by using preventive
diplomacy and conflict prevention will bring an end
to violence on the African continent. As our founding
father in Namibia once said,

"A people united, striving to achieve a common
good for all members of society, will always
emerge victorious".
In making that wisdom relevant, I believe that the
Council would see much greater success.

