Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Lowcock and
Ms. Gamba for their briefings.

The facts on the ground attest to improvements in
the situation in Syria, including on the humanitarian
front. With the evacuation of residents of Fo'ah and
Kafraya, there are no more besieged areas left in the
country. As the risks to safety are being reduced in
areas recently liberated from terrorists, the stage is
gradually being set for the geographical expansion of
humanitarian deliveries. However, there are still major
problems with humanitarian access in a number of
areas that are not controlled by Damascus, including
those occupied by the so-called coalition, in violation
of Syria's sovereignty. Thus no significant progress
has been seen in the provision of vital supplies for
the inhabitants of the Rukban camp, located in a
closed zone around the United States Al-Tanf military
base. Nor do we see anything in the functioning of
this camp that contributes to establishing peace and
eradicating terrorism.

We are once again obliged to draw attention to the
need to prepare for winding down the cross-border
mechanism, which the Security Council introduced
as a special measure at a time and in circumstances
when it was not possible to conduct humanitarian
operations in a number of areas from Syrian territory
itself. The situation today is fundamentally different,
and it makes no sense to continue to maintain this relic
of the past, which infringes on Syrian sovereignty.
In addition, the Secretary-General's review does not
give us a convincing impression of the effectiveness
of United Nations control over cross-border supplies
and the distribution of goods in Syria. By its nature the
mechanism is discriminatory, since it serves only areas
temporarily controlled by armed groups.

Russia continues to provide humanitarian assistance
to the Syrian side on a daily basis. We regularly
present the members of the Security Council with the
numbers. More than 2,800 tons of humanitarian cargo
have been delivered and more than 86,000 people have
been treated by our medics. In the past few years, in
cooperation with specialized United Nations bodies,
the International Committee of the Red Cross and the
Syrian Arab Red Crescent, Russian specialists have
provided about 300 humanitarian convoys, sometimes
in extremely difficult conditions. We are also carrying
out joint humanitarian actions with international
partners, a good example of which was the recent
delivery of humanitarian supplies to residents of eastern
Ghouta mentioned by my French colleague, conducted
according to a top-level arrangement between Russia
and France, an operation for which Russia provided the
transport component. In the past few weeks decisive
measures have been taken to eliminate terrorist centres
in the southern regions of the country, fully responding
to the goals set by the Security Council and in the
interests of Syria's immediate neighbours as well as
Syria itself. We in Russia have given unfailing attention
to the priorities of the regional stakeholders and we
maintain intensive contacts with them at various levels.

However, it is still too soon for rosy scenarios.
Sadly, it does not lack for moments of tragedy, as my
American colleague also mentioned today. We were
shocked by the series of terrorist attacks just the other
day in Suwayda province whose victims were in the
hundreds. The perpetrators ofthat crime mustbe severely
punished. Where punishing the guilty is concerned, it
is crucial to ensure that we have the uncompromising
determination of all international stakeholders to fight
together and with uniform standards against terrorism
in all its forms, as Council resolutions demand.

The implementation of local pacification
arrangements is continuing in the areas of Dar'a and
Quneitra provinces that have been liberated from
terrorists. These were agreed on with the direct
participation of specialists from the Russian Centre for
the Reconciliation of Opposing Sides. The militants are
given the opportunity to take advantage of the State
amnesty, regulate their status and join the efforts to
restore peaceful life, and many are making that choice.
Those who are unwilling to accept reconciliation leave
for the northern regions of the country with their
family members.

As we have said many times, and I would like to
say it again, the real humanitarian workers, whether
doctors, teachers or journalists, have nothing to fear
from the central authorities' restoration of control in
the liberated territories. Those who should fear for
their safety are the people hiding an entirely different
activity, designed to destroy the Syrian State and
spread extremism and false propaganda, behind a
humanitarian facade. We receive requests for help in
evacuating all kinds of activists from south-western
Syria and review such appeals based on humanitarian
considerations and our capabilities. The standouts in
this story are the White Helmets, whom my colleagues
have already discussed today, who disguise themselves
as an organization for Syria's civil defence and yet have
taken part in disgusting acts of provocation, including
the use of poisonous substances. Their trademark in
the information war against Damascus has become
the production of videos in which they have cynically
exploited little children. We have already reported on
such cases a number of times. We believe that once the
White Helmets are kicked out, Syria will become safer,
and that once these people have moved to their foreign
sponsors in Europe and North America they will
eventually stop engaging in provocations and refrain
from helping terrorists.

As the situation in much of Syria is normalized,
the task of returning refugees and internally displaced
persons to their permanent homes is becoming ever
more urgent. It will reduce the migration burden on
host States, primarily Lebanon, Jordan, Turkey, Egypt
and various European countries. The main thing is that
all Syrians who want to should be able to return to their
homes and take part in the restoration and development
of their homeland. This process has already started.
The numbers of citizens returning to Syria are already
in the thousands. Of course, they need appropriate
conditions for their safe and dignified return and
placement, and the Syrian authorities are ready to work
on providing them. In an official statement on 3 July,
the Government of Syria urged its citizens to return
home and affirmed its responsibility for their safety
and integrity. We note that the appeal was welcomed
in various States that have been hosting refugees from
Syria during the conflict.

I would like to emphasize that there is no basis for
the insinuations that have been made with regard to
Law No. 10 have no basis, as the Syrian authorities have
continually explained. A whole information campaign
has been cooked up accusing Damascus of wanting
to expropriate the property of critics of the current
Government living abroad. But the law's only and very
pertinent objective is regulating the situation related to
real estate property rights, which are in a state of chaos
thanks to the conflict. It is important to note that the
Syrians are not rushing to implement the law and are

prepared to continue discussing the details with United
Nations experts.
Successfully implementing the plans for the return
of refugees and internally displaced persons will
require the coordinated efforts of all stakeholders in
cooperation with the Syrian authorities. The specialized
bodies in the United Nations system should play a major
role in this, including the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees. The issue will be on
the agenda of the tenth international high-level Astana-
format meeting, to be held on 30 and 31 July in Sochi.
Russia is taking concrete steps to help. The Centre for
Refugee Reception, Distribution and Settlement has
begun its work in coordination with Damascus with an
extensive network of branches at checkpoints in various
parts of the country.

In that context, the revival of the Syrian economy,
including job creation, is a critical challenge. The
war has dealt a severe blow to many sectors of Syrian
industry and agriculture and has destroyed homes
and infrastructure. There is an acute shortage of
construction materials and heavy equipment, which
also needs fuel. The education system must be restored,
along with the medical field, a source of great pride for
the Syrian people before the conflict. The right thing
for all international partners to do would be to help the
Syrian recovery efforts and refrain from clinging to
artificial political dynamics. It is also long past time
to lift the unilateral sanctions, whose primary victims
are ordinary Syrians, as the United Nations has shown.

I would also like to touch on the issue of
humanitarian mine clearance. Our Russian specialists
have done tremendous work in sharing their expertise
with their Syrian colleagues, and more than 1,200
local sappers have been trained. We spoke about
this in detail recently in a special Security Council
meeting (see S/PV.8304). We hope that the signing of
the memorandum of understanding between the Syrian
Government and the United Nations Mine Action
Service (UNMAS) will be followed up with concrete,
practical and non-politicized measures. In Raqqa alone
there is a ton ofwork to be done, and regrettably, months
after the terrorist centre there was wiped out, the so-
called coalition has not done enough to make the city
it destroyed habitable. We would also like to think that
our international partners could help UNMAS through
dedicated financing for demining projects in Syria and
by providing technical support.

In conclusion, I would like to digress from purely
humanitarian issues and point out that thanks to
Russian specialists, both sappers and archaeologists,
the monuments in Palmyra that the terrorists destroyed,
which are part of the heritage of all humankind, are
being restored. We expect the specialized international
bodies, in particular UNESCO, to show genuine interest
in this issue.

In a broader sense, it will be important to start
talking about Syria's reintegration into the regional
trade and economic system. Unblocking a number of
internal roadways and border crossings has to be an
important prerequisite for strengthening the traditional
links between Syria and its partners in the region. That
is by far the best way to meet the goal of normalizing
relations among the States of the Middle East, and
Russia is ready to support it in every way. And, of
course, stabilization will also help advance the political
settlement process under the auspices of the United
Nations, which all members of the Security Council
unanimously support.

