Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Australia welcomes
today's briefing on the Sahel and the personal
commitment of the Secretary-General, Special Envoy
Prodi and the other speakers, including World Bank
President Kim and the representatives of the African
Union and the European Union. I must say, as a general
comment in starting, that the partnership between the
United Nations and the World Bank, in particular, has
the potential to be a genuinely transformative one, and
I know that the global community wants to see it grow.

We know that the Sahel region has been struggling
for far too long with chronic humanitarian, security and
governance crises. Possibly nowhere is the development-
security nexus as pronounced. The region illustrates
the deep connection between security challenges, such
as terrorism and transnational crime, and development
challenges, such as food security and the generation of
economic opportunities. As Mr. Prodi has reminded us,
those challenges transcend borders and so, obviously,
must the solutions. He has previously warned us, and
did so again today, that we must not forget the Sahel or
we risk more crises like the one in Mali.

We welcome the visit led by the Secretary-General
and World Bank President. It highlighted the centrality
of addressing economic challenges as part of the path
to peace, building on their partnership in the Great
Lakes region. The $8 billion mobilized will reinforce
the dividends of peace.

Progress towards peace and stability requires
genuine United Nations, intergovernmental and regional
cooperation and coordinated engagement. Australia
considers that the United Nations integrated strategy
for the Sahel region provides a solid framework, and
we strongly support its three strategic objectives. It
is obvious that the key element now is to move ahead
with implementation by identifying priorities for action
and the comparative advantage and added value of the
United Nations itself.

Within that context, I would like to address three
specific issues: first, national ownership and regional
cooperation; secondly, terrorism and transnational
crime; and thirdly, resilience. First, Governments of
the region must own and lead efforts in the Sahel; they
must in turn be accountable to their populations. We
therefore welcome the 5 November ministerial meeting
held in Bamako. The launch of the coordination
platform at the meeting was an important milestone,
and we look forward to hearing more about its work and
how the Council can support it.

Increasing cooperation between national
Governments and regional and international
organizations will be vital to the success ofthe strategy.
That is particularly true of efforts to combat terrorism
and transnational organized crime, my second area of
focus. The threat must be tackled through capacity-
building, prevention and coordination. Border
management and building law-based criminal justice
should be important focuses of our capacity-building
efforts. In that regard, we welcome the recent progress
made on transborder security at the November regional
ministerial conference in Morocco.

We know that a comprehensive counter-terrorism
strategy must include efforts to prevent terrorism and
extremism from emerging, arming and recruiting.
We therefore particularly welcomes the strategy's
recommendations on countering violent extremism,
including through regional dialogue among traditional,
community and faith-based leaders and organizations.
I should note that the Al-Qaida sanctions regime has
significant potential to help Sahel States to turn the
tide against Al-Qaida affiliates in the region, but it can
realize that only ifthe regime is genuinely accessible to
States and is integrated into their responses. We have to
place the sanctions regime in the hands of the affected
countries and regions, both to ensure that the sanctions
list accurately reflects the dynamic and evolving nature
of the threat and to enhance its implementation.

As Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities,
Australia is committed to seeing the Committee
working collaboratively with the region to identify
the individuals and entities we should be applying
the sanctions against - the Al Qaida affiliates, their
leaders and, most importantly, their enablers, those
who provide the arms, funds and recruits. To that end,
on 3 December we convened a special meeting with
Member States of the Sahel and Maghreb to discuss the
threat posed by Al-Qaida, the first in a series of steps in
improving regional awareness and engagement.

Finally, as others have said, building resilience
in the Sahel will be essential to breaking the cycle of
humanitarian crises and protecting the most vulnerable
from persistent shocks. We must also target the
underlying drivers of conflict - inequality, social
exclusion and ethnic tensions. To date, my own country
has provided $50 million in assistance to the region over
the past two years to meet immediate needs, and has also
supported communities in the region in building long-
term resilience to disasters and addressing the causes
of food insecurity, including support for agricultural
research.

To conclude, we have seen the impact of concerted
national, regional and international efforts in Mali. We
are confident that the Sahel strategy can be a valuable
tool for the United Nations, the region and international
partners in achieving a coordinated response to the
challenges of the broader Sahel region. Much of the
effort will have to be innovative. We know that it is
overdue, and it is, of course, necessary.

