The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Denmark, Japan, Morocco and Sierra
Leone, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Momodu Koroma,
Foreign Minister of Sierra Leone.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Koroma
(Sierra Leone) took a seat at the Council table;
Ms. Loj (Denmark), Mr. Motomara (Japan) and
Mr. Bennonna (Morocco) took the seats reserved
for them at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Jean-Marie Guehermo, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations.

It is so decided. I invite Mr. Guehenno to take a
seat at the Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees to
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure to Ms. Carolyn McAskie, Deputy
Emergency Relief Coordinator.

It is so decided. I invite Ms. McAskie to take a
seat at the Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Ivan Simonovie,
President of the Economic and Social Council.

It is so decided. I invite Mr. Simonovic' to take a
seat at the Council table.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 15 July 2002 from the
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom to
the United Nations that reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that the
Security Council extend an invitation to
Mr. Sylvian Ngung, Deputy Permanent Observer
of the African Union to the United Nations, to
address the Council under rule 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure of the Security
Council during its consideration of the Mano
River Union on 18 July."

That letter will be published as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/2002/76l.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 to
Mr. Sylvian Ngung.

It is so decided. I invite Mr. Ngung to take the
seat reserved for him at the side of the Council
Chamber.


The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

That concludes the formal opening of this
Security Council meeting. What I would like to do now
is just to briefly explain the format of today's
workshop.

The workshop is divided into three parts. First of
all, I am honoured to welcome Secretary-General Kofi
Annan, who will open the workshop. Then the Foreign
Minister of Sierra Leone and the Foreign Minister of
Guinea will speak. After this introductory session, we
shall move on to the first topic of the workshop, which
is "Lessons learned in Sierra Leone". Two keynote
speakers will address us, after which members of the
Council and invited speakers will take the floor
according to the speakers' list before us. I will
encourage everyone to keep their introductory remarks
brief, because what I would really like to facilitate this
morning and this afternoon is plenty of time for real
debate, discussion and exchange of views.

Today is about learning the lessons from Sierra
Leone, but it is also about giving the Security Council
an opportunity to look forward and to think about the
ways in which we can use the lessons we have learned
in Sierra Leone, to apply them in other parts of Africa,
and also to reflect on what we need to do to encourage
regional peace in the Mano River Union. I hope you
will forgive me if today I am a more interactive and
informal chair than is normal for Security Council
meetings. I hope that a more informal style will
facilitate the kind of debate and discussion that is more
normal in a seminar format. On that basis, I hope you
will also forgive me if, if any of you begin to run
overtime, I respectfully ask you to keep your remarks
brief. I will do my best to do that in as charming a way
as possible.

The afternoon session will focus on the way
forward for the Mano River Union and will have
exactly the same format. I shall endeavour to end the
workshop at 6 pm. by summing up some of the main
points that will have been made and by indicating, I
hope, some kind of action plan that will take us
forward. To facilitate the discussion, I would like to
make a few introductory remarks, but I will keep them
brief, to try to give some kind of lead for the rest of the
day.

I think it is very important that we acknowledge
that the international community has brought peace to
Sierra Leone. Just two years ago it looked as if all the
efforts that we were making in Sierra Leone were on
the brink of collapse, and the Revolutionary United
Front (RUF) controlled half of Sierra Leone, including
the diamond fields. But now we have a Sierra Leone
that is stable and democratic; peaceful elections were
held in May; and the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) is carrying out its mandate
confidently and effectively. What we want to see is that
peaceful situation enshrined so that the fragile peace
that we now have is not disrupted.

A lot remains to be done. There are enormous
post-conflict challenges. We need to manage the
transition from peacekeeping to peace-building. And
we need to ensure that the international community's
investment is not wasted. So the objectives that we
have set ourselves today are to learn the lessons from
the United Nations experience in Sierra Leone that
might be relevant to other conflict situations, to
consider how the United Nations can focus more on
peace-building in Sierra Leone, and to examine what
more the United Nations can do to help reduce
subregional instability and end fighting in Liberia.

Others will talk in more detail about the lessons
we have learned from Sierra Leone, but I think the key
issues are that conflict is complex and that there are no
easy solutions. In learning the lessons from Sierra
Leone, I hope that we will be honest and as open as
possible about where we think we did the right thing,
as well as where we think we made mistakes.

With respect to the situation in the Mano River
Union, it is a region that is inherently unstable and
where there has been a cycle of conflict, with
significant refugee flows between countries. What we
need to do today is to look at ways in which we can
work with the countries in the Mano River Union to
support a regional approach, but also to think about
how the United Nations can raise its profile,
particularly in the context of the crisis in Liberia, and
facilitate and coordinate a peace process. As I said, I
will say more as the day progresses. But I would like to
stop there.

I have great pleasure in asking the Secretary-
General to make some opening remarks.


