Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would

like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the

International Criminal Court (ICC), for her briefing and

for presenting her sixth report to the Security Council,
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011). The contribution of
the International Criminal Court to fighting impunity
is evident, and the Court's activity to that end should be
further supported.

Azerbaijan welcomes the commitment of the
Government of Libya to restoring the rule of law
in the country and ensuring accountability for the
crimes committed in the course of the conflict. We
also acknowledge the existence of serious challenges
and threats facing the country and undermining the
progress made so far.

We commend the Libyan Government for its
cooperation with and assistance to the Court and the
Office of the Prosecutor. We welcome the signing of a
memorandum of understanding between the Government
of Libya and the Office of the Prosecutor on burden-
sharing in further investigations and prosecutions. As
the report notes, the signing of the memorandum of
understanding is a positive commitment on the part of
the Government of Libya to providing justice to victims
and to cooperating with the ICC in the investigation
and prosecution of additional cases against those
responsible for the most serious crimes in Libya.

The Libyan authorities continue to demonstrate
their commitment to ensuring an effective and genuine
investigation and fair trials, consistent with the required
international standards. Thus, by employing available
legal proofs and acting in compliance with the process
set out in the Rome Statute, the Government challenged
the admissibility of the SaifAl-[slam Al-Qadhafi and
Abdullah Al-Senussi cases. In its decision issued on
11 October, the Pre-Trial Chamber found the latter case
inadmissible before the ICC, stressing that Libya is
willing and genuinely able to carry out its proceedings
in relation to that case. We also note the Government's
further submission, filed on 23 September, regarding
the case against Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and its
readiness to share the supporting evidence with the ICC
in accordance with Libya's national legislation.

We commend the recent efforts towards setting up
mechanisms to address allegations of other crimes that
reportedly took place during the armed conflict. The
adoption of Libya's new transitional justice law and
the establishment of the fact-finding and reconciliation
commission are essential steps in that regard.

We also take positive note of the Libyan
Government's efforts to improve the conditions and
treatment of detainees and its commitment to securing
the handover of detainees to effective State control
and to ensuring the proper functioning of the criminal
justice system.

In conclusion, we encourage the international
community to continue providing the necessary support
to the efforts of the Libyan Government towards ending
impunity for the most serious crimes committed during
the conflict and advancing its development and security
agenda.

