Mr. Moura (Brazil): I wish first of all to thank
you, Madam President, for convening this important
meeting. I should also like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Gambari for his briefing this morning. Brazil
welcomes the presence of Mr. Albino Malungu,
Minister for Social Assistance of Angola. We also
appreciated his statement this morning.

This meeting follows up on last month's briefing
by Professor Gambari on his visit to Angola. At that
time he underlined that one of the objectives of his
mission was to consolidate the growing trust between
the Government of Angola and the United Nations.
After the war resumed in late 1998 the sense of
frustration with the United Nations that was felt in
Luanda was understandable. We in Brazil perceived
that fact, and did our best to restore a good working
relationship between Angola and the United Nations.

Having been the victims of a long war against a
colonial regime and suffered the brunt of a cold-war-
era conflict, the people of Angola are yearning for
peace. Today the objective evidence gathered since the
signing of the Bicesse Accords points to the
undisputable responsibility of Jonas Savimbi's UNITA
for the failure of a 10-year-long United Nations
peacekeeping presence in Angola.

An almost continuous state of war has resulted in
the destruction of much of Angola's infrastructure, the
creation of huge deficits in education and health
services and the condemnation of a large part of its
population to untold suffering and the condition of
being refugees in their own country.

The Angolan Government made strenuous efforts
to implement the "Acordos de Paz" and the Lusaka
Protocol. The refusal of UNITA to abide by its peace
commitments forced the Angolan Government to
uphold its own authority and to limit UNITA's capacity
to wage conventional warfare.

The Security Council recognized UNITA's
responsibility and decided to establish an increasingly
complex sanctions regime. The persistence of UNITA's
war-making capacity led this Council to create the
Panel of Experts that was so skilfully coordinated by
Ambassador Fowler. As a consequence, there is now a
worldwide effort to control the illegal traffic in
diamonds that fuels wars such those waged by Jonas
Savimbi in Angola and Foday Sankoh in Sierra Leone.
Unfortunately, however, these important milestones
have not yet been translated into meaningful change for
those millions of internally displaced Angolans.

The Angolan Government faces the extremely
difficult challenge of providing for the basic needs of a
growing mass of displaced people and of fighting
against guerrilla warfare aimed at the civilian
population. In this context, the international
community must make a combined effort to strictly
implement sanctions against UNITA and provide
assistance to the Angolan people, and to do so working
closely with the Government of Luanda.

With that in mind, the third Conference of Heads
of State and Government of the Community of
Portuguese Speaking Countries (CPLP), held in
Maputo on 17 and 18 July, reviewed the situation in
Angola and reaffirmed that the absence of peace in that
country was a result of the lack of fulfilment of their
commitments by Jonas Savimbi and his followers. The
Conference also expressed support and solidarity to the
Government of Angola in its efforts to suppress armed
subversion and re-establish peace under the terms of
the Lusaka Protocol.

In Maputo the President of the Federative
Republic of Brazil stated that the seven CPLP countries
should work together to promote the implementation of
United Nations sanctions against UNITA. He said that
it was high time to send Jonas Savimbi a clear message
about the will of the international community to ensure
the end of the Angolan conflict, which he hopes will
culminate in the holding of free and fair elections at the
end of 2001.

In our view, the strategies needed to tackle
humanitarian problems, such as those which afflict
Angola, should focus on conflict prevention,
peacemaking, peacekeeping, and post-conflict peace-
building, and should take into account the multiple
dimensions of conflicts.

In the case of Angola, the peacemaking effort
embodied in the three United Nations Angola
Verification Missions and the United Nations Observer
Mission in Angola did not succeed. As the Angolans
took into their own hands the task of resolving the war
situation, the United Nations established the United
Nations Office in Angola, which has, inter alia, the
role of coordinating humanitarian actions. They must
be based on the principle of shared responsibility and
joint efforts. The mandates of the humanitarian and
development agencies involved can differ in nature, but
they are intertwined, since their goal is the full
enjoyment of basic human rights.

It is therefore essential that the United Nations,
through its various organs, including this Council and
the Economic and Social Council in their respective
spheres of competence, cooperate with the Government
of Angola with a view to producing synergy in the field
of humanitarian assistance in that country. That also
means supporting Angola's own humanitarian
programmes.

Civil society in Angola is also organizing itself,
as is the Roman Catholic Church. The task of
diminishing suffering and preparing for reconstruction
is so vast that everybody will have to do more.
Organized groups will have to pool their efforts in
order to assist local authorities and groups of
concerned citizens in upholding the most basic human
right - the right to life.

The huge needs of Angola are such that we
should think beyond the much needed provision of
immediate relief assistance and start to plan the
architecture of post-conflict recovery and capacity-
building institutions. Immediate relief-assistance
actions are essential to address the consequences of
situations in which people remain displaced or return
under precarious conditions. However, a long-standing
solution to the humanitarian situation in Angola
depends on a political process that could ensure the
transformation of UNITA from an armed opposition
movement into a party committed to the establishment
of democracy in Angola. The Security Council and the
international community should keep that fact in mind
while planning a course of action to deal with the
situation.

