Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Chile wishes to express its gratitude to the presidency
for convening this meeting on the situation in Haiti
and the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH). This is a priority situation for
Latin America and the Caribbean. We thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Honore
for introducing the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2015/157).

In January, Council members had an opportunity
to visit Haiti, where we witnessed the progress that
had been achieved and took note of the remaining
challenges, of which political dialogue remains the key.
The Council was able to send a strong, unified message
on the need for all stakeholders to work together to
establish democratic and institutional processes in the
country. Only a few days after the presentation of the
electoral calendar by the provisional Electoral Council,
we stress the need for the political stakeholders to
assume their responsibility towards the Haitian people
and strive together to ensure that all the elections are
conducted successfully.

It is very difficult to put into context the process
by which MINUSTAH will be strengthened and
reconfigured. In that regard, we note the message in
the Secretary-General's report that

"the lingering political crisis diverted attention
from the focused pursuit of initiatives underpinning
the consolidation process" (S/2015/I57, para. 53).

Those initiatives are outlined in the annex to the
report. The elections are thus a priority of fundamental
importance, and we must act to ensure that they are
conducted smoothly. The Mission must maintain its
capacity to provide logistical support for the elections
and to contribute to creating a stable and secure
environment throughout Haiti.

The Secretary-General recognizes that the
Government of Haiti must confront and assess those
challenges on the basis of a gradual political context
and the complexity of the elections. In his report, the
Secretary-General also recognizes that, despite the
fact that the Haitian National Police has improved
its capacity to address crime and public disorder, the
elections threaten to exacerbate the political climate
in the country. In our view, this presages a period of
uncertainty and a prolonged electoral process, which
will likely involved several rounds of voting and
possible run-off elections and may be exacerbated by a
complex economic context that could impact Haiti this
year.

As we reiterate the importance of ongoing support
for Haiti, we must listen to the Haitian authorities,
who have reaffirmed the importance of the military
component of MINUSTAH in strengythening security
throughout the electoral cycle, and have requested a
sufficient and robust Mission presence. This and other
requests are clearly reflected in the letter sent by the
President of Haiti to the Secretary-General, which has
been circulated as a document of the Security Council
under the symbol S/2015/191.

Although the report of the Secretary-General
indicates that the security situation has remained
stable overall, we must not forget that the fact that,
as of 18 February, the number of troops stood at
4,615 contributed to that. The real challenge will
therefore begin after 1 July when, in accordance with
the provisions of resolution 2180 (2014) - barring a
revision - we will have to face a prolonged cycle of
elections with practically half as many troops, and that
at a time when there will still be a long way to go before
the Haitian National Police can reach the appropriate
minimum numbers to be able to face that challenge.
Chile reiterates its support for a gradual reduction of
the force that takes into account the electoral calendar,

with a view to ensuring a process that guarantees

transparency and democratic governance in a way that

does not undermine the achievements of the past years.

We welcome the announcement of the intention to make

full use of the police levels that have been authorized.

Honestly, however, we wonder whether it will be

possible to reach those numbers in an opportune time

to fully carry out the preventive functions performed

by the military component.

I would not want to conclude my statement without
reiterating that Haiti continues to face challenges
on the humanitarian and development fronts. It is
crucial that the international community continue to
support initiatives aimed both at funding immediate
needs - including with regard to the recent increase in
cholera cases, the ongoing situation with the remaining
internally displaced persons and the prospects for
increasing food security - and at supporting Haiti's
national capacities in the long term.

In conclusion, I want to reiterate Chile's commitment
to the Haitian people, its authorities and MINUSTAH.
Chile will continue to support the consolidation of the
rule of law, democracy and the development of Haiti's
capacities, as that contributes to building a political
culture that is committed to the stability of the country
and the progress of the Haitian people. We must do our
work well in order to succeed.

