Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I want to start
by congratulating you, Madame President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of October. We have no doubt that you
will have an extremely successful presidency. I would
also like to take this opportunity to complement
Lebanon, and in particular Ambassador Nawaf Salam,
for the very wise and able stewardship that he provided
to the Council during September, a difficult month at
the best of times.

Both historically and in contemporary times,
Syria has been an important country in the Middle
East. Its role in the Middle East peace process and in
the stability of the wider region cannot be
overemphasized. Prolonged instability and unrest in
Syria therefore clearly have ramifications for the
region and beyond.

India remains concerned about the unfolding
events in Syria that have resulted in the deaths of
hundreds of civilians and security force personnel. We
deplore all violence, irrespective of who its
perpetrators are.

We recognize the responsibility of all States to
respect the fundamental rights of their people, address
their legitimate aspirations and respond to their
grievances through administrative, political, economic
and other measures. At the same time, States also have
the obligation to protect their citizens from armed
groups and militants. While the right of people to
protest peacefully is to be respected, States cannot but
take appropriate action when militant groups -
heavily armed - resort to Violence against State
authority and infrastructure.

Given the complexity of ground realities in Syria,
we believe that engaging Syria in a collaborative and
constructive dialogue and partnership is the only
pragmatic and productive way forward. In our bilateral
contacts with the Syrian Government, as well as
through the India-Brazil-South Africa initiative, we
have urged them to exercise restraint, abjure violence
and pay heed to the aspirations of their people.

The international community should give time
and space for the Syrian Government to implement the
far-reaching reform measures they have announced.
For this, it is also necessary that the opposition forces
in Syria give up the path of armed insurrection and
engage constructively with the authorities. We firmly
believe that the actions of the international community
should facilitate engagement of the Syrian Government
and the opposition in a Syrian-led inclusive political
process, and not complicate the situation by threats of
sanctions, regime change, et cetera.
11-52974

The resolution under the Council's consideration
does not accommodate our concern about the threat of
sanctions. It does not condemn the violence perpetrated
by the Syrian opposition, nor does it place any
responsibility on the opposition to abjure violence and
engage with the Syrian authorities for redressing of
their grievances through a peaceful political process.
We have, therefore, abstained in the vote on the
resolution.

