Mr. Rosati (Poland): At the outset, Madam, let me
say how glad I am to see you presiding over the present
ministerial meeting of the Security Council. I would like to
express my deep satisfaction at your initiative to convene
this meeting. The Polish delegation immediately lent its
support to the United States proposal in this respect,
regarding it as highly advisable and timely.

The precarious security situation and persistent lack of
stability in many areas of Africa remain a source of deep
concern for us. The complex nature of African conflicts
reduces the effectiveness of the measures applied by the
United Nations and the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) in their efforts to resolve them. Essentially a
product of deep social and economic underdevelopment,
crises in that part of the world are aggravated by ethnic,
cultural and religious factors, all deeply rooted in history.
They often involve total disruption in the functioning of
State organs, especially in areas affected by military
hostilities. They are also frequently accompanied by
massive displacements of populations, which additionally
worsen the humanitarian situation in a region, generating
further violations of human rights.

The unique character of African crises calls for the
development of an overall concept of international
assistance that would address their underlying causes in
all their complexity. Hence, it is important that the
recommendations to be submitted by the Secretary-
General aimed at devising a feasible plan to terminate
civil wars in Africa should be based on a precise
identification of their sources. They should also include
a specific outline of modes of international assistance for
the comprehensive reconstruction and rehabilitation of the
destroyed administrative, economic and social
infrastructure of countries affected by conflicts.

All this, however, indispensable as it is, would only
be one step on the long path to normality in many war-
torn places in Africa. What is needed first and foremost
is a vision of that normality. This vision should be
worked out primarily by the peoples of Africa themselves.
We believe that in thinking about the African future they
would be well advised to build on well-tested solutions,
enriched with their specific local experience and African
traditions, bearing in mind that respect for universally
recognized standards of democracy, the rule of law and
basic human rights lies at the centre of contemporary
international relations.

My Government welcomes the ongoing efforts to
develop cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization of African Unity. We note with appreciation
the significant achievements in this area and we
encourage the continuation of this bold approach, which
already this year has brought a significant enrichment of
that cooperation in both substance and form.

Regional and subregional efforts aimed at defusing
tensions and terminating conflicts in Africa are
indispensable in the search for a peaceful future for that
continent. Regional actors are uniquely placed to provide
countries and nations in trouble with appropriate and
timely advice and assistance. In this context, the tireless
efforts of African mediators in regional conflicts deserve
our deepest respect.

The peacekeeping capacity of African countries is,
in our View, one of the most important aspects of the
regional potential to deal with conflicts, and it should be
comprehensively developed. Over the last few years we
have been witnessing an enormous step forward in

 

expanding the theory and practice of peacekeeping in
Africa.

By way of example, I wish to refer in this context
only to the efforts to assist this process undertaken by the
Western European Union. Poland believes that more use
should be made of thorough observations contained in
documents relating to African peacekeeping forces
submitted to the Security Council by Secretary-General
Kofi Annan and by his predecessor.

As I have already indicated, the humanitarian
consequences of crises in Africa are indeed devastating.
The experience of the refugees in the Great Lakes region
proves that the chances of survival of civilian populations
involved in conflicts are very often determined by the
effective provision of humanitarian assistance and
protection. Thus, limiting or impeding the flow of aid can
have and often does have tragic consequences for hundreds
of thousands of people in the regions affected by military
hostilities. The parties to a conflict are obliged to respect
the human rights of the civilian population in the territories
under their control, and it is imperative that those
responsible for violating these rights, including by impeding
international relief operations, should be brought to justice.

We hope that this debate will give momentum to the
process of freeing Africa of current conflicts and of
removing the prospects of potential ones. This is necessary
if many other Vital problems of Africa are to be efficiently
tackled. My country is profoundly convinced that the
countries of Africa, torn by ongoing crises, will succeed in
rejecting that which brings suffering and misery to their
people and building on that which can secure peace and
prosperity. We can see no other way for a continent whose
boundless human and natural resources remain largely
untapped, to the detriment of Africa itself and of the entire
world.

My country is proud of its participation in the United
Nations-led conflict-solving activities in Africa, including
many United Nations peacekeeping operations. This
military role, important as it is, is being complemented by
assistance to our African partners in other areas, crucial for
harmonious development of every country facing
fundamental systemic reforms.

The Polish delegation believes that the presidential
statement to be adopted by the Security Council at the
conclusion of this meeting will significantly enhance
prospects for terminating conflicts in Africa. Poland, as a
traditionally active member of the United Nations, stands
ready to contribute its share to the common endeavours
vis-a-vis Africa.

