Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): The situation in Abkhazia,
Georgia, continues to cause my Government concern. On
the ground, instability, tension and the risk of new
confrontations have been high since the tragic events of
May 1998, and make the work of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) and the
peacekeeping force of the Commonwealth of Independent
States (CIS) more difficult and more dangerous.

Concerning the political process, we must note the
failure of the parties to settle the conflict. In fact, despite
the considerable and sustained efforts of the United
Nations, the Russian Federation, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the
group of Friends of the Secretary-General to move the
peace process forward, we are unfortunately still far from
a political settlement.

As the Secretary-General points out in his report, the
last six months have been marked by a lack of
willingness to renounce violence or to consider seriously
peaceful and mutually acceptable options for the
resolution of the conflict.

The parties must commit themselves to the search
for a political solution within the framework of the United
Nations, making use of the mechanism established in
November 1997. Political machinery to address the
various questions of the peace process is in place and the
commitment of the international community to the
negotiation process is clear and firm. But primary
responsibility for reinvigorating it rests with the parties
themselves. They must grasp this opportunity with both
hands, and we look forward to concrete and substantive
progress on the outstanding issues of the definition of the
political status of Abkhazia and the problem of the return
of refugees and displaced persons in dignity and safety.

We would like to stress that it is particularly
important to begin the return of refugees and displaced
persons. We therefore call upon, in particular, the Abkhaz
side to allow the unconditional and immediate return of
all persons displaced since the resumption of hostilities in

 

May 1998. We commend the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative for their efforts to place the Geneva
process back on track. The high-level meeting between the
two parties which took place last week in Geneva under the
aegis of the United Nations was in itself a positive step,
and we hope that the parties will intensify their active
engagement in this process. We urge them to refrain from
the use of force and to observe strictly the Protocol on a
Ceasefire and Withdrawal of Armed Formations signed on
25 May 1998.

We remain deeply concerned at the continuing
deterioration of security conditions. A significant increase
in subversive activities by armed groups has disrupted the
peace process and impeded the return of refugees. My
Government is particularly concerned about the attacks
against UNOMIG and CIS personnel.

The Council should be unequivocal in its intolerance
for violence against peacekeepers, which must stop
immediately. We demand that the parties provide increased
security for UNOMIG and other international personnel. In
this regard, we welcome the measures already taken to
improve security conditions and to minimize the danger to
UNOMIG personnel.

However, we believe that unless further arrangements
are made in this field, the Mission will not have the
capacity to return to its full operational levels and to fulfil
its mandated tasks. We therefore welcome the decision of
the Secretary-General to keep the security of UNOMIG
under constant review.

In conclusion, we support the extension of UNOMIG' s
mandate, as recommended by the Secretary-General, as well
as the draft resolution before us, which addresses our
concerns.

