Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I warmly welcome
the Secretary-General's briefing. I agree with his
nine-point plan for reform and with every other word
that he said.

I would like to pay tribute to the brave men and
women serving in United Nations peacekeeping
missions. For many people around the world, they
are all that stands between stability and chaos. More
than 3,500 peacekeepers have lost their lives holding
that line, including nine this year. We are humbled by
their sacrifice.

We have a duty to those peacekeepers, all those
risking their lives today and all the people whom they
protect, to ask tough, fundamental questions about
peacekeeping deployments. Peacekeeping is one of the
best things that the Organization has ever established.
Peacekeeping is the jewel in the United Nations crown.
Peacekeeping is the United Nations unique selling
point. Peacekeeping is also a good investment. In
human terms, United Nations peacekeeping saves lives.
In terms ofpeace, it significantly increases the survival
rate of peace agreements. We should continue to invest
in that crucial tool that answers the call to help when no
one else comes. But as with all investments, we should
examine the market.

First, we must think long and hard before deploying
missions and about whether peacekeeping is the right
tool at the right moment. Horizon scanning and early
warning give us an opportunity to use other tools.
Preventive diplomacy, conflict prevention, mediation
and early action to prevent conflicts and mass human
rights abuses remain vital, but those must be begun
long before peacekeepers may be required. Too often
that moment is missed. When a peacekeeping mission
is required, we must ask if that mission has a clear
objective and a clear exit strategy. Does it have the right
mandate? Will the host Government cooperate? There
are at least two ways in which a Government might
not cooperate - by opposing the very deployment of
a mission or by hindering the mission's ability to fulfill
every part of its mandate once it has been deployed.

History has given us enough tragedies to
support the deployment of peacekeepers when host
Governments are unwilling or unable to protect their
own people- with or without the Government's
consent. If the host Government does not cooperate, the
Council has a crucial role to play. We must ensure that
States shoulder their primary responsibility to prevent
conflict, minimize suffering and ensure that cycles of
conflict are not repeated. Where there are spoilers to
peace, including host Governments that seek to stifle
missions, we must use all the tools at our disposal to
change that behaviour.

But time after time the message sent by the Council
is one of disunity and confusion. We had a chance last
year to bring pressure to bear on the parties in South
Sudan, but at the crucial moment we failed to deliver.
We cannot complain now about the tragic status quo
in that country if we are not prepared to act ourselves.

Once deployed, we must recognize when a
peacekeeping mission is no longer the right tool for the
job, when other parts of the United Nations system are
better placed to support development and peacebuilding
needs - as in Haiti, Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire. We
know that peacekeeping is but one tool available to
the United Nations. It cannot deliver every aspect to
the United Nations response to conflict. Peacekeeping
should exist alongside both conflict prevention and
peacebuilding work.

Where military force is necessary, the United
Nations is not the only organization capable of
delivering it. We need only look to West Africa, where
the Economic Community of West African States has
demonstrated regional leadership through deployments
in Mali and in support of the political transition in
the Gambia. Or to Somalia, where the African Union
Mission in Somalia is degrading the threat from the
terrorist group Al-Shabaab.

But military operations can only create the
space for the political process to progress. We must
therefore redouble our efforts to address the political
challenges to peace 4 not only the security ones ~ if
we are to deliver the Secretary-General's agenda on
sustaining peace.

My final point is that, if and when we deploy
peacekeeping missions, we must make sure that they
are effective. That means better mission planning, more
pledges of troops and equipment and stronger mission
performance. Mandates must be limited, realistic and
prioritized, with a clear end goal and the benchmarks
for getting there, while building on and complementing
the work of other parts of the United Nations so that we
can measure the impact of their activity and hand them
over when the peacekeeping task is complete.

We must conduct regular and robust reviews of
missions to establish where current situation sit on the
spectrum of conflict and ensure that we are responding
and resourcing them appropriately. Pledges of troops and
equipment need to meet specific shortfalls identified by
the United Nations, including the deployment of more
women. We need to develop a greater breadth and depth
of capabilities so that the United Nations can deploy the
most appropriate tools to deliver mission mandates.

Ultimately, peacekeeping must perform better.
That means high-quality training, appropriate
equipment, medical provision and skilled and
courageous leadership. Missions are the human face
of the Organization to so many people in the world.
They have to act to uphold the principles that we all
represent, while holding peacekeepers to account for
underperformance or misconduct, especially when
there are allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse.
Peacekeepers' successes save lives, and we owe it to
them and the people they protect to ask those tough
questions and find the right answers.

