Mrs. D'Achon (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Kamalesh Sharma, for the very detailed
information he has just given us and to welcome the
representative of Timor-Leste.

My comments, which will be brief, are in support
of the statement to be made on behalf of the European
Union by the Permanent Representative of Italy. France
fully associates itself with that statement.

The latest report of the Secretary-General shows
that the action of the United Nations, which has been
strengthened since May 2003, and of the people and
Government of Timor-Leste and their neighbours has
led to significant progress in the development of the
country's institutional, economic and social capacities
and to its full inclusion in the international community.
France welcomes this and commends all the parties
involved.

Until May 2004, the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET) will focus more
and more on peace-building and development of the
country's capacities by the transfer of responsibilities
to Timor-Leste. International assistance should be
matched by the active determination of the Timorese to
fully implement their new autonomy.

France is nevertheless aware of the need for some
form of international support to be maintained after
May 2004, and is open to proposals in that regard. A
clear distinction should, however, be drawn between
UNMISET and the subsequent United Nations
presence. The main aim of international assistance
should be then, even more than today, the development
of Timorese capacities in sectors where this is
necessary. It would be premature to name all those
sectors now, but some, such as the police and justice,
already seem clear. With regard to security as well, a
needs assessment will be more relevant in the months
leading up to the May 2004 deadline.

In any case, international assistance, will mean
coordinated action by the various agencies of the
United Nations system, particularly the World Bank
and the United Nations Development Programme.
Moreover, it should be given in accordance with a
complete and definitive exit strategy, which has yet to
be formulated.

It is therefore important for the Secretariat to
inform the members of the Council and the donor
community about the situation foreseen in May 2004
both in terms of security and other spheres of public
life. In this connection, the report of the Secretary-
General scheduled for early 2004 should give us
detailed information for analysis, which would enable
the Council to decide with a full knowledge of the
facts.

