The Secretary-General: We meet at an
important moment in the development of the peace
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Over
the past few months, there have been several positive
developments. The ceasefire is holding at the
confrontation lines, notwithstanding some allegations
of violations, which the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) is investigating. Most of the forces have
withdrawn in accordance with the Harare
disengagement plan. MONUC's relations with the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
remain positive and cooperative. I had a very
constructive meeting with Presidents Kabila and
Kagame in Lusaka earlier this month in the margins of
the summit of the Organization of African Unity. I was
encouraged that they both pledged to improve dialogue
and cooperation, undertake confidence-building
measures and avoid incitement.

However, as members are all aware, the
restoration of peace and stability in the Congo will
ultimately rest on the success of the inter-Congolese
dialogue. I would therefore like to commend the
tireless efforts of the facilitator, Sir Ketumile Masire,
that have led to the adoption by all parties of the
Declaration of Fundamental Principles of the Inter-
Congolese Political Negotiations.

Like you, Mr. President, I would like to take this
opportunity to express my gratitude to Kamel Morjane,
who has served very effectively as my Special
Representative in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. As you mentioned, even though he is leaving
his current post, he is returning to the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
where he has served for many years. I am sure he will
continue to make a very constructive contribution to
the work of the Organization. We here in the Council
will probably have the opportunity of seeing him from
time to time. I think that, during his service, he has
helped bring the parties back to the path of negotiation
and has given the people of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo new hope of escaping the cycle of violence
and instability. I would also say that, through his
political and diplomatic skills, his long experience with
the region and its difficult issues and the relations he
has developed with all the parties, Mr. Morjane has
served with great distinction the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as Africa
and the United Nations.

Mr. Morjane's successor will face considerable
challenges. The third phase of MONUC's deployment
is about to begin and, as Mr. Morjane has informed the
Security Council, we are still far from the point in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo Where the peace
process is irreversible. Only last week, three respected
non-governmental organizations told us of the
appalling humanitarian and human rights situation
encountered by millions of Congolese and of serious
obstacles still to be overcome. Perhaps chief among
these is the central issue of the disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation, resettlement and
reintegration of the armed groups, without which
progress in other areas will be very difficult. The
continued resolve of the Security Council, which has
been steadfast in its support of the peace process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, will be essential in
the process as we move forward. I trust that the
Council will continue to display the same high level of
interest in the challenges and opportunities facing the
Democratic Republic of the Congo as it has over the
past two years of MONUC's existence.

