Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I want to start by thanking
Under-Secretary-General Ladsous and my colleague
Ambassador Hilale of Morocco, Chair of the Central
African Republic country-specific configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for their briefings. I would
also like tojoin others in welcoming President Touadera
to the Security Council and by thanking him for his
appraisal of the current situation and the challenges
and opportunities facing the Central African Republic.
We strongly support the efforts of President Touadera
towards a Central African Republic where all citizens
can live in peace.

The ongoing work on the formal disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and rehabilitation
(DDRR) framework is of particular importance. It is
critical to continue to advance the national dialogue
in ways the build on the results of the Bangui Forum.
The Government, the region and the international
community must speak with one voice on that issue,
thereby ensuring a coherent approach to armed groups
and avoiding damage to public trust.

The African initiative for a peace and reconciliation
agreement is very welcomed, and should be carefully
coordinated with national efforts and should support the
implementation of Security Council resolutions. The
effective participation of women in all reconciliation,
transitional justice and DDRR frameworks is key to
sustainable results.
Ending impunity is a prerequisite for true
reconciliation. At the Bangui Forum, the people of
President Touadera's country made an unequivocal plea
forjustice, which must be delivered upon in the context
of nationally agreed processes, as he indicated. We
look forward to the human rights report by the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA).
Its findings should be followed up on, not least in view
of the operationalization of the special criminal court.
We encourage the Government, in its efforts to improve
accountability, to take full advantage of the support
provided by MINUSCA and of the court.

While security in Bangui has improved, people
across the Central African Republic continue to live
under the threat of violence. We are deeply concerned
about the recent events in Bambari, which risk leading
to a de facto east-west partition. To avoid that, it is
vital that the State re-establish its authority in the
city. The recent visit to the city by President Touadera
is a very important signal. We heard today about the
dire humanitarian situation and new displacements. I
am glad to say that we remain a major humanitarian
donor. We urge others to respond to the appeal made
today by the President for further funds going to his
country. The protection of civilians remains a priority.
We are encouraged by the robust action by MINUSCA
in that regard in Bambari. Further measures and
flexible adaptation to the fast-evolving situation will
be necessary.

We welcome President Touadera's participation at
the Peacebuilding Commission earlier today, as well as
the configuration's intention to further intensify efforts
to support the National Recovery and Peacebuilding
Plan. To re-establish and extend State authority over
the whole of the territory and to prevent a relapse
into widespread hostilities, peacebuilding efforts
are important, including the capacity of the public
administration throughout the country.

I want to stress that there must be zero tolerance
for sexual exploitation and abuse for all peacekeeping
and United Nations staff, uniformed as well as civilian.
We note with great concern that allegations of further
abuse by United Nations staff still persist in the
Central African Republic. Victims, both women and
men, boys and girls, need to be protected, assisted and
compensated, while perpetrators must be brought to
justice. The United Nations must never lack the power
to act to hold those responsible to account. We welcome
the leadership of the Secretary-General on the issue,
including his vision for a new strategy to address sexual
exploitation and abuse, with a clear focus on victims'
rights.

In conclusion, it is imperative that we continue
to support the efforts of President Touadera and
his Government and that we remain focused on
supporting a peaceful Central African Republic at this
critical moment.

