It is always a pleasure seeing Foreign Minister Maas and joining him at the Security Council. We thank our expert briefers - Mr. Magagi, Assistant Secretary- General Jencea and Ms. Pasisi - for their insights and expertise in briefing the Security Council today. With regard to today's threats to prosperity are tomorrow's geopolitical problems, the briefers have clearly set out the impacts of climate change on international peace and security. We, the United Kingdom, have kept this issue high on the Security Council's agenda since we first brought it to the Council, in 2007 (see S/PV.5663 and resumption). Unfortunately, what we said then, and what many others have emphasized since, has been proven right. This year, for the first time in its history, the top five global risks in the World Economic Forum's annual report were all environmental. It is clear that climate change is a multiplier of stress and hardship. It hits hardest in the most vulnerable communities in the most vulnerable countries and regions across the world. As we have heard, scarce resources, economic shocks, displacement and sea-level rise lead to significantly higher chances of violent conflict. With the added multiplier of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), as we have all experienced in the course of this year, the threat to peace has become extreme. We all feel the impacts of climate change, but they do not affect us equally. We know, for example, that women and girls suffer disproportionately. Gender inequalities can limit access to education, decision-making, food and adequate housing. Girls and women can be more exposed to disaster-induced poverty or exploitation. Women are significantly more likely than men to die during a climate- related disaster. And we know that it is tragic but true that gender-based violence and exploitation increase during crises. In their aftermath, women and girls are often subject to sexual violence and exploitation as they attempt to gain access to food and other basic needs. I joined the President last week in focusing on these specific concerns. Let me once again emphasize and reiterate that the United Kingdom is dedicated to tackling all forms of gender-based violence globally, including through the Preventing Sexual Violence in Conflict initiative. Our approach to climate security must be sensitive to these inequalities and deep concerns. Women's full, effective, pivotal and meaningful participation is key for sustainable peace. The evidence proves it. We must be led by the needs and priorities of women and girls, and we must draw on their potential, their insights, their expertise and their experiences in crafting our response. The Security Council must take this opportunity to address this imbalance. Of course, no nation is unscathed. Every country needs to decide how to adapt to climate impacts, and how to build resilience. At the heart of its priorities for the twenty-sixth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP26) next year, the United Kingdom wants to bring countries together to urgently increase climate action in line with the goals of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and the objectives of the Framework Convention. At COP26, we will prioritize action that builds adaptation and resilience, particularly in climate-vulnerable regions, including through better coordination and increased finance. By building resilience, we can reduce risk, including climate-related security risks. Furthermore, as the leaders of all 54 Commonwealth countries emphasized in their recent statement on the COVID-19 pandemic, we must come together and work collaboratively and collectively to build back better. This includes continuing to advocate on behalf of small and vulnerable States, recognizing that the pandemic has exacerbated many of the inherent challenges that these States already face. Working together benefits each and every one of us. But above all, we need an evidence-based approach to climate-security threats. With such an approach, we can tailor solutions to the fragile and conflict- affected States on our agenda. We have already done this in several resolutions of the Security Council, in particular recent resolutions on Mali, Darfur, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Sudan and Somalia. We now need to push for the effective implementation of those resolutions. We need to integrate climate resilience into our development, peacebuilding and humanitarian work. We need to use data, evidence and best practices. To do that effectively, we need to understand the drivers of conflict and the implications for long-term stability. I would like to echo calls for a comprehensive report of the Secretary-General to the Council on climate-related security risks. Secondly, we would also welcome climate-risk assessment and climate resilience as an integral part of the Council's work. This will correctly factor climate risks into United Nations operations, conflict prevention and resolution strategies and peacebuilding funds. Through the Risk-Informed Early Action Partnership, we will expand early-action financing, improve early-warning systems and build national capacity to respond early to risks. We are supporting the development of a reimplementation plan that will make some | billion people safer from disaster by 2025. Thirdly, we will support strengthening the ability of the United Nations to enable analysis and action on climate risk as a fundamental way of working. Finally, we will integrate climate forecasting with broader conflict-prevention measures to keep our efforts on target. In conclusion, there is no doubt that climate-related security threats, as the President himself articulated, are real. They are immediate, and they are here to stay. We must therefore work together so that the United Nations system can consider climate risks and threats holistically when we make decisions and implement them into United Nations mission planning.
