Mr. Minami (Japan): Let me begin by expressing my
sincere appreciation for your leadership, Mr. President,
in convening today's open debate. Before I go into the
substance of my statement, like the speakers before me,
I would like to extend my delegation's condolences and
sympathy to the people and Government of France, in
connection with the terrorist attacks on 13 November.
Likewise, our condolences go to the peoples and
Governments of Lebanon and Iraq, which also recently
suffered from atrocious terrorist attacks.
Japan appreciates the fact that the Council is
focusing its attention on the root causes of conflict. By
using its political leverage for conflict prevention and
peacebuilding in a timely manner, the Council can help
avoid situations in which large-scale action is required.
As an active member of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) and a newly elected member of the Council,
Japan also welcomes the United Kingdom presidency's
initiative in inviting the Chair ofthe PBC to this session.
Today, our eyes are fully open to the fact that peace
and security and sustainable development are closely
linked to each other. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) aims
at approaching the security/development spectrum in
an integrated way. Goal 16 is epoch-making. All the
Member States recognize the need for breaking down
silos. In implementing that Goal, every principal organ
of the United Nations has its role to play. In that respect,
let me underscore three points.

The first concerns the importance of the role to be
played by the Council. I would suggest that the Council
has a tendency to pay insufficient attention to the
nexus that should connect it to other intergovernmental
organizations when it discusses issues in New York.
In order to break down silos and make the discussions
within the United Nations system holistic, the Security
Council should ensure coherence with the work of other
bodies, such as the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council, the High-level Political Forum,
the executive boards of funds and programmes and the
Human Rights Council, in addition, of course, to the
PBC. Particularly when it comes to laying the ground
for peace and taking measures based on long-term
projections, the Security Council should make full use
of the comparative strengths of the relevant institutions.

That would help the Council to lessen its already heavy
workload. We believe that the Council should take the
lead in reaching out to those bodies.

Secondly, I would like to highlight the importance
of giving more priority to conflict prevention on the
ground. In that connection, the United Nations country
team plays a crucial role, and its updates should
enable the Secretariat to proactively brief the Security
Council. That would allow the Council to be engaged
at the outset in situations where increased tension is
observed, thereby preventing tensions from escalating
into conflicts.

Lastly, I would like to stress the importance of
institution-building in preventing conflict. It is for that
very reason that the PBC Working Group on Lessons
Learned, which Japan chairs, has focused on the annual
theme ofinstitution-building. Japan intends to submit a
report on those activities by the end of 2015. We hope
to make additional contributions to today's theme with
that report.

Before closing, allow me to briefly touch on Japan's
engagement. Japan places human security at the centre
of its policy. That concept emphasizes placing people
at the heart of development policy and protecting them,
through empowerment, from various threats, including
conflict. Indeed, the concept of human security calls for
that seamless and coherent way of supporting efforts
aimed at sustaining peace and development, all the way
from the phases of conflict prevention and resolution
efforts to those of consolidation of peace, prevention
of relapse, reconstruction and sustainable development.
Japan is determined to take an active role in conflict
prevention, peacebuilding, humanitarian assistance and
development cooperation, through a holistic approach.

