Mr. Viinanen (Finland): I thank you, Sir, for
having organized this debate. I congratulate the
Secretary-General on the excellent report we have
before us today (S/2011/634*). We support the full
implementation of the recommendations contained
therein.

Finland aligns itself with the statement of the
European Union. In addition, I will make some
remarks on two interrelated issues: first, rule of law
12-21054
and transitional justice in peace processes, mediation
and peace agreements; and secondly, access to justice
for women, children and vulnerable groups.

The rule of law in the context of peace and
security has been debated by the Council for almost a
decade, and a common understanding has emerged
about the centrality of justice and the rule of law to the
prevention of conflicts and the sustainability of peace
agreements. When bringing warring parties to a
negotiating table, a particular challenge is to address
the simultaneous requirements of stability and justice
in a balanced way.

In his report, the Secretary-General confirms that
the United Nations policy to reject any endorsement of
amnesty for genocide, war crimes, crimes against
humanity or gross violations of human rights is
increasingly reflected in peace agreements, ceasefires
and other arrangements. Blanket amnesties are
considerably less common today than they were
10 years ago. Despite this positive development, we
agree with the Secretary-General's conclusion that a lot
remains to be done, as the incorporation of justice and
accountability measures into peace agreements remains
uneven. This is an area where we stand ready to work
together with the United Nations, the Council and all
Member States to further enhance the quality of
mediation, the resulting peace agreements and their
implementation.

Human rights violations and the need for justice
cannot be overlooked in the name of stability. Peace
can be sustainable only if it goes hand in hand with
justice and respect for human rights. There should be a
multifaceted and properly sequenced transitional
justice strategy to address the legacy of violations of
human rights and international law, including
prosecutions, truth-seeking, reparations and
institutional reform. The World Bank's World
Development Report 201] demonstrates that providing
improved security, justice and jobs is a precondition
for a successful transition to stability. If one of these
elements is missing, transitions are less likely to
succeed.

It is important to ensure that the rule of law is
fully taken into account in all reform and
reconstruction efforts undertaken in conflict and post-
conflict situations. In so doing, priority should be
given to access to justice for those who often suffer
disproportionately in conflict and whose voices are
12-21054

unfortunately still the weakest in peace negotiations
and post-conflict processes: women, children and
marginalized groups.

The Secretary-General recommends a United
Nations policy to ensure the full inclusion of
marginalized populations. Good progress is being made
by United Nations actors in advancing women's access
to justice in post-conflict situations. I would like to
commend the work of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict in
this regard.

Children need our attention. The Secretary-
General in his report recommends the development of
common minimum standards on children and
transitional justice. Finland fully supports that call.
Another area where Finland would like to see progress
made is reparations for victims of conflict and of
serious violations. We believe that innovative
measures, such as collective reparations or measures
that create economic and employment opportunities,
could greatly contribute not only to justice being done
but also to the broader goal of peacebuilding.

Although I have not mentioned many pertinent
issues - such as the role of the International Court of
Justice, the importance of the International Criminal
Court and support for the implementation of the
principle of complementarity to its fullest extent, or
due process considerations of sanctions regimes - our
support for all the essential building blocks of the rule
of law both at the international and national level is
unwavering. I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity to
address the Council and stand ready to work with the
Council and the whole United Nations membership in
advancing the rule of law.

