Ms. Rodriguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): Cuba supports a genuine and thorough
reform of the Security Council that will make it an
effective, transparent representative and democratic
organ that reflects the evolution of the United Nations
and international relations. We welcome the Security
Council's adoption of note by the President S/2017/507,
which sets out and consolidates all the presidential notes
on the working methods of the Council. Nevertheless,
additional efforts are required without delay to move
towards the democratization of the Security Council,
both in its membership and its working methods, so as
not to jeopardize the credibility of the United Nations
and its long-term legitimacy.

Although we recognize the increase in recent years
in the number of open debates, informative meetings,
monthly wrap-up sessions and the unprecedented
process of consultations and exchange of views with
Member States for the selection and appointment of the
Secretary-General, we still see a continuation in the
trend in the Council to work mainly in closed formats
and to take decisions without addressing the concerns
of non-permanent members and the other Members of
the United Nations.

We need effective formulas to do away with
exclusive practices and to ensure that there is genuine
participation and democratization of the work and

decision-making of the Council. It bears noting that, in
line with Article 24 ofthe Charter ofthe United Nations,
its Members recognize that the Security Council, in the
discharge of its functions, acts on behalf of Member
States, and therefore the work of the Council is a shared
responsibility borne by all Member States.

Cuba reiterates the need for the Council to adopt a
definitive text that regulates its work and thereby puts
an end to the provisional nature that has characterized
its rules of procedure for more than 70 years. That is
indispensable in terms of transparency and the need
for accountability.

We note with regret that the Council continues to
present to the General Assembly annual reports that are
merely a descriptive overview of its meetings, activities
and decisions, instead of reflecting an explanatory,
exhaustive and analytical content that focuses on the
work ofthe Council and enables us to assess the reasons
behind and implications of the Council's decisions. It
is regrettable that the Security Council continues its
work without presenting special reports on measures
for maintaining international peace and security for
consideration by the General Assembly, as requested
by the Charter in Articles 15 and 24.

With regard to the veto, which is closely linked to
the working methods of the Council, we reiterate that
this is an anachronistic and anti-democratic privilege,
which must be eliminated as soon as possible.

In addition to a change in its working methods,
the Security Council must align its functions with the
mandate entrusted to it in the Charter of the United
Nations. In that regard, Cuba is very concerned about
the trend in the Security Council to take up issues
that do not pose an immediate threat to international
peace and security and to take up functions beyond its
remit, thereby increasingly usurping the role assigned
by the Charter to other organs of the United Nations,
particularly the General Assembly.

The selective manipulation in its operational
practices, attempts to introduce issues that are not
under the agenda of the Council and the politicization
of specific issues in terms of particular interests
of domination and hegemony must cease and be
vigorously rejected.

No genuine reform of the United Nations is possible
until the Security Council is reformed. Only in that way
will we preserve multilateralism and be able to count

on a reformed, democratic, transparent and efficient
Security Council - one that represents the interests of
all the States Members of the Organization.

