Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Let me, too, thank
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and Assistant
Secretary-General Gilmour for their briefings
this morning.

Let me speak a little, first, about the wider situation
in the Sudan and its impact on Darfur and then,
secondly, on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and our approach to
the upcoming mandate renewal.

We meet again during uncertain times in the
Sudan. When we last met in the Chamber on this issue
(see S/PV.8513), I said that the Transitional Military
Council had a choice. It could choose to deliver on
the legitimate demands of the Sudanese people for a
political system that is inclusive, respectful of human
rights and the rule of law. It could choose to engage
with the international community to gain the support
that the Sudan desperately needs as it seeks to turn
around decades of economic mismanagement and to
help resolve conflict.

Instead, the Transitional Military Council chose
brutal violence that resulted in the deaths of over
100 peaceful civilian protesters and the injury of
hundreds more. Through our press statement this week
(SC/13836), we in the Council strongly condemned
that violence and urged the authorities to immediately
end the use of violence, fully respect human rights and
ensure justice and accountability. I am sure that will be
the clear and unambiguous message that will be sent by
members of the Council today.

We note that, today, the Transitional Military
Council has acknowledged the violations committed
by the security services on 3 June and said that an
investigation is under way. The United Kingdom urges
the military authorities to ensure that the investigation
is transparent and ensures the accountability that the
military authorities have a responsibility to deliver for
the Sudanese people.

May I also say how strongly we support the position
of the African Union (AU). The African Union has
demonstrated strong regional leadership in response to
the situation in the Sudan. We fully support its efforts
to find a peaceful and swift resolution to the current
crisis and we call on all international partners to show
their support for those AU efforts.

Unfortunately, the violence, human rights violations
and abuses perpetrated in Khartoum on and since 3 June
are all too familiar to the people of Darfur. As Andrew
Gilmour referenced, there remain serious human rights
and protection concerns in Darfur. The very forces
that perpetrated the recent violence in Khartoum, the
Rapid Support Forces, have targeted and continue to
target civilians in Darfur. That includes indiscriminate
shooting, the looting and burning ofvillages and sexual
and gender-based violence, among other crimes.

As noted by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Pramila Patten, in her statement on the Sudan
yesterday, the Rapid Support Forces have "consistently
been listed by the Secretary-General in his annual report
on conflict-related sexual violence". Let us not forget
that the Rapid Support Forces came from the militia
known as the Janjaweed. This militia was responsible
for a conflict which the United Nations estimates
left 300,000 people dead and 2.5 million displaced.
It should be of great concern to us all that the Rapid
Support Forces currently occupy most of the team sites
that UNAMID has vacated to date. The Transitional
Military Council has shown no signs of abiding by
previous agreements on the handover of UNAMID
team sites for civilian use. As Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix stated, it has gone so far as to explicitly demand
by decree that UNAMID's remaining team sites be
given to the Rapid Support Forces.

UNAMID team sites must not be handed over to
the Rapid Support Forces. That would not only violate
existing agreements on the handover of the sites, as
well as United Nations principles, financial rules and
regulations, it would also be grossly negligent. We
would risk enabling violence against civilians. Since
the events of 11 April, Darfur has witnessed a spike
in violence in camps for internally displaced persons,
intercommunal clashes and attacks on humanitarian
actors. This week, UNAMID verified intercommunal
clashes in central Darfur that resulted in the deaths
of 17 people, 15 injured and more than 100 houses
burned. Following the incident, UNAMID plans to
intensify its confidence-building measures to promote
intercommunal dialogue. That is just one example of
the important role that UNAMID continues to play in
Darfur, despite its limited footprint.

The other obvious impact of the wider situation is
on the Darfur peace process, which is currently stalled.
The Transitional Military Council previously stated that
resolving the Sudan's internal conflicts would be its top
priority, and at the time that was a welcome statement.
However, its recent actions severely undermine that
commitment. The United Kingdom therefore calls on the
military authorities to undertake confidence-building
measures, including agreeing to an independent and
transparent investigation of the violence in Khartoum.

The United Kingdom remains committed to the
transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding in
Darfur, and if it is to succeed a number of conditions
should be met. UNAMID's departure must be
undertaken responsibly, without creating security
and protection vacuums. For peacebuilding to be
sustainable, the international community requires a
willing and able partner in the host State. Unfortunately,
the current conditions do not lend themselves to that.
As a result, we in the Council have a responsibility
to step back, take stock of the current situation and
consider how that affects the assumptions that we have
all previously expressed and shared about UNAMID's
immediate future.

I would like to say that as we have been since
UNAMID first deployed to Darfur 15 years ago,
the United Kingdom remains firmly committed to
supporting efforts to build peace and stability in
Darfur, and that commitment guides our approach to
UNAMID's mandate renewal. The United Kingdom
and Germany believe that the most prudent approach
would be a technical rollover of UNAMID's mandate,
which would provide time for progress on the broader
political situation. It would give time for the issue
regarding the handover of UNAMID's team sites to
be resolved, and it would enable the United Nations
and the African Union to develop a political strategy
to address the outstanding challenges that will remain
following UNAMID's departure.

I take note of the communique of the African
Union issued yesterday, and in particular its clear
rejection of any handover of assets to the Rapid Support
Forces under any circumstances, and its demand that
the decree issued by the Transitional Military Council
be repealed. Along with Germany, we will engage with
all our colleagues on the Council and especially our
African Union friends with regard to the details of the
proposed technical rollover.

In conclusion, we will be watching the actions ofthe
Transitional Military Council in the coming days and
weeks. It still has a choice to make. The international
community should be united in demanding that it make
the right choice. That would require immediate steps
to establish a civilian-led transitional authority that in
turn would pave the way for peace in Darfur. Moreover,
it has an obligation to the people of the Sudan, who have
shown tremendous bravery and perseverance in their
dignified and legitimate demands for a better tomorrow.

