Mr. Michon (France) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to thank our three speakers for their briefings and to reiterate France's full support for the Special Representative. I would like to stress four points. First, France is concerned about the stalemate in relations between the Somali Federal Government and certain federal member states, which has lasted morethan 18 months and is a major obstacle to the completion of crucial projects for Somalia. Dialogue must resume immediately, particularly between the Somali federal authorities and the authorities of Jubaland and Puntland. In that connection, we welcome the mediation efforts undertaken in December by the United Nations, the African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the European Union, but regret that the Somali authorities did not follow up on them. Secondly, with regard to the 2020 and 2021 elections, France takes note of the enactment of the electoral law. While that is a positive step in furtherance of the commitments made at the latest Somalia Partnership Forum, uncertainties remain regarding key issues, in particular with regard to the definition of electoral constituencies, the representation of federal member states and the implementation of the 30 per cent quota for women, whose full and effective participation is essential. Those uncertainties must be quickly clarified so that the 2020 and 2021 elections can be held on schedule, in a peaceful, inclusive and transparent manner, and based on the principle of one-person, one-vote. We also call on the Somali authorities to broaden the democratic space so as to enable the participation of all political parties and civil society, and to lift all restrictions on the freedoms of expression and assembly. Thirdly, with regard to the security situation, France remains concerned about the frequency of attacks by Al-Shabaab, particularly in Mogadishu. In that context, we note that it is critical to continue to implement the security transition plan from the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) to the Somali security forces. The Somali federal authorities must therefore step up their efforts if they hope to control the entire territory, including through the implementation of a credible force-generation plan and the integration of regional forces into the Somali National Army. With regard to AMISOM in particular, France is of the view that the European Union must of course continue to provide the Mission with financial support, but that, in return, the Somali federal authorities must speed up the implementation of security reforms and resume their cooperation with the federal member States. In that connection, we stand ready to participate actively in the discussions on future international engagement in Somalia after 2021. Those discussions must include all actors involved in Somalia. Fourthly, with regard to climate change, France welcomes the briefing delivered by the Director of the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI). It is evident that climate change is a major factor in the conflict in Somalia. As explained by the SIPRI representative, episodes of drought followed by floods and, more recently, the invasion of locusts, both caused by climate disruption, significant affect Somalia's humanitarian and security situation. As in many other places affected by climate change, the increase in the number of internally displaced persons and forced population displacements, combined with the scarcity of natural resources and food insecurity, are exacerbating tensions between displaced people and host communities and stoke the flames of intercommunal rivalries. Unfortunately, this situation will likely recur in other regions of the world. That is why we believe that conflict prevention must fully integrate an analysis of the security impacts of climate change. In that context, we call on the United Nations to conduct a periodic analysis of the security risks of climate change throughout the world - not only areas of conflict - based on information provided by United Nations agencies and on their capacity for conflict analysis. As SIPRI did in the case of Somalia, such analyses must include recommendations for preventive measures to be implemented, first and foremost by the national authorities but also by development partners, regional organizations and United Nations agencies.
