The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Korea. I thank a number of representatives for their
kindness in allowing me to precede them.

The rising prevalence of intra-State conflicts since
the end of the cold war is posing a new type of threat to
international peace and security. These conflicts have
frequently entailed massive flows of refugees and
internally displaced persons. Moreover, with this alarming
explosion of displaced people, a dangerous new trend has
also emerged. Refugees are not just an unintended
consequence of conflict. They are intentionally being
created by the warring parties themselves. With disturbing
frequency, innocent civilians in these conflicts are being
targeted by combatants on a massive scale and subjected
to atrocities, intimidation and other gross violations of
international humanitarian norms.

As we all know well, in Bosnia and Herzegovina
combatants deliberately sought to drive civilians from
their homes. In places such as eastern Zaire militants have
also been known to use refugees as cover, mingling
among the innocents to exploit the sanctuary offered by
refugee camps and intimidating genuine refugees from
returning to their homes.

 

Needless to say, the ultimate solution to such conflicts
is the achievement of a negotiated settlement and the
re-establishment of national authority. Given that such a
comprehensive political solution is often not easily
forthcoming, however, the provision of humanitarian
assistance to refugees becomes all the more pressing.
Moreover, doing so in vulnerable conditions is a dangerous
task indeed. Recent experiences have shown that there is
clearly an urgent need to improve the protection of refugees
and more effectively ensure that humanitarian assistance
can be safely delivered to them. The Republic of Korea is
deeply concerned about the implications of this problem for
international peace and security, and we have therefore
taken the initiative to hold an open debate on this issue.

Today we are searching for an answer to the question
of how the Council can improve its support for
humanitarian assistance in conflict situations. So far the
Council's reaction has varied and has involved a certain
amount of trial and error, but the overall trend is towards
greater engagement. The Republic of Korea welcomes this
trend and firmly believes that the Council's involvement in
the protection of humanitarian assistance can be handled
with greater consistency, efficiency and effectiveness. In
this regard, we would like to present several suggestions.

First and foremost, in the event that the Council
decides that a humanitarian crisis involving refugees
requires a peacekeeping operation, the Council should
carefully ensure that no mismatches exist between the
operation's mandate and capabilities and the expectations
invested in it. Some lessons in this regard can be learned
from the United Nations experience in Srebrenica, one of
the designated safe areas in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
Council should exercise particular caution and care in
defining peacekeeping mandates in situations where even
the minimum conditions for peace do not exist.

Secondly, closer coordination among the various
United Nations bodies and agencies involved, as well as
between them and other agencies and regional
organizations, would certainly enhance the international
community's capability to protect or provide humanitarian
assistance to refugees and other civilians in any given
cr1s1s.

We believe that the Security Council has a critical role
to play in all this through its power to define the mandate
of peacekeeping operations tied to the crisis and to give
political guidance, when requested, to the special
representative of the Secretary-General. The role of the
special representative of the Secretary-General is
particularly important, for he or she is the figure charged
with ensuring that all the different United Nations and
other bodies in the field discharge their respective tasks
in such a manner that they complement one another.
Armed with clear political guidance form the Council, the
special representative of the Secretary-General may be in
a better position to respond efficiently to fast-changing
conditions in the field.

Thirdly, further efforts should be made to combat
the prevailing culture of impunity that breeds disregard
for international humanitarian law. Although a number of
Council resolutions and presidential statements have been
issued as warnings to parties suspected of violating basic
standards of international humanitarian law, these have
not had the desired impact. In furtherance of these efforts,
the Security Council should consider imposing further
punitive measures against violators, such as targeted
sanctions.

The Council could also consider establishing ad hoc
international criminal tribunals endowed with stronger
powers to enforce their decisions. For instance, although
the International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia has
already contributed significantly to the advancement of
humanitarian law, its lack of enforcement power has left
the most prominent individuals indicted still at large.

Another important legal issue related to the
protection of humanitarian assistance is how to strengthen
the legal framework that is designed to protect the safety
and security of United Nations and other personnel
engaged in peacekeeping and humanitarian activities. The
scope of the existing legal framework could be expanded
to cover other categories of personnel beyond United
Nations and associated personnel.

A fourth suggestion is for the Council to place
greater emphasis on improving its preventive capacity.
Ultimately, crisis prevention always costs less than crisis
response. Although we do not have a detailed blueprint to
propose in this regard, a more systematic employment of
various mechanisms, such as early warning systems
including fact-finding missions, and preventive
deployment, may warrant further consideration. These
might not be easy tasks, considering that special care
should be taken to maintain a balance between the need
for such preventive activities and respect for sovereignty,
not to mention the matter of financial implications.

Last but not least, we believe that the Security
Council should improve its ability to react rapidly to

 

humanitarian crises once they erupt. In this regard, we
welcome the progress that has been made in creating a
United Nations rapid-deployment capability for
peacekeeping, including civilian and humanitarian
components, and would like to encourage the Secretariat
and Member States to further accelerate the process of
creating such a capability, including stand-by arrangements.

We cannot overemphasize the need to devise a
comprehensive response to the new challenges to
international peace and security posed by massive threats to
the security of people. We therefore believe that today we
have started an important deliberation on the need for
expanding the involvement of the international community
in meeting such challenges.

In closing, I would like to express my appreciation to
all the delegations and representatives of international
organizations taking part in today's debate. We sincerely
hope that our discussions will pave the way for a more
integrated and coordinated approach by the international
community to ensure protection for humanitarian assistance
to refugees and others in conflict situations.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

