Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): I thank
Ambassador Momen and Ambassador Vilovic' for their
briefings.

Last year we witnessed both progress and setbacks
in the peacebuilding efforts of the United Nations.
Liberia, Sierra Leone and Burundi have achieved
tangible results in their efforts to develop a national
reconciliation strategy, including the successful
conduct of elections and resource mobilization for
a new poverty-reduction strategy. By contrast, the
Central African Republic and Guinea-Bissau relapsed
into conflict and have yet to restore constitutional order.

Tolstoy once wrote that happy families are all alike,
but every unhappy family is unhappy in its own way.
Similarly, the ways in which peace is maintained often
resemble one another, while when it is disturbed, it is
disturbed in different ways for different reasons. That
is why a one-size-fits-all solution cannot work for every
conflict. Peacebuilding is constantly evolving, a process
informed by trial and error. It is therefore important
to draw lessons from both successes and failures. It
goes without saying that peacemaking, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding overlap and intertwine with each
other. For peacebuilding to be effective, therefore, early
peacebuilding tasks should be carefully incorporated
into all multidimensional peacekeeping mandates from
the beginning. Since a particular success story does
not guarantee the same result in another case, every
situation requires its own tailored prescription.

That need for a flexible response, however, presents
the Security Council with a dilemma. The instruments
that the Charter of the United Nations grants to
the Council must be used with greater consistency
and predictability. That is where the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) and the Security Council can
find room for mutual cooperation in the service of a
common goal. The PBC's architecture enables a flexible
response to each specific situation through its platform
of country-specific configurations. The Commission
can be more receptive to the particular requests of
countries on its agenda and can work with them
through its unique advocacy role, building partnerships
and marshalling resources, while the Security Council
focuses on its primary responsibility for international
peace and security. The PBC is a fund-raiser, promoter,
counsellor and adviser. In that regard, the essence of
cooperation between the Council and the PBC lies in
their division of labour.

The transition from political mission to country
team is the phase that requires the greatest cooperation
between the two bodies. In order for a transition
to proceed coherently, national development plans
must be made in consultation with the Government,
development partners and civil society, starting with
the initial planning stage. Resolution 2097 (2013),
adopted last month, extending the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone, is
a good example; the role of the PBC in the gradual
drawdown of the political mission in Sierra Leone was
properly stressed.

All successful peacebuilding includes some
common factors: substantial progress in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) and security
sector reform (SSR); strong national ownership;
active regional engagement; and the strong support
of the international community. Support for SSR and
DDR should be a particular priority in post-conflict
peacebuilding. We have often witnessed how post-
conflict societies with less successful SSR and DDR
processes quickly relapse into conflict. We hope that
the Secretary-General's report on the assessment
of United Nations support for SSR, prepared by the
Inter-Agency Security Sector Reform Task Force, will
provide comprehensive and systematic direction for
future efforts.

The significance of national ownership cannot
be overemphasized. National actors should be
empowered to own and lead the peacebuilding
process. Without engagement at the grass-roots level,
resilient peacebuilding will be elusive. Democratic and
inclusive leadership is also indispensable for national
reconciliation. The United Nations should work together
with legitimate Governments with a view to integrating
peacebuilding efforts into their national development
strategies.

Development plans in a post-conflict society are
not sustainable without stable resources. We commend
the Chair Group's dialogue with senior officials of
the World Bank, and expect the PBC to continue its
cooperation with financial institutions, especially the
World Bank and the African Development Bank. As
suggested in the New Deal for Engagement in Fragile
States, the product of the Fourth High-level Forum on
Aid Effectiveness in Busan in 2011, we should continue
to develop an integrated development strategy and to
align those resources to get results.

My delegation hopes that the Security Council
will continue to cooperate with the PBC to maximize
the achievements of peacebuilding based on mutual
comparative advantage.

