Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): We join
other delegations in thanking the Secretary-General for
his most recent report (S/2010/85) on the United

Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT).
In addition, we extend our thanks to His Excellency
Mr. Jose Luis Guterres, Deputy Prime Minister of the
Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste, and to
Ms. Ameerah Haq, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Timor-Leste, and express our
appreciation to her for both the current and future
proposals on the mandate of UNMIT. We also extend
our thanks to Mr. Ian Martin, former Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Timor-Leste and head of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste, for
his leadership resulting in the comprehensive findings
and the recommendations of the technical assessment
mission.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has aligned itself with
the statement that will be delivered later on by the
representative of the European Union.

Allow me now to comment on the points we
consider crucial for the joint efforts by the United
Nations and Timor-Leste Government to achieve
sustainable peace, stability and prosperity in the
country.

The positive Timorese political undertakings in
2007 and 2009 should serve as a springboard for the
upcoming municipal and national elections. We share
the view that the national and municipal elections to be
organized in 2010 and 2012 will be of critical
importance. In this context, we commend the domestic
authorities for the successful organization and
completion of the elections in 2009. Furthermore,
President Ramos-Horta's recent pledge to engage with
national and local leaders on issues of national interest
may be viewed as a constructive prelude to fostering
political dialogue. In this light, the recent activities
such as the "Road to peace and national unity"
dialogues as well as the "Dili, City of Peace" campaign
are noteworthy. Bosnia and Herzegovina believes that
such efforts may serve as encouraging indications of an
additional strengthening of the security and justice
sectors.

Strengthening security sector reform is crucial for
sustainable peace and security in Timor-Leste. A clear
delineation of responsibilities between the Policia
Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL) and the Falintil-
Forcas Armadas de Defesa de Timor-Leste (F-FDTL)
has to be defined, and a comprehensive reform process
of both should be carefully developed and completed.

While we commend the process of resumption by
the PNTL of the primary responsibilities for police
operations in several districts since May 2009, we are
also hopeful that the rest of the country's districts will
follow through by the end of 2010. The appropriate
completion of the certification process thus remains
essential, as does further capacity-building of the
PNTL at the national and district levels. Bearing these
commitments in mind, we agree that there is a need for
a carefully mapped-out approach to the drawdown of
UNMIT police, taking into account all the lessons
learned from the 2006 and 2008 events. We look
forward to hearing more about the UNMIT team's
plans, supporting the approach explained in the
comprehensive report of the technical assessment
mission.

We are deeply convinced that only truth and
justice can lead the country towards full reconciliation
and prosperity. We commend the consensus achieved
among all stakeholders to institutionalize the
recommendations of the Commission for Reception,
Truth and Reconciliation and the Commission for Truth
and Friendship regarding investigations of crimes
against humanity and other serious crimes committed
during the crisis. The more successful the fight against
impunity is, the better the prospects for true
reconciliation and national unity will be.

Socio-economic problems must be addressed in
an effective and coordinated manner, with all
stakeholders on board, including the private sector,
civil society and foreign donors. Infrastructure
projects, foreign investment and an improvement in
youth employment will contribute, inter alia, to poverty
reduction and the promotion of sustainable economic
growth.

We are pleased to note the significant
improvements in dealing with internally displaced
persons. Bosnia and Herzegovina is aware of the
challenges that large numbers of internally displaced
persons entail. The reintegration of internally displaced
persons is linked both with achieving and maintaining
lasting peace and with strengthening democratic
institutions and processes.

However, the slow progress on the gender and
human rights fronts is a matter of concern. This is
principally significant in terms of domestic and sexual
violence against women and children. It is crucial that
domestic violence and sexual assault cases be formally

10-2486]
prosecuted in accordance with the new Criminal Code.
In this vein, we also encourage the continuation of
programmes for the prevention of gender-based
violence, under the auspices of the United Nations
Development Fund for Women and UNMIT.

Finally, Bosnia and Herzegovina commends the
effective interconnectivity that the technical
assessment mission has undertaken with relevant
United Nations entities regarding its review of progress
and challenges in Timor-Leste. We are of the view that
the technical assessment mission's current findings and
recommendations are valuable for paving the future
road towards stability and progress in Timor-Leste.
With this in mind, Bosnia and Herzegovina supports
the extension of the UNMIT mandate for another
12 months.

