Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to express our deep
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for holding this
open debate. We would also like to thank the three
Chairmen of the Security Council Committees for their
detailed briefings. Those Committees form the
cornerstone of counter-terrorism at the global level. We
would also like to commend the continuous progress in
cooperation and constructive dialogue between the
groups of experts and those Committees, enhancing the
effectiveness of their mandates and the influence of
their activities in the field.

With regard to the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), we support its adoption of a
transparent, strategic approach to its work,
concentrating on raising awareness of the importance
of that work within the United Nations and
contributing to the rationalization of its working
methods. We also support the Committee in
enumerating the major challenges facing the Member
States in fully implementing resolution 1373 (2001)
included in the report of the Executive Directorate,
particularly with regard to the urgent and necessary
human and financial resources and the basic
infrastructure for national capacity-building.

We believe that taking a regional and subregional
approach to facilitate the provision of technical
assistance to Member States, upon their requests,
would enhance rational management of available
resources and increase the opportunity for coordination
and exchange of expertise in combating terrorism
among neighbouring countries.

At the national level, Morocco has continued its
intensified efforts to implement resolution 1373
(2001), particularly the practical parts regarding
measures to counter money laundering. We established
a special unit on financial transactions in 2009 that
receives and deals with the reports submitted to it by
banking institutions on suspicious financial
transactions. It has begun to respond to those requests
with a view to joining the Egmont Group of Financial
Intelligence Units in 2011.

Furthermore, all the relevant aspects of
implementing resolution 1624 (2005) are in complete
accordance with all the efforts by the Kingdom of
Morocco in adopting a comprehensive approach to
counter-terrorism that focuses on and deals with the
factors that contribute to the spread of extremist
ideologies and ideas.

With regard to the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities, we welcome the efforts by that
Committee in reviewing the Consolidated List to make
it more accurate, credible and effective. Although we
note the progress made in order to implement the
provisions of paragraph 25 of resolution 1267 (1999),
we believe further efforts are required to enhance
transparency and contacts with concerned States. We
believe that the Consolidated List on which the
sanctions regime depends must remain accurate and
flexible in order to cope with changing developments
on the ground.

In that regard, we would like to express our deep
concern over the spread of terrorist activities in the
Sahara and coastal areas and the intensification of
trafficking activities in drugs, humans and small arms,
which finances terrorist activities that affect the region
and beyond and represent a grave danger to the entire
area. At the national level, we have continued our
tireless efforts to adapt our legislation to our
international commitments, particularly in monitoring
dual-use export material and in accordance with the
free trade agreement that we concluded in recent years.
We will continue to be an active and serious partner
with the international community by making every
possible effort to establish constructive and effective
international cooperation in order to eradicate
terrorism.

