Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we wish to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas,
for his valuable briefing on the latest developments in
the Sahel region. I also wish to commend the efforts
and activities of the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) for having provided
support to countries in the region in which elections
recently took place, for supporting the good offices
of Governments in the region with a View to reducing
tensions and differences between States, and for
playing a key role in promoting cooperation among
Governments in the face of security challenges.

I should like to focus on three key issues: the
security situation, the humanitarian and development
situation, and the role of UNOWAS.

First, with regard to the security situation, we
wish to once again highlight the deteriorating security
situation in the Sahel and Lake Chad basin in recent
times, in particular the terrorist attacks carried out by
armed groups in Burkina Faso, the Niger, Nigeria and
Mali. Despite the positive developments in West Africa
and the Sahel mentioned in the Secretary-General's
latest report (S/20l9/549), the increasing number
of terrorist acts and suicide bombings perpetrated
by armed groups, claiming the lives of hundreds of
civilians, have negatively affected peace and stability
in a number of countries in the region. It is therefore
incumbent upon Governments in the region and the
international community as a whole to cooperate with
each other and intensify their efforts in addressing
security shortcomings.

We call on the Multinational Joint Task Force
and the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel) to continue their efforts in combating the
terrorist organization Boko Haram and other armed
terrorist groups, and we further encourage the G-5
Sahel Joint Force to capitalize on the support provided
by the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, in accordance with
resolution 2480 (2019), which provides for extended
support to all participating States. We also welcome
the role of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) in coordinating regional efforts
to combat common threats across the region. In that
regard, we recall the final communique issued by the
ECOWAS in Abuja on 29 June, which emphasizes the
importance of fostering cooperation and the exchange
of information among States in the region, with a View
to combating terrorism. We also look forward to the
convening of an ECOWAS Extraordinary Summit on
terrorism to be held in Burkina Faso in the near future.
The State of Kuwait supports all regional initiatives
aimed at fostering cooperation among the countries of
the region and ensuring their stability and prosperity.

Secondly, with respect to the humanitarian and
development situation in the region, we must draw
a link between the humanitarian situation and the
deteriorating security situation. Owing to increased
suicide bombings, armed attacks against farmers
and herders, piracy and other maritime crimes, there
has been an overall increase in hunger, poverty and
epidemics, and the number of refugees and displaced
persons has increased across the region. In addition, as
a result of the violence, there has been a shortage of
basic human services. For example, it is estimated that
this year some 14 million people will require urgent
humanitarian assistance in Burkina Faso, Mali, the
Niger and Nigeria.

I would like to commend the work being carried out
by the various United Nations agencies to alleviate the
suffering of refugees and others in need. We thank the
Governments of countries in the region that have hosted
refugees and urge all parties to commit to upholding
the principles of human rights and ensuring unimpeded
access to humanitarian assistance.

With regard to overcoming the various challenges
facing the region, a comprehensive development
approach must be adopted with a focus on capacity-
building, strengthening Government infrastructures
and fostering economic growth. Confronting these
challenges is the only way to address the root causes of
conflict in the region. Security and development have
always been closely linked to the wider development
and prosperity of societies.

Thirdly, on the role of UNOWAS, the Office plays
a critical role in developing the security sector and
supporting political processes in West Africa and the
Sahel. We have taken note of the significant efforts of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and his team. We commend the work of UNOWAS
in supporting States' good offices in their mediation
efforts to resolve disputes and support electoral
processes across the region. We hope that these efforts
will be expanded to include building security and
development capacities in the Sahel and enabling States
to combat organized crime and violence. We commend
the role of UNOWAS in this regard.

