Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): As the representative
of a country that participates in the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) air strikes against the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, I join the delegation of the United
States in expressing our deep regret about the incident
involving the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade, likewise on the
assumption that the incident will be confirmed to have been
caused by NATO action.

Collateral damage is damage caused by bombs or
missiles that have gone astray. It is always deplorable, and
it is especially disturbing if it entails loss of life among
innocent civilians. It is, however, by definition, accidental
and not intentional. Accordingly, collateral damage to an
embassy building is not essentially different from other
collateral damage. As the Embassy was not deliberately
targeted, the accident cannot be regarded as a Violation of
diplomatic immunity, let alone as an attack on the integrity
of the country concerned.

All collateral damage is regrettable, and it is a deeply
disturbing thought that air strikes in which my country
participates have led to loss of life among innocent
civilians. It is equally disturbing to realize that Belgrade's
ethnic cleansing of Kosovo, which was already well under
way by 23 March, has enormously accelerated and
intensified since our air strikes began. Yet we do not waver
in our conviction that we had no choice but to launch these
air strikes after Mr. Milosevic had continued to ignore the
Security Council's demands contained in its resolutions of
23 September and 24 October 1998.

The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
Mrs. Ogata, has confirmed that last year more than a
quarter of all asylum requests in Europe were made by
people from Kosovo and that up to 23 March her Office
was providing assistance to 400,000 people displaced or
otherwise affected by fighting inside the province and to
90,000 refugees and displaced people outside Kosovo.

It is true that here are many more refugees today, but
no civilized Government could have foreseen the scope, the
meticulous preparation and the sheer ferocity of Belgrade's
determination to drive out the ethnic Albanians. We cannot
be held responsible for the fact that Mr. Milosevic seized
this opportunity to accelerate and try to complete his final
solution to the Kosovo problem.

We accept our share of responsibility for the tragic
events that are occurring in this conflict, but we totally
reject any suggestion of equivalence or even comparison
between the accidental casualties caused by our air strikes
and the systematic killings, executions, rape, physical
abuse, intimidation, harassment and burning of houses, for
which the regime in Belgrade must assume full
responsibility.

