Mr. Faaborg-Andersen (Denmark): My thanks
go to Mr. Daudi Ngelautwa Mwakawago for his
briefing. Today is a real occasion for optimism. The
departure of the peacekeeping force, the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), is good
news for the people of Sierra Leone and their
international partners. It underscores how far the
country has come since the early days of UNAMSIL:
from teetering on the brink of complete State collapse
to making solid progress towards a fully functioning
State.

UNAMSIL itself has undergone a transformation
from a peacekeeping to a peacebuilding operation. We
thank the Secretary-General and his Special
Representatives, in particular Mr. Mwakawago, as well
as all the troop-contributing countries, which have
helped make the Mission a success. We should like
also to thank the United Kingdom, which came to the
Mission's rescue at a particularly critical juncture. The
importance of the British over-the-horizon security
guarantee for the stabilization of Sierra Leone must not
be underestimated.

UNAMSIL has created conditions for stability
and has assisted the Government in its commendable
efforts to tackle the consequences of war. A good part
of UNAMSIL's accomplishment lies in the innovative
methods employed. Extracting and disseminating
lessons learned from UNAMSIL would be helpful for
existing and future peace operations, including the
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) next door.
We are hopeful that the new United Nations Integrated
Office in Sierra Leone will provide an equally strong
role model for the next peacebuilding phase and will
succeed in providing the necessary support to the
Government, together with the country's development
partners.

Looking ahead, the most delicate phase will be
from now until the elections in 2007; there remain a
good number of unfinished aspects of the peace
process. These challenges essentially relate back to the
sources of the war, including the cynical manipulation
by unscrupulous politicians of basic human needs:
livelihood, security, fairness and respect. The key
objective for the next peacebuilding phase must be to
facilitate the development of Sierra Leone society in
order to ensure that such basic needs can be met
without resort to violence, and that self-serving
spoilers are denied the space in which to operate.

A continued successful transition will depend
also on the Government's commitment to good
governance and the principle of zero tolerance for
corruption and cronyism; on the implementation of the
poverty reduction strategy paper, the rule of law and
gender equality; and on the capacity of the security
agencies to act in a professional and efficient manner.
The massive youth unemployment is of particular
concern. Young men without proper employment and
with despair for the future are a recipe for instability
and could far too easily be manipulated by political
players.

Also in that regard, the Special Court for Sierra
Leone provides an important reason for optimism.
Here, justice is served against those who used to be
untouchable. Establishing the rule of law in a society
which has hardly known it before is important for
reconciliation and is a key step towards confronting
new attempts at destabilization.

Finally, Sierra Leone's prospects depend on those
of its neighbours, as highlighted by the Secretary-
General. It is vital to revive the Mano River Union,
strengthen the Economic Community of West African
States and harmonize the efforts of the United Nations
agencies across borders. Robust development cannot be
achieved in a vacuum, but entails viable cross-border
collaboration and trade.

Let me conclude on a more general note. Despite

the challenges still facing the country and its
international partners, Sierra Leone is an example of
what a concerted international community can do about
State failure - and it can do a lot, as we have seen.
The cost of UNAMSIL, at one point the largest United
Nations operation, has been considerable. But the cost
of doing nothing would have been much higher. It
would have been devastating not only for Sierra Leone
but also for the region and beyond. If anything, the
wars in Sierra Leone and neighbouring Liberia have
shown that State failure is deadly and contagious. They
have shown why the United Nations needs to continue
its peacekeeping and peacebuilding effort, and to
become even better at it.

