My delegation would like to thank Deputy Special Envoy Matar and Acting Assistant Secretary-General and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator Rajasingham for their briefings on the political and humanitarian situations in Syria. We once again would like to express our appreciation to the United Nations and its humanitarian partners for continuing to provide life-saving assistances to the Syrian people, despite challenging circumstances on the ground. Indonesia also commends Special Envoy Pedersen and his team's strong commitment to pursuing peace in Syria. I wish to highlight three points. First, humanitarian responses must be scaled up urgently, particularly with the increasing cases of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and the onset of winter. On top of the economic crisis and the threat of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Syrian people must also deal with the harsh and challenging winter season. Many people in Syria are already displaced, with millions of families living in inadequate and crowded shelters. We can only imagine the hardships they are facing during winter in displacement. In addition, the winter rainfall has damaged internally displaced persons' sites across north-west Syria, which has worsened the already dire situation. It is therefore crucial to ensure the timely delivery of humanitarian assistance to civilians in need. In this context, my delegation believes that the combination of cross-line and cross-border humanitarian access is important to guarantee that humanitarian assistance reaches people in need throughout Syria through the most direct routes and in accordance with the humanitarian principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence. Secondly, we welcome the agreement by both co-Chairs with regard to the next sessions of the Constitutional Committee. We are pleased to hear that the fourth session of the Constitutional Committee is scheduled to be held next Monday in Geneva and to be followed by the fifth session in January 2021. Indonesia sincerely hopes that all relevant parties will continue to engage in a constructive manner in order to achieve substantive and concrete progress under the auspices of the United Nations and in line with resolution 2254 (2015). That will be a significant step in ensuring a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political process. It is also essential that all parties to the conflict and those with influence over them reach an inclusive agreement so as to resolve the conflict peacefully, as well as to avoid further suffering of the Syrian people. Thirdly, it is imperative to protect civilians and cease hostilities. We are particularly concerned about the intensifying hostilities in some areas in Syria. Indonesia urges all relevant parties to cease hostilities and immediately comply with their obligations under international law, including international humanitarian law. Maintaining calm in Syria and respecting the ceasefire agreement are key. The Syrian people cannot afford any more tensions or conflict in this already very difficult situation. A military solution is not the answer to resolving the conflict in this country. Let me take this opportunity to express our condolences on the passing away of the former Foreign Minister Walid Al-Moallem. In conclusion, I wish to emphasize the importance for the Council to unite around that common humanitarian goal to alleviate the suffering of the Syrian people and to support the mandate of the Special Envoy to assist the country in achieving a comprehensive political settlement.
