Ms. Pillay: I thank the Council for the invitation
to brief it on human rights developments in Libya. I
welcome the ongoing attention given by the Council to
this fragile country situation.

Through their courage and resilience, the Libyan
people have emerged from 42 years of systematic
human rights violations. In the weeks that followed the
declaration of liberation, the challenge before them has
been to create the conditions necessary for achieving
long-term stability and security and to ensure respect
for the rule of law and human rights. In that regard, the
development and implementation of inclusive,
transparent and victim-centred transitional justice
policies is essential.

Importantly, the interim authorities have
repeatedly expressed their commitment to human rights
and have taken some encouraging steps. In November
2011, Interim Prime Minister Abdurrahim El-keib told
the media that his Government would "build a nation
that respects human rights and does not accept the
abuse of human rights". He noted that they need time
to put that into practice. As Mr. Martin said, in
December the National Council for Public Liberties
and Human Rights was established.
12-21455
In addition, the authorities have begun
undertaking the arduous task of legal reform and the
adoption of new legislation. Of relevance in that regard
is the adoption of a law on transitional justice, as yet to
be made public, on which the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) provided extensive comments through our
staff in the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL). I commend the Libyan authorities for their
sense of urgency in addressing pressing issues by
means of strengthening the legal framework. Before
new laws are enacted, care needs to be exercised to
ensure their compliance with international human
rights standards and to undertake wide consultation on
their provisions with all relevant actors and
stakeholders.

At the same time, the human rights situation
remains of concern and requires increased vigilance by,
and sustained assistance from, the international
community. Undoubtedly, immense challenges lie
ahead. The interim Government still does not exercise
effective control over the revolutionary brigades, and
that has human rights repercussions in a number of
areas. Light and heavy weaponry in the hands of such
brigades pose a threat to public security and the
protection of the human rights of the population.

A related area that I am extremely concerned
about is the conditions of detention and treatment of
detainees held by various revolutionary brigades. The
International Committee of the Red Cross visited more
than 8,500 detainees, in approximately 60 places of
detention, between March and December 2011. The
majority of the detainees are accused of being
Al-Qadhafi loyalists and include a large number of
sub-Saharan African nationals. The lack of oversight
by the central authorities creates an environment
conducive to torture and ill-treatment. My staff have
received alarming reports that that is happening in the
places of detention that they have visited.

It is therefore urgent that all detention centres be
brought under the control of the Ministry of Justice and
the General Prosecutor's Office. Moreover, a structure
and process for the judicial screening of detainees
should be put in place immediately so that those
detainees held without any legal basis can be released,
while others receive a fair trial.

The interim Government has made some effort to
address the existing legal vacuum. For example, on

29 November 2011, the Minister of the Interior issued
a decision stipulating which authorities have
jurisdiction to arrest, detain and investigate. In
addition, in December, the Minister of Justice reported
that the judicial police had assumed control over six
detention facilities. However, detainees continue to be
held in unacceptable circumstances outside any legal
framework or the protection of the State.

The situation of persons subjected to internal
forced and involuntary displacement also remains an
area of concern. The United Nations estimates that, as
of January, 60 per cent of Libyans have been able to
return to their homes in the towns of Bani Walid and
Sirte since the end of the fighting. However, several
other groups are unable to return home for fear of
reprisals. For example, some 35,000 residents of
Tawergha who are accused by residents of the nearby
town of Misrata of involvement in serious crimes are
housed in camps or other accommodation across the
country. Many of the men are held by revolutionary
brigades in detention, where many have reported being
subject to torture.

Let us not forget the situation of women in Libya.
Despite some gains for women's rights in previous
years, inequality and discrimination in many areas of
women's life persist in law and practice. Diverse views
exist within Libyan society as to the status of women
and their role in society. In the light of the recent
decision of the National Transitional Council not to
stipulate a minimum percentage for the representation
of women in the National Congress, I would like to
emphasize that facilitating their stronger representation
in public life will be an essential step towards ensuring
that the revolution brings meaningful achievements for
women and girls across the country.

In addition to addressing ongoing human rights
concerns, Libyans are faced with the enormous
challenge of addressing past abuses. Those include
violations committed during the former regime, as well
as violations of international human rights and
international humanitarian law committed during the
conflict, as documented in the first report of the
international commission of inquiry on Libya,
mandated by the Human Rights Council (see A/HRC/17/44).

We must not forget that the Libyan people rose up
in order to remove a tyrannical ruler whose regime
committed atrocious human rights violations against its

people. Torture, unlawful killings and enforced
disappearance were widely practised. The families of
the disappeared, including over 1,200 prisoners
allegedly killed in the 1996 Abu Salim prison
massacre, continue to wait for the truth and for justice
to be done. Acts amounting to the mere exercise of
freedom of expression and association frequently
resulted in the death penalty, including after unfair
trials before the People's Court and, later, the State
Security Court.

I commend the Libyan authorities' stated
commitment to transitional justice processes and
mechanisms, as they would enable Libya to deal with
such abuses. We stand ready to provide assistance.
Those processes should lead to the legislative and
institutional reforms, including within the security
sector, required to ensure justice, accountability and
reparations for victims and guarantees of
non-repetition, in compliance with international human
rights standards. Moreover, international law requires
the prosecution of individuals who may be criminally
responsible for international crimes.

Furthermore, there remain outstanding questions
regarding possible civilian deaths resulting from NATO
operations. The commission of inquiry is currently
investigating such allegations. Any findings that it
reaches will be important in shedding light on the
extent to which NATO forces took all feasible
measures to protect civilians in all their military
operations. Information so far indicates that NATO
made efforts to keep civilian casualties to a minimum,
but where civilians have been killed and injured, the
Alliance should disclose information about all such
events and the remedial actions undertaken.

Current investigations by the commission also
seek to deepen initial findings into the question of
sexual violence, in particular, to ascertain the extent
and whether cases were linked to incitement by the
command of either side. I call upon all sides, including
NATO, to cooperate fully with the commission of
inquiry in the current final phase of their investigations
into those and other issues.

In that phase of the commission's investigations,
members of the Secretariat and the commissioners are
currently in Libya to conduct the last of three missions.
On 9 March, the commissioners will discuss the
findings of their final report with members of the
Human Rights Council.

Following the publication of that second report,
the focus should be on the implementation of all
recommendations issued by the commission. With the
support of my Office, the Human Rights Section within
UNSMIL, as mandated by the Council, will play an
important role in that regard.

In addition to providing Secretariat support to the
commission, in October, I sent two senior OHCHR
staff members to Tripoli, Benghazi and Misrata on a
one-week mission to assess needs and to assist in
setting the priorities of the human rights component
within UNSMIL. Particular attention was given to the
issues of transitional justice, detention, women's rights,
minorities, migrants, racism and xenophobia in their
discussions with Government representatives and
emerging civil society actors. With the establishment
of the Human Rights Section within UNSMIL, headed
by my representative, I deployed OHCHR staff
members on a temporary basis to bolster capacity. I
have initiated a consultancy to strengthen civil society
capacity in monitoring and advocating for human
rights protection.

Allow me to conclude by stressing the following
points. First, urgent steps need to be taken to put an
end to current abuses, particularly those occurring in
detention.

Secondly, I welcome the priority attention given
by the authorities to transitional justice processes and
mechanisms, and encourage them to expeditiously
make their commitment to transitional justice a reality.
The processes and mechanisms must address abuses
committed both by the former regime and by all actors
during the conflict, and must be established after an
informed national consultation.

Thirdly, in the major undertakings of the coming
weeks and months, the authorities should use civil
society activists and organizations, including women's
and youth groups, as a key resource in addressing a
range of social and political challenges. Thorough
consultations with civil society groups will be critical
in developing lasting solutions to today's challenges.

Finally, I would like to reiterate my Office's
commitment to continuing to support the Libyan
people in realizing their rights. Working together,
UNSMIL, the Human Rights Section and OHCHR
headquarters are ready to respond to requests for
technical assistance, for example, in the area of legal
and institutional reform; to help in consultation
processes; to build capacities, including those of key
State institutions, such as the police, the judiciary and
penitentiary institutions; and to monitor and report on
human rights developments.

Ultimately, the task of the Libyan people is to
forge their own future on a firm basis of respect for the
rule of law and international human rights standards.

