The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

I would like to remind members of the Council of
the objectives and suggested issues for this meeting.
Generally, this meeting will provide an unusual
opportunity to access critically the ways and means
used by the Security Council to fulfil its responsibility
in the maintenance of international peace and security.

More specifically, however, in keeping with the
annex to the letter circulated by Ambassador
Valdivieso, this meeting will attempt to reflect on the
particular experiences of the work of the Council
during the month of August that may contribute to
enhancing the quality and political relevance of the
work of the Council in the immediate future, and,
secondly, to reaffirm monthly presidencies as
interconnected and interdependent occurrences and not
as isolated happenings.

In that context, Council members may wish to
refer to lessons arising from the consideration of this
month's agenda as well as to procedural issues such as
the conduct of the work of the month - transparency,
the provisional programme and schedules - the
quality and pertinence of the oral briefings presented to
the Council by the Secretariat and, possibly, the
contents of the report of the Security Council to the
General Assembly. In addition, Council members may
wish to refer to the usefulness of meetings such as the
one convened this month on regional approaches to
conflict management in Africa.

I invite members of the Council to contribute to
the discussion with brief, frank, focused and pointed
statements, preferably on the issues outlined just a
moment ago.

As President of the Council, I must point out that
Colombia does not believe that this meeting is an
opportunity to reiterate national positions on
substantive items discussed during the month. With this
brief introduction I shall now give the floor to
members of the Council who have expressed a desire to
speak.

