Mr. Meece (Spoke in French): I am honoured to have
been given the opportunity to present to the Security
Council an overview of the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and on the work of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) in the
context of the report of the Secretary-General distributed
to the Council last week (S/20l3/96). Certain elements
of the current situation are encouraging, including the
relative continued weakness of the organization and
combatants of the Forces democratiques de liberation
du Rwanda (FDLR) in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

Nevertheless, I regret to inform the Council that the
general security situation in eastern part of the country
has continued to deteriorate since my last briefing
(see S/PV.6868). Worse yet, certain areas have seen a
significant deterioration in security and humanitarian
terms. I refer here to the situation in northern Katanga.
Moreover, it is my intention to focus the Council's
attention on the security situation and associated key
factors. Of course, I will briefly touch on certain other
important developments linked to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

(spoke in English)

The attention of both the Congolese authorities and
the international community has been focused mostly
on the mutiny originally started by Bosco Ntaganda
and now widely referred to as the Mouvement du
23 mars (M-23) rebellion. That attention is well merited.
The consequences of the rebellion arising both from the
direct action of the M-23 forces and the indirect effects
felt throughout North Kivu and neighbouring provinces
represent the most serious security threats to stability
in the region in general and the population in particular,
at least since I took up duties in Kinshasa in July 2010.

While there has been a general pause in M-23
offensive operations since its temporary occupation of
the provincial capital of Goma late last year, the M-23
has continued to consolidate its own administrative
structures in the portion ofNorth Kivu it occupies, with
reports of widespread violence and threats of violence
within that area, targeting local authorities or others who
attempt to resist its authority. In addition, MONUSCO
continues to receive many reports of continuing M-23
recruitment of new combatants, including through the
use of force, and widespread recruitment of minors.
We have also observed that the M-23 has maintained
significant military positions just outside of the city of
Goma, in violation of the Kampala agreement reached
last year. Those positions include well-placed firing
positions on the Munigi Heights, which put the Goma
airport within firing range. There has been no evidence
to date of any general pullback of M-23 forces or a
significant change in their general military posture.
The M-23 forces maintain an appearance of being well
supplied, well provisioned and well armed.

The M-23 has also continued to conduct patrols
or stage other operations immediately adjacent to the
city of Goma. Those have provoked in recent weeks
increased fears and rumours in the area of an imminent
resumption of large-scale military actions. They are
indicative of a generally tense and fearful atmosphere
in Goma and the general region. The overall situation
is volatile and precarious and could break down at any
time into large-scale conflict without much, if any,
prior warning.

Government forces, the Forces armees de la
Republique democratique du Congo (FARDC), are
maintaining a military presence in Goma of 650 troops,
in accordance with the Kampala agreement. The
FARDC Eighth Military Region headquarters has been
re-established in an area south of Sake in the province.
A renewed Congolese police presence has been
established in Goma with the support and collaboration
of MONUSCO, which has been maintaining order
despite a shortage of arms, vehicles and other resources
since the M-23 occupation of the city. Absent the
three-way security arrangement at the Goma airport
called for by the Kampala agreement, MONUSCO has
maintained overall control of the airport from the time
of the occupation through the present.

Associated with this situation, we have continued
to see a general increase in Congolese militia activity
through the province. Whether by design or simply
circumstance, the continuing clashes between armed
groups have assumed the character of proxy battles. For
example, in the very volatile area around Pinga in North
Kivu, there have been ongoing clashes between Mayi-
Mayi Cheka, with Cheka having shifted his collaboration
from the FDLR to the M-23, and the Alliance des
patriotes pour un Congo libre et souverain, a militia
now sharing anti-M-23 objectives with the FARDC.
Other armed confrontations are regularly occurring
involving a number of other forces, including the FDLR,
Rahiya Mutumboki, Nyatura, the Front Congolais pour
la retablissement de la democratic, Mayi-Mayi Shetani,
and various other groups. Inter-community ethnic
tensions, sharply heightened since last year by the
M-23 rebellion, characterize many of these conflicts.
All contribute to a general situation of instability, an
overall degradation of security conditions, and a state
of quasi-permanent threat to much of the population of
the province.

The M-23 has been unable to establish any
significant base of support outside of its occupied
area of North Kivu, despite its strong efforts to do so.
Nonetheless, there has been a general increase in militia
activity in South Kivu province, increased insecurity in
the northernmost portion of North Kivu, and ongoing
strife in Ituri district of Orientale province, facilitated
by security voids and the general preoccupation of
authorities with the M-23 threat. This general increase
includes some increased activity by the Ugandan Allied
Democratic Forces (ADF) group based in northern
North Kivu, although it is not clear at this time whether
this represents a longer-term trend or is a short-term
coincidence. Widespread reports of killings, sexual
Violence including rape, the use of children and forced
recruitment, and other human rights abuses characterize
the violence in essentially all areas.
There are two relative brighter spots, if I may
use that term, in the general security scene in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. One is the continuing
weakness of the FDLR and its apparent inability to
rebuild or reinforce its general capabilities, despite
the general lessening of FARDC and joint military
operations directed against them since the beginning
of the M-23 rebellion. There has been a major reduction
in the number of FDLR personnel processed for
repatriation since a peak of 141 repatriated combatants
was achieved in March 2012, just before the outbreak of
the M-23 rebellion. This result was associated with the
joint operations then ongoing in South Kivu. Numbers
have fallen considerably since.

We did record an unusual surge in January of 66
repatriated Rwandan FDLR combatants, in contrast
to the 29 recorded in December. Forty-four of these,
however, were in South Kivu, apparently connected
with a large-scale move of the majority of FDLR
personnel left in that province, apparently seeking
areas safer from attack by Rahiya Mutumboki and
others. As of 15 February, however, only 19 FDLR
combatant repatriations have been recorded for the
month, apparently indicating a return to the generally
low repatriation levels of late 2012.

Despite these conditions, there is no evidence that
the FDLR has been able to build any new strength; in
fact, all reports suggest the opposite. While the FDLR
certainly does retain a significant capacity for making
trouble in the areas of its operations, particularly in
North Kivu, it seems clear that its overall position is
weak - certainly compared to that of two or more
years ago.

In Orientale district in north-eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the attacks and generally
activities of the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) also
appear limited. In collaboration with the Dungu Joint
Intelligence and Operations Centre, we continue to
estimate LRA combatant levels in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to be very limited. Generally
operating in small and usually poorly equipped and
supplied groups, LRA fighters certainly do continue
to exact severe violence on civilians they target,
including abductions, significant violence and looting
by armed elements. Also, of course, the group retains
the capability to move forces across borders at will,
requiring ongoing vigilance and regional cooperation
to put an end to this regional threat. For some time
now, however, LRA operations and numbers in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo have been of more
limited scale. It should also be noted that the sparsely
settled but very large areas of Haut-Uele and Bas-Ue'le'
districts also continue to experience elevated levels of
violence from criminals, including poachers.

MONUSCO has sought to respond to all of these
threats using all available resources and to the limits
of our mandate. As noted in the Secretary-General's
report, for example, and contrary to a considerable
amount of erroneous press reporting at the time,
MONUSCO was substantially engaged militarily
to oppose M-23 offensive operations, including the
November offensive against Goma. I would be happy to
supply Council members with a detailed account of the
military operations surrounding that M-23 offensive, as
may be desired.

Unfortunately, as is clear, this military engagement
and that of the Congolese FARDC forces failed to halt a
strong, well-conceived, well-equipped and determined
operation to take control of Goma. MONUSCO has
been continuously reviewing our deployments and
bases of operations to try to ensure maximum capacity
to respond not only to the M-23 operations, but also
to the threat posed by a wide variety of armed groups
throughout eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Our civilian and police components and United Nations
specialized agencies have all worked closely together
to respond as effectively as possible to a broad and
growing range of security and humanitarian issues. I
must underscore again, however, that our forces and
our resources are stretched very thin over a broad area.
Indeed, as new threats are emerging in other areas,
including Maniema and Katanga provinces, we have a
very limited opportunity to respond to them.

As the Council is aware, there have been a broad
range of regional and international efforts under way
in regard to this daunting array of issues, and most
especially in regard to the threats posed by the M-23,
FDLR, ADF and other armed groups in North and South
Kivu. These include the regional peace framework
initiative spearheaded by the Secretary-General's office
to achieve a durable peace in the region, talks under
way in Kampala under the general coordination of
Uganda as chair of the International Conference of the
Great Lakes Region, and increased regional initiatives
associated with the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) and the African Union. I will
not detail all of those here, as the Council has already
received substantial reporting and updates on these
efforts.

I will briefly mention, however, two particularly
important pending initiatives with a direct potential
impact on MONUSCO activities. The first has been
the proposal to add an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV)
surveillance capability to MONUSCO. I would like to
express my personal thanks and appreciation to the
Council for its support ofthis proposal, and I can assure
Council members that we are moving forward with the
relevant New York offices to ensure deployment of these
UAVs at the earliest possible time. Our field personnel
have affirmed to me the importance of the potential
benefits that can accrue from this new capability, once
deployed.

The other is the widely discussed proposal for an
additional military force or brigade within MONUSCO
equipped with a peace enforcement authority going
beyond a traditional United Nations peacekeeping
mandate. From my perspective, it has become
increasingly clear that the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
now MONUSCO, has long operated consistent with
a traditional United Nations peacekeeping model
developed and based on a post-conflict environment.
Unfortunately, of course, as recent events have
underscored anew, the environment in which the
Mission operates is much more and too often one of
active conflict.

Seeking to adapt a post-conflict peacekeeping
model to this context has not been particularly
satisfactory. I am convinced that a peace enforcement
capability on the ground is a necessary component to
help achieve the conditions necessary to obtain the
engagements and commitments needed by all parties
to permit a durable peace in the area to be established.
As a specific proposal for that prospective force is
finalized - likely utilizing military forces to be
provided by SADC - I would strongly encourage the
Council to give serious consideration to the proposal,
its needs and requirements and, I hope, provide the
necessary support and authorization for such a force to
be deployed at the earliest time possible. I believe that
represents an urgently needed and important response
to the existing situation on the ground, especially in
North and South Kivu.

In discussing current security threats, I must also
note the recent worrisome security developments in
Katanga and other provinces. The Mayi-Mayi leader
known as Gedeon and associated militias, such as
Kata Katangais and others, have been increasing their
activities in northern Katanga province since Gedeon's
escape from prison in late 2011. The situation has now
reached alarming proportions, affecting a growing
geographic region and already producing a major
humanitarian crisis. The Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs now estimates that there
are 316,000 displaced persons in Katanga because
of Gedeon-related military activity. That number is
growing.

We have received many requests for an increased
MONUSCO presence and response. Unfortunately,
we have a very limited presence in the area and,
correspondingly, a limited capacity for response.
Nonetheless, we are looking at all possibilities
involving all relevant country team agencies, as well
as MONUSCO, and working with local, provincial and
national authorities to identify options. I fear, however,
that the situation will likely grow worse in the coming
weeks.

Likewise, I have been concerned by events that
took place roughly a week ago, with the temporary
occupation of the town of Punia in Maniema province
by a cell of the Rayi Mutumboki militia group - a
considerable distance from what had been their area
of operations in South Kivu province. That represents
another expansion of the reach of militia activity and
violence and, again, beyond the area of any MONUSCO
presence. In that case, a FARDC counter-attack using
troops from Kisangani was able to drive out the Rayi
Mutumboki elements a day after their occupation of
the town, driving them east towards Kasese, a town
in Maniema that was still under Rayi Mutumboki
occupation as of early this week. Fortunately, there were
no casualties among the humanitarian workers from a
number of agencies operating in the area. Nonetheless,
that, too, represents a worrisome development to which
we have a limited ability to respond. I would also note,
in passing, as significant issues to monitor, potential
problems with continuing tensions in parts of Equateur
province and reported significant refugee flows from
the Central African Republic into Equateur.

The increasing challenge to humanitarian agencies
has been growing increasingly acute, particularly in
the light of the ongoing financial pressures limiting
funding for needed operations. Humanitarian workers
are facing daunting challenges in delivering services
to needy populations, certainly including, but not
limited to, the large and growing numbers of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) in the Kivus, but elsewhere
as well. The challenges include adequate access as
needed and associated security threats posing potential
immediate dangers to the individuals and agencies
involved. We are working as closely as possible with
MONUSCO resources and those drawn from all United
Nations agencies to respond to those needs. Those
include security concerns, focused on large and growing
IDP camps in North Kivu, in protecting those in the
camps from attacks. We have achieved some progress
in that regard. However, I would very much urge all
Member States and organizations to be as forthcoming
as possible to support those humanitarian efforts to the
maximum extent possible, so as to facilitate effective
responses to the already enormous, and likely growing,
needs.

Before concluding my remarks, I would like
to briefly note a few important developments also
touching on MONUSCO's mandate.

The Nations Assembly recently adopted a new
election law providing for substantial reforms to the
Independent National Electoral Commission (INEC).
Just within the past week, the Assembly also passed
a required legal review by the Supreme Court, which
will be forwarded to President Kabila for promulgation
in the next few days, which we expect soon. That
will set the stage for INEC reforms, including a new
formulation of an oversight plenary and executive
board. As that unfolds, we will need to examine, in
collaboration with all engaged partners, the prospects
and timing for needed pending democratic and
transparent provincial and local elections to determine
an appropriate engagement to support the process.
That represents a critical phase of development for the
nascent democracy in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, as well as for pending decentralization moves
consistent with the 2006 Constitution and popular
will, all in the general existing political context. It is
too early to reach definite conclusions about how those
processes can and will unfold. The issues represented,
however, are of obvious importance to the future of the
country and its people.

I must also note that critical reviews of the existing
stabilization and reconstruction plan for areas emerging
from armed conflict/international strategy for security
and stabilization programmes in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as moves
to advance to formal adoption the Peace Consolidation
Programme for other areas of the country, are also
moving forward. All of them are of great importance for
the stability and development of the country. All affect
the issues of MONUSCO involvement, the transfer of
functions, as possible, to country team members, and
how key issues may be addressed generally. I should
also note that all of those questions are directly linked
as well to issues of security and stability in the eastern
and other areas of the country; each is also important
by itself.

Security sector reforms, most critically military
reform efforts, also remain at the centre of key
immediate priorities. President Kabila recently
repeatedly reaffirmed the importance of that sector
and his intentions to implement major new activities
in that regard. However, it remains of vital importance
to define a comprehensive strategy that provides the
needed resources, engagements and expertise of all
parties under Congolese Government overall direction.
We will maintain an active dialogue with Government
authorities to define how those initiatives may unfold.

I should also note significant recent progress in
two key areas, including the formal adoption of ajoint
United Nations/Congolese Government action plan to
stop and prevent underage recruitment, sexual violence
against children and other grave child rights violations
by FARDC and Congolese security services. We have
made considerable progress to define associated specific
actions, which represents a major and encouraging step
forward in a long-standing area of concern. As well,
I am pleased to report that we are nearing the formal
adoption of the long-awaited multi-year joint justice
programme, to be jointly signed by the Congolese
Minister of Justice and the United Nations, with its
implementation overseen by the Ministry of Justice.
I am optimistic that that will be ready for adoption
and signature in the near future. That will effectively
complement our ongoing efforts with the military
justice system in the fight against impunity, which
remains a high priority. We will continue to pursue
those activities as strongly as possible

Finally, before I conclude, let me take note of the
various discussions and options regarding potential
modifications of the MONUSCO mandate. I strongly
believe that such a review is appropriate. Indeed, I
have already indicated some areas where I believe a
modification is urgently needed, especially with regard
to a new peace-enforcement capability. Let me also
strongly urge that those discussions be held in full
cognizance of the overall context and the limitations
of MONUSCO's available human and other resources.
Above all, I strongly urge that the temptation be resisted
to add more to the already very substantial compilation
of MONUSCO tasks and requirements. It is essential
that mandate-tasking be tailored to a realistic appraisal
of the overall context and available resources and
capacities.

(spoke in French)

I should like to reiterate my sincere gratitude to
all the members of the Security Council, as well as
Member States, for their active support for MONUSCO
and its personnel, who work under dangerous and
difficult circumstances. Allow me to express to all of
MONUSCO's personnel, military and civilian alike, a
final word of gratitude and commendation against the
backdrop of a very worrisome situation in the Kivus
and Katanga. All United Nations staff carry out their
work with perseverance, often in the most difficult of
conditions, thereby demonstrating a spirit of sacrifice
and commitment that honours the ideals of the United
Nations. Blue Helmets and civilian personnel alike face
the challenges associated with the mandate that the
Council has entrusted to them with professionalism,
courage and determination. In that regard, they deserve
our gratitude and our admiration. My thanks go to them
and to the Council for its support and attention.

