Mr. Munoz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I would
first like to associate myself with the statement made
by the Permanent Representative of Jamaica on behalf
of the member countries of the Non-Aligned
Movement members of the Peacebuilding Commission.
The Peacebuilding Commission is currently in the
process of establishing its identity in order to put its
imprint on its efforts, in line with the mandates
conferred upon it by the resolutions that established it.

We believe that the central matter as regards the
Commission's future is the issue of its relevance. Since
it is not a new donor entity - notwithstanding the
importance of the Peacebuilding Fund - it is essential
that the Commission be given the leadership role in
mobilizing and coordinating resources and efforts in
support of countries emerging from conflict. The
Peacebuilding Commission must not become a body
for academic debates. It should instead be in the field
providing advice and working with countries emerging
from conflict.

To that end, it is essential to strengthen ties with
international financing institutions, such as the World
Bank, the International Monetary Fund and regional
banks, as well as with the community of donor
countries. We welcome the efforts made in that regard.
Likewise, we believe it is necessary to adopt the
necessary measures to ensure the broadest possible
participation by all relevant actors in the search for
solutions to the most pressing problems encountered by
countries emerging from conflict, including
participation by civil society.

In the future it will be necessary to strengthen the
role and work of the Organizational Committee as the
managerial body of the Commission - in particular its
country-specific format, which is key.

We believe it is urgent to avoid competing visions
that could weaken the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission. This requires action agreed between the
General Assembly and the Security Council, as well as
proper coordination with the Economic and Social
Council.

With a view to strengthening the work of the
Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission, we believe it is necessary to establish an
annual calendar of formal meetings, leaving the
necessary flexibility to carry out informal meetings
whenever necessary, either in a country-specific format
or another format.

We observe with concern the persistence of
discussion on how to carry out the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission. National ownership in
determining and carrying out national priorities is, of
course, a basic premise in this respect. National
priorities are identified as a result of an internal
process of consultation carried out by the national
Government, with participation of various national
actors. But in our opinion, defining national priorities
is a two-way street, and the Peacebuilding Commission
cannot be excluded. One of the main purposes of the
Peacebuilding Commission, according to resolution
1645 (2005) is "To bring together all relevant actors to
marshal resources and to advise on and propose
integrated strategies for post-conflict peacebuilding
and recovery" (para. 2 ( a )).

We are pleased that in the months since its work
began, the Peacebuilding Commission has addressed
the cases of Burundi and Sierra Leone. During this
period, specific plans of action were reviewed for both
countries, with the active participation of the national
authorities of those countries; the contribution of the
Peacebuilding Support Office in approving the
disbursement of significant assistance for both
countries was valuable. This year we should follow up
on the status of the implementation of the agreed
programmes. It will also be necessary for all of us to
make efforts to replenish the resources of the
Peacebuilding Fund.

Lastly, beyond the required reports mandated by
the resolutions, we feel that at this stage the most
important thing is for the Peacebuilding Commission to
make active cooperation with countries emerging from
conflict a priority.

