Mr. Schieb (Germany): Germany aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union.

On 26 October, we commemorated the deaths of
201 peacekeepers in 2015 and 2016 - 201 too many. A
growing number of them were victims of asymmetrical
attacks. Just yesterday, two more peacekeepers lost
their lives in Mali. That is why we need to redouble our
efforts to protect our peacekeepers and to ensure the
proper implementation of peacekeeping mandates.

The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), one of
the missions facing the most asymmetrical attacks,
is a good example of how future casualties could be
reduced. We consider three elements as essential.

First of all, we need better reconnaissance and
information gathering. Military reconnaissance is
fundamental to detecting asymmetrical threats at
an early stage and setting the course for appropriate
counter-measures. To make that possible, the military
equipment, training and concept of operation must be
adapted to the given circumstances. That is what we are
trying to achieve right now in the northeast sector of
MINUSMA. Germany, in partnership with neighbouring
troop-contributing countries (TCCs), made a significant
contribution in northern Mali, with a reconnaissance
task force in Gao. That force carries out a wide array
of activities related to information-gathering, including
reconnaissance ground forces, human intelligence and
civil military cooperation, as well as air reconnaissance
by tactical and unmanned aerial vehicles with a
range of up to 100 kilometres. In addition, Germany
deployed the unmanned aerial system Heron 1 for
the MINUSMA mission last Tuesday, with a range of
up to 900 kilometres. Its findings will help to reduce
the asymmetrical threat to all TCCs, United Nations
personnel and civilians alike.

Secondly, we also need better protection.
Asymmetrical threats are difficult to detect and
counter. Therefore, protective measures are of key
importance. Germany provides a highly professional
force protection unit that covers the entirety of Camp
Castor in Gao. Special counter-improvised explosive
device personnel support investigations into potential
perpetrators. As a first step, Germany will make
a financial contribution of €2 million towards the
purchase of armoured vehicles, yet much greater efforts
must be made since such vehicles are indispensable to
protect the lives of our peacekeepers in Mali.

Thirdly, we must ensure better medical support.
When United Nations peacekeepers face an asymmetric
attack in the middle of the desert, 100 miles north of
Gao, nothing is more important to their safety than quick
and adequate medical support. In the vast expanses of
northern Mali, that cannot be done without helicopters.
They are of key importance to medical evacuation
and protection. They are also of key importance to the
moral and operational strength of our peacekeepers
on the ground. Germany is currently examining ways
to provide modern medical evacuation and protection
helicopters for MINUSMA in 2017.

Those three elements cannot provide an overall
solution to the challenges of peacekeeping in the face
of asymmetric threats. Yet they represent important
tangible elements for the protection of our peacekeepers
on the ground. For the near future, it is crucial that the
High-level Independent Panel on United Nations Peace
Operations recommendations concerning asymmetrical
challenges be implemented. We owe it to the men and
women in the field to offer them as much protection as
possible. We can only do that together and Germany is
ready to contribute.

