Mr. Goledzinowski (Australia): First of all, I
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the
work you are doing as President of the Council,
including chairing this debate, which comes at a
critical juncture.

The region has undergone some dramatic changes
since the last Council debate on the situation in the
Middle East (see S/PV.6484). As events show
dramatically, the people of the region have made it
clear that their aspirations are to greater political,
social and economic opportunities and that they must
be addressed.

But in the face of these regional tectonic shifts,
one crucial issue - the peace process - has stalled.
Australia has consistently supported a just and enduring
peace based on a negotiated two-State solution, allowing
Israel and a future Palestinian State to live side by side
in peace and security. There is a now an urgency to
achieving progress towards peace - an urgency that our
Government conveyed to Israeli and Palestinian leaders
during our Foreign Minister's visits to the region in
December 2010 and again in March 2011, and in regular
conversations since then.

Australia continues to urge all sides to exercise
maximum restraint, avoid all civilian casualties and
return to negotiations as soon as possible. If these steps
are not taken and credible progress towards peace not
made, there is a real risk that the surge in violence we
saw in March will be repeated, with unacceptable
civilian casualties on both the Palestinian and Israeli
sides.

Australia is deeply concerned at this recent surge
in violence in Israel and the Palestinian territories,
including rocket attacks on southern Israel by militants
in Gaza and the killing of civilians in Gaza, the West
Bank and Jerusalem. Violence undermines the
prospects for a peaceful resolution of the conflict.
Above all, all of us must condemn terrorism in all its
forms; there can never be justification for the wilful
killing of innocent civilians through such brutal acts.

As a strong supporter of Palestinian State-
building efforts, Australia welcomes the remarkable
progress made by Prime Minister Fayyad and the
Palestinian Authority since 2009 in building the
institutions necessary for Statehood. It is clear that this
institution-building must be matched by political
progress towards peace - political progress involving
both sides, negotiating directly on final status issues. In
this context, both sides must refrain from actions which
undermine confidence and the prospects for achieving

peace, including the construction of illegal settlements.
Settlements undermine the prospects for achieving
peace and compromise the future of a two-State
solution. They should stop.

Australia also remains concerned at the
humanitarian situation, particularly in Gaza. We
continue to welcome the relaxation of some Israeli
restrictions on access to and from Gaza and recognize
Israel's legitimate security concerns. However, the
restrictions remain a barrier to peace. Gaza does not
need ad hoc assistance measures, even if well-
intentioned; it needs predictable and adequate flows of
goods and materials. The United Nations will continue
to have a critical role to play in addressing the
humanitarian needs of the people of Gaza.

In conclusion, the changes in the wider region
underline the urgency of achieving progress towards
peace. Australia calls upon Israelis and Palestinians
alike to recognize that it is in their mutual interest to
return to direct negotiations so that a just and enduring
peace can finally be realized.

