Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's
meeting. China listened carefully to the briefing
by Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Honore'.

Recently, Hurricane Matthew caused severe
damage to Haiti, leaving hundreds of people dead
or injured. China would like to express its sympathy
and condolences to the Government and the people
of Haiti. We call on the international community to
actively provide Haiti with humanitarian assistance,
with a focus on health care, sanitation and the supply
of drinking water in the disaster-affected areas so as
to prevent the renewed outbreak of cholera and other
epidemics. We hope that Haiti will overcome the
effects of the hurricane as soon as possible, rebuild the
damaged houses at an early date, gradually complete the
political transition and embark on the road to stability
and development.

Development is the fundamental way to enhance
Haiti's disaster resilience and recovery capacity. It is
also the master key to the settlement of the question
of Haiti. We hope that the Haitian Government will
strengthen planning, formulate development strategies
aimed at addressing conditions in the country, accelerate
the building of infrastructure, advance agriculture,
tourism and other important sectors, promote the rule
of law, improve the humanitarian situation and ensure
that the interests of vulnerable groups are guaranteed.

The international community should promptly
honour its assistance commitment, enhance targeted
assistance and help the Haitian Government in
enhancing its governance capacity so that Haiti will be
able to stand on its own and achieve development at
an early date. The United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH), under the leadership of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Honore, has
played an important role in advancing the electoral
process and maintaining security and stability in Haiti.
China expresses its appreciation in that regard.

China has always maintained that United Nations
peacekeeping operations should be adjusted in the
light of developments in the host countries, with the
ultimate purpose of withdrawing. In view of the fact
that the overall security situation in Haiti is improving
and that the Haitian National Police has been growing,
MINUSTAH should consider withdrawal at the
appropriate time and not remain endlessly in Haiti.

The Haitian Government should take upon itself the
responsibility for maintaining its national security and
stability. It is China's hope that the Secretariat and the
Haitian Government will strengthen communication
and assess the situation in Haiti in a timely manner,
while ensuring stability in Haiti and the smooth
functioning of the new Government. Appropriate
arrangements should be made regarding the future
presence of the United Nations in Haiti.

