Mrs. Carrion (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me, at the outset, to thank Mr. Gilmour, Mr. Onanga-
Anyanga and Mr. Impagliazzo for their briefings.

The Central African Republic has swung between
consolidating the achievements made since the
election of President Touadera, in particular the recent
headway made in Bangui and Bambari, and a serious
deterioration in humanitarian and security conditions
in other parts of the country, including deadly attacks
against the staff of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA). On the latter point, we are
deeply concerned about the threats against Mission staff
and the number of incidents that directly affected them.
The security of MINUSCA staff should be at the centre
of our attention. I also want to point out that attacks
against Blue Helmets could constitute war crimes and
that the perpetrators must be held accountable before
the courts.

The complex state of affairs in the country reflects
the many challenges that lie before the Government of
the Central African Republic, in particular with regard
to the development of solid national institutions and
the expansion of State authority throughout the entire
country. Uruguay acknowledges that the efforts made
by President Touade'ra and his Government in the first
year of his term have paved the way for considerable
progress to be made, including the establishment of
various national institutions, as required under the
Constitution, and headway in the ongoing dialogue
with the various armed groups. With regard to that
issue, we would like to underscore the convening,
on 20 and 21 April, of the fourth meeting of the
Consultative Follow-up Committee on Disarmament,
Demobilization, Reintegration and Repatriation, in
which the 14 main armed groups participated. We
encourage all armed groups to engage with the dialogue
process and to use the platform to voice their claims in
a peaceful way.

It is essential that the international community
continue to nurture and support the efforts of the
Government of the Central African Republic to achieve
peace and stability in the country. By the same token,
the action of the international community at the
Brussels Conference in November 2016 constituted
a clear expression of international solidarity and a
commitment to learning from the lessons of the past
and to not giving up. In recent months, a number of
initiatives to support the peace process have taken
place, including the African initiative, led by the
African Union and other subregional organizations, as
well as the efforts of the Community of Sant'Egidio.
In that regard, for any effort to be successful, proper
consultations must be held with the Government and
should aim at complementing the measures that are
already being made by national authorities in the search
for reconciliation and peace in the country.

The implementation of MINUSCA'S sexual
exploitation and abuse action plan has been successful,
with a decrease in the number of cases recorded.
However, there is still a lot to be done in order to weed
out the scourge once and for all. Uruguay reiterates
its support for the zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse.

In conclusion, allow me to convey my greetings to
all MINUSCA staff, who day in and day out play a key
role in the country. I would also like to pay tribute to the
six Blue Helmets who died the line of duty as a result of
cowardly attacks, which we vigorously condemn.

