Mr. Zaayman (South Africa): South Africa would
like to thank you, Sir, for having convened this debate.
We also join others in thanking the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his briefing.

Unfortunately, the reports that we receive every
month confirm that the situation in Palestine is
deteriorating daily, while the international community,
including the Security Council, remains unwilling or
unable to deal with the matter.

South Africa aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, and
we wish to make the following additional comments.

Let me start by reiterating South Africa's
condemnation of all forms of violence, regardless of
who the perpetrators are, and we again urge all parties
to engage in dialogue. Unfortunately, the situation on
the ground in Palestine and Israel today has set back
earlier gains, and should the parties agree to re-start
the negotiations, they will have to focus again on basic
elements of a peace aimed at creating an enabling
environment for negotiations. We have consistently
warned that the situation on the ground will change to
such a degree that the future of a two-State solution
will become more and more elusive. Unfortunately, we
are perilously close to that scenario becoming a reality.

Notwithstanding the grim picture, a small glimmer
of hope remains. We noted that Israel and Jordan were
able to reach an agreement on monitoring Israeli activity
around the Temple Mount, or Al-Haram Al- Sharif. That
agreement is timely, and we hope that it will de-escalate
tensions and prevent violence, especially with Passover
approaching. It is essential that the importance of those
holy sites to a variety of major religious groups be
respected equally by all parties. South Africa rejects

the use of holy sites to incite violence. Because there is
no progress on negotiations, including on the status of
Jerusalem and its holy sites, it is imperative to maintain
the so-called post-1967 status quo. Although far from

ideal, we believe that those measures would contribute
to limiting provocations and reducing violence.

The Council's failure is clearly demonstrated by
the continued expansion of the Israeli settlements,
which are illegal under international law. Israel's
appropriation of land continues unabated. On
15 March, Israel announced the appropriation of 579
acres of land in the occupied West Bank near Jericho,
the largest seizure of West Bank land in recent years.
The building of those settlements is not only contrary
to international law, but it represents an obstacle to a
two-State solution and peace. We sincerely hope that
all Council members will uphold their responsibilities
under the Charter of the United Nations and put an
end to the illegal appropriation of land. South Africa
stands ready to work with all parties and the broader
international community, including members of the
Security Council, to advocate for the immediate
cessation of settlement activities by Israel in the West
Bank and Jerusalem.

