Mr. Ferreira (Sao Tome and Principe): I wish to
express my satisfaction at seeing you, Sir, as President of
the Security Council for this month, and wish you success
in your work. In speaking today, I should like to take this
great opportunity to express the deep concern and explain
the position of the Government of Sao Tome and Principe
with regard to the question of the peace process and
reconstruction in Angola.

Despite all the gains made so far in the peace process,
the security situation remains volatile in many parts of the
country, and, if Angola's situation does not improve, that
subregion may face a situation that is not deserved. The
present stage of the implementation of the Lusaka
agreement has reached a point of no return, because too
much effort and hope has been invested by all the parties
involved, and by the international community, in this long
and painful process to build a long-lasting peace and a good
environment for development.

To date, with regard to the establishment of the
Government of National Unity and Reconciliation, some of
the main steps in the implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol have not yet been taken. Without the resolution
of all the military aspects and the question of general
security, the outstanding political issues cannot be
resolved. Such issues include the return of UNITA
deputies to the National Assembly in Luanda, the
establishment of the Government of National Unity and
Reconciliation and the special status of UNITA's leader.

These and other issues, such as mine clearance, can
only be settled if all related military questions are
resolved, thereby avoiding the repetition of the sad events
that took place in 1975 and after the democratic election.
With the withdrawal of UNAVEM. III in February 1997,
careful consideration and planning will be needed if we
are to extend the small United Nations team beyond that
date and give it a clear mandate.

Another critical challenge is the demobilization of
troops and their reintegration into civilian society. We call
this important matter to the attention of all the parties
involved and appeal to donor countries to provide
additional resources to support this vital effort. We would
like to point out that if this reintegration is not done well,
Angola will in future face widespread urban insecurity.

The Council has adopted a resolution that reflects
the reality of the situation in Angola in order to give a
chance to all parties involved in building the peace, so
that one day Angola's people may enjoy a better life.

I cannot conclude my statement without making a
strong appeal to the Angolan Government, and to UNITA
in particular, to do their utmost to collaborate with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and to
resolve all outstanding political issues within the time-
frame adopted by this Council.

