Mr. Bessho (Japan): Ijoin others in thanking the
Secretary-General for his insightful briefing. I would
also like to express my appreciation to the United
Nations for holding a high-level event on famine
prevention and response together with the World Bank
in New York last month.

Japan is deeply concerned about the continued
serious state of food insecurity in Yemen, Nigeria,
Somalia, South Sudan and other countries. The swift
delivery of humanitarian assistance is crucial to
people suffering from famine. Regrettably, as the
Council emphasized through its presidential statement
in August (S/PRST/2017/14), conflict and violence
are major causes of the food insecurity in most of
the cases we are discussing today. Conflicts destroy
livelihoods and human food production, force people
to flee and hamper food distribution. Furthermore,
they impede effective humanitarian access to those
most desperately in need of help, and in some cases,
starvation has become a part of deliberate strategies to
gain or maintain political control or military advantage.
I would like to stress once again that the Council must
address such problems and contribute to the mitigation,
resolution and, ifpossible, the prevention of food crises.

For that, we need to enable a more robust short
and long-term response. The international community
must enhance measures to address the root causes of
conflicts, not only by making post-conflict responses
but also by focusing more on preventing conflicts and
their recurrence. To this end, Japan emphasizes the nexus
between humanitarian efforts, development and peace.
Together with urgent humanitarian assistance, Japan
provides development cooperation aimed at promoting
mid-to-long-term self-reliance. In the post-conflict
phase, we will also supply peacebuilding and conflict-
prevention assistance, as well as assistance for poverty
reduction and economic development. For example, in
Uganda, which is taking in a large number of South
Sudanese refugees, Japan is providing, along with
urgent humanitarian assistance, projects in the areas of
technical assistance with rice farming and vocational
training through the Japan International Cooperation
Agency and international organizations. That synergy
for projects is designed to promote refugees' self-
reliance and support host communities, as well as
helping refugees prepare for a smooth repatriation. We
believe that such assistance will facilitate and stabilize
South Sudan's development when its refugees return
home, thereby contributing to its peacebuilding and
conflict-prevention capacities in the future.

As a first step to exercising this approach to famine
response, Japan has decided to provide a new emergency-
aid grant in December, totalling $11 million, to South
Sudan, Somalia, Yemen, and north-eastern Nigeria.
It will be used for capacity-building assistance to the
local people for pest control and monitoring nutrition,
for example, along with urgent humanitarian assistance.
Japan will enhance measures with the humanitarian
development and peace nexus in mind, with the aim of
helping countries suffering from famine to overcome
their humanitarian crises and achieve sustaining peace.

While the August presidential statement focused
on four countries, more are suffering from severe
food insecurity. The presidential statement requests
the Secretary-General to provide early warning when a
conflict that has devastating humanitarian consequences
and hinders an effective humanitarian response has the
potential to lead to an outbreak of famine. We continue
to count on the efforts of the Secretary-General in that
regard so that we can act swiftly and effectively to
address the risk of famine and link our efforts to the
goal of achieving long-term peace and security.

