I wish to begin by extending my heartfelt thanks to the German presidency for organizing today's timely and necessary open debate. Let me also express my sincere appreciation to the distinguish briefers for their insightful interventions. Georgia aligns itself with the statement submitted by observer of the European Union (see annex 30). Let me add a few remarks in my national capacity. Today we are facing a global health crisis unprecedented in the history of the United Nations. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has ravaged the whole world, affecting all three pillars of the United Nations: peace and security, development and human rights. To date, the vicious virus has claimed more than half a million lives, shattered societies and plunged the global economy into a deep recession. In these unprecedented times, Georgia expresses its solidarity with all Member States that are fighting the COVID-19 pandemic and offers its heartfelt condolences for their loss. But the worst is yet to come, especially if we continue to disparage the international security context of the existing health crisis. The exacerbated root causes of armed conflict, hindered national and international conflict-resolution efforts and the rapid spread of disinformation that we are already witnessing in different parts of the world are all visible harbingers of looming security turmoil. Therefore, responding to these challenges with heightened resolve and inclusive multilateral cooperation should have no alternative. The first step to that end must be our staunch support and painstaking implementation of the Secretary-General's appeal for an immediate global ceasefire, which aims to silence guns in all conflict-affected corners of the world and enable unhampered humanitarian access to the most vulnerable groups of society, including women, children, older people, the forcibly displaced and people with disabilities. The adoption by the Security Council yesterday of resolution 2532 (2020), which supports the Secretary-General's appeal, was an encouraging development to that end. We believe that the Security Council will take up the issue of global health emergencies with a focus on international security. This is equally relevant in the light of past examples of Security Council engagement with the epidemics that turned into global health risks, including severe acute respiratory syndrome, HIV/ AIDS and the Ebola virus disease. Hence, it is paramount to urgently find unity among the Council members and spearhead a meaningful international response towards the implementation of the Secretary-General's appeal. At this critical juncture, when it is particularly important to reaffirm our strong commitment to the principles embodied in the Charter of the United Nations, failure to do so might cause irreparable damage to international peace and security. This conclusion seems especially unmistakeable from Georgia's perspective. While concentrating on the fight against the pandemic, my country has been afflicted by the negative effects of disregarding the rules-based multilateral order. Notwithstanding the fact that the Government of Georgia, in cooperation with partners and international organizations, has managed to effectively confront the spread of the virus within the country, our sovereignty and territorial integrity have been systematically targeted by one of the permanent members of the Security Council. To be specific, the Russian Federation has deliberately intensified its use of hybrid warfare tools against Georgia and, with fabricated propaganda myths, constantly attacked one of the laboratories of Georgia's National Centre for Disease Control and Public Health, the Richard Lugar Centre, which plays a crucial role in the fight against the spread of COVID-19 in Georgia. At first glance, the absurd claims by Russia that the Georgian Government has artificially spread COVID-19 in the occupied Tskhinvali region and collected biological samples from the residents of the region actually serve to undermine the trust of the local population in the Government of Georgia, which is yet another goal of creating managed chaos on the ground. We stress that such disinformation campaign by the Russian side represents an open attack on the health protection of the population and the national security of Georgia. More than that, neither the pandemic nor the call of the Secretary-General for an immediate global ceasefire have prevented the Russian occupying regime from continuing the illegal processes of installing barbed-wire fences and so- called border signs or digging so-called anti-fire trenches along the occupation line in both occupied Georgian regions of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali/South Ossetia. In a recent instance, such illegal activities were going on simultaneously in up to 14 villages in the vicinity of the Russian-occupied regions of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali/South Ossetia. To make matters worse, due to the irresponsible and inhumane approach of closing the so-called crossing points along the Russian occupation line, the population residing in the occupied regions - including children, older people, the chronically ill and the immunologically compromised- remain stripped of access to urgent care and medical evacuation. Thus, as a result of the denial by the Russian occupying regime of medical evacuation to those in need, the death toll of ethnic Georgians has risen to 14 since the closure of the occupation line of Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia in September 2019. In concluding my remarks, I would like to call on the international community to urge all parties involved in armed conflicts or exercising effective control in conflict areas immediately to ensure the complete and unconditional elimination of any impediments to the effective delivery of and access for emergency humanitarian assistance to civilians living in the conflict-affected areas, first and foremost in the occupied regions of Georgia. For its part, Georgia reaffirms its strong commitment to the principles embodied in the Charter of the United Nations and stands ready to contribute to the collective endeavour of strengthening rules-based multilateral cooperation in the fight against the pandemic and its negative effects. We urge the Security Council to consider the issue of global health security in greater detail.
