Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): Speaking about Africa
on one of his trips to the African continent, British
Foreign Secretary Jack Straw had this to say:
"Africa matters. It matters if you want to produce
a stable world. You cannot have four continents
going forward and one going backwards."

May I extrapolate this quote by saying that all the
subregions in Africa need to move forward at fairly the
same pace for the progress of Africa. Therefore, any
plan to strengthen cooperation between the United
Nations system and the various regions of Africa is
warmly welcomed and needs to be encouraged.

In January this year, the Security Council held a
public, meeting with the participation of several
ministers from Africa and elsewhere, to discuss the
conflict situations in Africa in the presence of
Mr. Amara Essy, Secretary-General of the Organization
of African Unity (OAU) and now Interim Chairperson
of the Commission of the African Union. Following
that meeting, the Council established the Ad Hoc
Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution
in Africa, which has a clear mandate to address the
issue of cooperation between the Security Council and
African subregional and regional organizations.

Today's meeting is therefore of particular
importance, especially given the presence of many
foreign ministers of the countries of the Central
African region and representatives of the Bretton
Woods institutions and of the United Nations
Development Programme. We are particularly pleased
to see the President of the Economic and Social
Council at the Council table. We extend a very warm
welcome to all of them.

We would also like to thank you, Sir, for the
background note prepared by your delegation. It has
been very helpful in preparing for this meeting.

Like other regions, several countries of Central
Africa are still confronted with either armed conflicts
or other forms of instability that keep claiming human
lives and damaging the economic infrastructure. Those
countries in the region which are in peace suffer from
the indirect effects of the instabilities of their
neighbours.

The Economic Community of Central African
States (ECCAS), established in October 1983, has
brought 11 countries of the Central African region
together and, although cooperation in defence and
security matters within the region has not been
systematic, various efforts have been made by the
countries of the region to address themselves to the
security problems arising from the conflicts in Chad,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, the
Central African Republic, Burundi, Angola, as well as
the Republic of the Congo.

With the assistance of the United Nations and
through the Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Questions in Central Africa, established in 1992, nine
countries in Central Africa signed the Non-Aggression
Pact in July 1996 in Yaounde. More recently, in July
1999, the Council for Peace and Security in Central
Africa (COPAX) adopted its early-warning mechanism
as the basic instrument of preventive diplomacy for the
region.

For the exercise of its functions, COPAX has
been provided with three tools: first, the early-warning
mechanism based in Libreville, which monitors the
situation in the subregion and can take decisive
measures to prevent any potential disagreement that
might degenerate into open conflicts; secondly, the
Defence and Security Commission, which looks after
administrative and logistics matters concerning
peacekeeping; and the Central African Multinational
Force to execute peace security and humanitarian
missions.

In May 2002, the OAU - now the African
Union- held a regional organizations consultative
meeting on cooperation in conflict prevention
management and resolution in Addis Ababa. That
meeting identified the areas through which subregional
organizations could be strengthened and their
cooperation with the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union and the United Nations further
enhanced.

We value highly the role played by the United
Nations missions in the Central African region in
managing and preventing large-scale conflicts. The
missions to the Congo, Burundi and Rwanda; the
United Nations Peace-Building Support Office in the
Central African Republic; and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region are contributing enormously to the
maintenance of peace and security in the region. There
is, however, scope for greater interaction and
concertation between the United Nations offices and
the subregional organizations for greater synergies,
which would benefit the region.

Let me highlight some of the areas where greater
cooperation may be beneficial. First, with the
necessary assistance and expertise, the African Union
and the subregional organizations, including ECCAS,
could work very closely with the United Nations on the
basis of comparative advantage in advocacy, preventive
actions and peacemaking.

Secondly, the subregional institutions, in a given
situation could play an important role in advising the
United Nations as to whether the situation requires the
Organization to play a lead role or that of a simple
coordinator. The respective roles of the United Nations
and regional organizations could then be clearly
defined at the very early stages of an emerging conflict
situation.

Third, the COPAX early warning system is yet to
be developed and reinforced. There is an urgent need
for financial assistance, appropriate training and
logistic support in order to make it fully operational.
The COPAX early warning system must be in a
position to alert ECCAS, the African Union and the
United Nations, in that order of priority, at the very
early stages of any potential conflict situation. The
success of an early warning system also depends on the
political will of the leaders, who should be willing to
look beyond their immediate national interests in order
to forge regional alliances for peace, stability and
development. We are pleased to note that the heads of
State of the Central African region have signed a
mutual assistance pact, committing themselves to help
each other against threats of armed aggression.

Fourth, the efforts at organization at the
subregional level in Africa must be fully supported, so
that they can build their own peacekeeping capacities.

Fifth, with appropriate assistance, ECCAS could
be equipped to provide relevant information on the
proliferation of illicit small arms and light weapons in
the region in order to combat the illicit trafficking of
such weapons, which, as we all know, are creating
havoc in that part of the continent.

Sixth, likewise, in the area of illegal exploitation
of the natural resources of the various countries in the
region, ECCAS can be made to play a prominent role
in monitoring the activities of companies and
individuals engaged in such criminal activities.

Seventh, with appropriate assistance, it might be
possible for ECCAS to develop a regional strategy to
combat terrorism.

Eighth, the United Nations and the subregional
organizations in Central Africa can also cooperate in
the area of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration in order to ensure the irreversibility of the
peace processes. Such cooperation could help define a
regional approach to the problem of former
combatants.
Ninth, the problem of internally displaced
persons and refugees in Central Africa, as in any other
region, could also be comprehensively addressed on a
regional basis with the close cooperation and
coordination of the relevant United Nations agencies
and the respective subregional institutions.

Tenth, in post-conflict situations, the United
Nations, in particular the Economic and Social
Council, and the subregional organizations should
coordinate their efforts in peace-building,
reconstruction and rehabilitation activities. With proper
planning and understanding, the subregional
organizations can become the operational arms of the
United Nations in the region.

The Central African region has a rich base and a
great potential for development. It is unfortunate that
seven of the 11 countries that belong to the region are,
or have been, embroiled in conflicts. There are,
however, positive signs that the region is able to and
wants to move forward. The recent summit, which
decided on a multinational force to be deployed in the
Central African Republic in order to assist the
Government in peace-building and economic
reconstruction, as well as the confidence-building
measures among the countries of the region, are major
steps in this direction. It is our duty and the duty of the
United Nations to give its full support to ensure that
such activities are fully implemented.

