The President: I shall now offer some comments
and questions in my capacity as the representative of
Pakistan.

First of all, I would like to thank High
Commissioner Lubbers for having come here to brief
us in such a comprehensive way. He has left a lot of
food for thought for members of the Council. It is very
timely, I think, that his briefing comes after the
Council's discussion on the question of peacekeeping
on 17 May and before the discussion that we intend to
have on 28 May on the issue of complex crises and the
United Nations response.

I think what is important to note, perhaps, is that
in any crisis, there are two aspects that immediately
arise. The first is security and the second is the
humanitarian requirements of people. We have a slight
dichotomy in the international response. For
peacekeeping, once the Council is able to take a
decision, we are then able to mobilize the resources
required for the deployment of the agreed
peacekeeping operations. On the contrary, with regard
to humanitarian response, we are dependent, first of
all, on voluntary contributions from Governments and
also on the response of the host Governments on the
ground with regard to access and cooperation. Would
Mr. Lubbers have any thoughts about how one could
synchronize the international security and financial
responses to calm crisis situations as they arise?

I have two specific questions with regard to
Afghanistan. I was very grateful to note Mr. Lubbers's
mention of Pakistan as an example of hosting 4 million
Afghan refugees over some 25 years. Many of them are
still there. In April 2001, Pakistan, Afghanistan and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) signed a tripartite agreement for
the voluntary repatriation of Afghan refugees. I would
like to ask whether there is any road map or plan drawn
up for the implementation of that agreement and, if so,
what progress has been achieved in that context.

My last point is that, as the High Commissioner is
aware, the Afghan Cabinet of President Karzai is
finalizing the electoral law, and it has been agreed in
principle that the Afghan refugees in Pakistan and Iran
will also participate in the elections. While the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan would be
mainly responsible for coordination in that regard, it is
our expectation and hope that the High Commissioner's
staff, with its experience and its data, will be able to
lend its assistance in that process, including by
facilitating the registration of Afghan refugees prior to
the elections. I would be very grateful to know if the
High Commissioner has any information or comments
that he would wish to make on this aspect.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

Mr. Lubbers has a lot of questions to address, and
I give him the floor.

