Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the co-penholders, France and the Dominican Republic, we are pleased to see the strong support of the Council for the unanimous adoption of resolution 2535 (2020), on youth, peace and security, which reflects the Council's recognition of and support for the pivotal role that young people play in the maintenance of peace and security. We are particularly grateful to all members of the Council for their support and their spirit of compromise. We also thank them for their active and constructive participation in the negotiation process. The achievements made would not have been possible without the work undertaken by Jordan, Peru, Sweden and South Africa, with their respective initiatives undertaken prior to the adoption of the resolution. This year we are celebrating the fifth anniversary of resolution 2250 (2015) and the seventy- fifth anniversary of the United Nations. In that vein, we would underscore a particular point of the Declaration for the Commemoration of the Seventy-Fifth Anniversary of the United Nations: "We will listen to and work with youth. Youth is the missing piece for peace and development. As we benefited from the foresight of the founders of the United Nations, young people today will have to live with the consequences of our action and inaction." That is the reason for which we wish to present the resolution that we have just adopted. From the very beginning of our work, we were focused on the goal of further accelerating and operationalizing the youth, peace and security agenda. With this resolution, we have achieved critical gains. We have strengthened the protection framework for the human rights of young people who are working to maintain peace and security, as well as the civic and political space. We call for the development of a guide dedicated to the protection of young people, including those who become involved with the Security Council. It encourages capacity-building, including the appointment of focal points for youth, peace and security both within the United Nations system and in countries and regional organizations. The youth, peace and security agenda cannot be disassociated from the women and peace and security agenda. Gender equality is a principle of the Charter of the United Nations that we must uphold if we are to achieve gender equality. The impact of youth is directly proportional to the full and effective participation of young women. Moreover, we acknowledge the importance of young people becoming involved in planning and the humanitarian response, as well as of the vital role that young people play in responding to climate-related events and natural disasters, which are increasingly frequent and extreme in nature, and to the coronavirus disease pandemic and its direct impact on young people. The resolution also provides for a guide to be given to peace missions that will be used to establish a strategy for youth, peace and security. It also provides for Member States to create funding sources that are accessible to young people's organizations and organizations led by young people. The resolution also urges that the youth, peace and security agenda be integrated and mainstreamed into all planning and strategic documents and into United Nations analyses, frameworks, initiatives and guiding instruments, while strengthening the link between the youth, peace and security and the work of the Peacebuilding Commission. Finally, the resolution requests a biennial report on the issue from the Secretary-General, thereby fully incorporating the youth, peace and security agenda into the Security Council's work. Young people are not waiting for us. They are also already taking concrete steps to face today's challenges. The idea is to maintain a link between the Security Council and young people that is mutually beneficial. In order to be able to talk about the sustainable maintenance of peace and security, it is vital to recognize and support the role of young people in conflict-resolution and peacebuilding processes. To conclude, we wish to thank the countries that expressed support for the resolution through their written statements during the open video-teleconference on youth, peace and security held in April (see S/2020/465), as well as through their co-sponsorship. The co-penholders deem it vital that all Member States take ownership of the resolution. We wish also to warmly thank the bodies that have been working on the implementation of this agenda: the Office of the Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth, the United Nations Population Fund, the Peacebuilding Support Office and the United Nations Development Programme. Moreover, we acknowledge the important role played by civil society and by young people's organizations and organizations led by young people, which have continually supported this initiative. We also thank Germany for having made it possible for to adopt this resolution today under its presidency.
