Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, we would like to thank all
our briefers today for their stirring and substantive
statements. However, we were, to tell the truth, a
little surprised that the briefings by United Nations
high officials referred to the issue of terrorism only
in passing. Recently, the Council has been paying
increasing attention to the topic, and we would expect
that from United Nations officials as well.

For four years, the armed conflict in Syria has
brought the Syrian people untold suffering and has
become the cause ofa humanitarian disaster. We highly
value the steps taken by the international humanitarian
community to alleviate the suffering. The Government
of Syria faces the difficult task of providing full-
scale humanitarian assistance to the people in the
territory they control. Neighbours of Syria - Lebanon,
Turkey and Jordan - are hosting the largest number
of refugees and providing for their needs. Russia
is providing the people of Syria with humanitarian
assistance on a bilateral basis. We attach great priority
to the humanitarian issues in Syria, both within the
Security Council as well as on the ground, where the
Russian Embassy in Damascus is in daily contact with
United Nations humanitarian agencies, as well as with
the Syrian Government.

The support given by donors to the plan for a
humanitarian response is invaluable. We also pay due
tribute to the Government of Kuwait for hosting a donor
conference, to which, unfortunately, representatives of
the Syrian Government were not invited, even though
three fourths of the humanitarian assistance for the
needs of the country's population has been provided
by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic itself.
We note that the Syrian Government recently took a
number of additional steps in the humanitarian field.
The United Nations received a "green light" for the
provision of humanitarian assistance to the majority
of the 33 locations that the United Nations requested,
except for eight locations. For security reasons, the
United Nations staff does not wish to send convoys
to five of the eight. In the territory controlled by the
Government, there is no significant lack of essential
items, and medical institutions are functioning. With
respect to opposition-held areas, the lack of assistance
for the provision of basic services to the population has
resulted in all of the ensuing harmful consequences.

Equally important on the humanitarian issue
in Syria is the Security Council's unified approach,
demonstrated by the unanimously adopted resolutions
and statements, including today's presidential statement
(S/PRST/2015/10). An important indicator of such unity
was the adoption last year of resolution 2165 (2014) on
trans-border humanitarian access to Syrians in need
through crossing points on the borders with Turkey and
Jordan. Unfortunately, the provision of humanitarian
assistance through those crossing points is still very
problematic, owing in part to the whims ofthe terrorists.
We call upon humanitarian actors to better coordinate
humanitarian assistance with Damascus.

Any impartial observer can see clearly that today
terrorism is the essential issue and threat in Syria. It
is terrorism that imposes the most suffering on people
in Syria. The position of the international community
with respect to terrorists is enshrined in resolutions
2170 (2014), 2178 (2014) and 2199 (2015). Terrorists,
according to the Secretary-General, have been waging
war on the values of the United Nations and its Member
States. Hundreds of thousands of people arbitrarily
find themselves in the hands of a barbarous so-called
caliphate, cut off from humanitarian assistance. In those
territories it is impossible to truly assess humanitarian
needs. The presence ofthe most odious terrorist groups,
the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS) and Jabhat
Al-Nusra, is noted in almost all regions - Ar Raqqah,
Deir ez-Zor, the south of Al Hasakah, the outskirts of
Aleppo, Idlib and eastern Ghouta. Recently, the recent
arrival of the Jabhat Al-Nusra in Dar'a led to 60,000
internally displaced persons, and in Idlib, to another
77,000. In an attempt to spread their influence, the
terrorist organizations are creating alliances.

That is a dangerous trend. Of particular concern is
the attempt by terrorists to intervene in the Palestinian
conflict, in particular, by taking the Syrian camp for
Palestinian refugees in Yarmouk. We call upon all
sides to ensure the security of civilians. We support
the combat against the Islamic State as well as against
other terrorist groups. Only the final eradication of
jihadist fighters in Syria will allow normalcy to return
to the country. We think that the trend of events in Syria
requires emergency measures to ensure the protection of
the country from terrorist aggression and the restoration
of its unity. Russia has, from the very beginning, called
for the implementation of local truces or freezes in
Syria. We are convinced that effective humanitarian
actions, including those in line with Security Council
resolutions, are possible only with a truce. We call upon
the United Nations and humanitarian organizations to
more actively engage in achieving local agreements
and to do more to rebuild destroyed infrastructure and
reestablish normal life in residential areas.

In conclusion, I would like to look at the root causes
of the problem. We fully agree with those who feel that
the Syrian crisis has gone beyond all imaginable or even
unimaginable limits. The international community
really must come together to solve the crisis. But for
the time being, there does not seem to be a feeling of
urgency to the task that is shared by all. Some seem to
be planning, for the years to come, programmes to arm
and train the so-called moderate opposition. However,
given current information, there is not any moderate
opposition. ISIS and Al-Qaida have taken over too
much control in Syria for that. For any conflict, there
are two solutions - a military and a political one.
Attempts at a military solution in the absence of a
Security Council veto was something we saw in Libya
in 2011. As a result, the country is in free-fall, sending
shock waves throughout the entire Sahel and the North
Africa region - and now even to the Mediterranean
region as well.

Steps continue to be taken towards a political
settlement in Syria, but lack consistency owing to the
fact that too many influential actors have priorities based
on their political agendas. The Geneva 11 conference,
convened with much difficulty, was halted after just
two short rounds of talks between the Government and
the opposition. Why? Because the opposition and those
supporting it were not happy that the Government of
Syria was insisting on the priority ofjointly combating
terrorist organizations. While such a position by the
opposition was strange then, today it looks absolutely
ridiculous as the entire world knows about the insanity
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.

Russian diplomacy throughout the entire Syrian
crisis has endeavoured to achieve a halt to the
violence through dialogue with the Government
and the opposition. We met twice in Moscow with
the Government and various opposition groups.
Unfortunately, those meetings did not include the
participation of the opposition organization created
and backed by some influential international players.
But it would seem that that was actually the time when
the international community could have - and should
have - demonstrated its unity in the political process.

But we are not giving up. Our basic hope now relates
to the Geneva context, as planned by Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General De Mistura. We are giving him
all possible support in that regard. We hope that other
conscientious members of the international community
will do likewise.

Given that today we are discussing humanitarian
problems, we would like to express our deep concern
with regard to the humanitarian situation in another
country, namely, Yemen. The conflict there could
become a Syrian one. Over the past month, the situation
in Yemen has worsened significantly. According to the
United Nations, there are serious issues with regard
to the provision of water, food and energy to people.
Many homes, schools and medical facilities have
been destroyed. Two million children do not attend
school. Approximately 1,000 civilians have been
killed, including 115 children. I would like to take the
opportunity provided by the presence of Ms. Amos and
Ms. Cousin to ask for an assessment ofthe humanitarian
situation in Yemen.

