Mr. Abu-Nimah (Jordan) (interpretation from Arabic): Allow me, Mr. President, to begin my statement
on behalf of the Group of Arab States - over which I
have the honour of presiding this month - by extending
to you our sincere congratulations on your assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
would emphasize that your wide experience and political
expertise will be major factors in directing the Council's
work and deliberations towards the success we fully
expect.

Allow me also to express our gratitude and
commendations to your predecessor, Her Excellency
Ambassador Madeleine Albright, the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America, for her
successful presidency of the Council last month.

Mr. President, the Arab States received notification
of your decision to convene an open meeting of the
Council to explore possible ways of addressing the tragic
situation in Somalia with satisfaction and great
appreciation, and gave it their support; the Arab Group
would also like to express its appreciation for the
vigorous efforts of the Council in respect of the problem
of Somalia, and of the many resolutions it has adopted on
that issue.

As we are all aware, the tragedy of Somalia, in both
its political and humanitarian aspects, is still racking that
Member State: there can be no doubt that the efforts of
the United Nations, as represented by the Council; of the
Secretary-General; and especially of the United Nations
Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM. II) - established by the
Council under resolution 794 (1992) - have created the
right environment to facilitate and ensure the success of
humanitarian assistance in Somalia.

That humanitarian assistance, although basically
humanitarian in nature, did to a certain degree help avert
a degradation in the social and security situations in

 

Somalia, and we assume that the United Nations, through
the Council, will finish the job by seeking means to achieve
a political settlement that will restore peace and security to
Somalia and its people, whose lot has been one of
continued suffering and tragedy after tragedy.

We believe that the fundamental and ultimate
responsibility for achieving national reconciliation, a
political settlement and peace and security in their country
lies primarily with the Somali people, its leaders, its
factions and its representatives. However - and despite the
termination of UNOSOM. II - that this is so does not
prevent the Council from resuming its endeavours to find
a way out of the impasse - within the framework of the
Charter, within the limits of the instruments available to it
and in light of the nature of the present phase of the
situation - to help the Somali people extricate themselves
from their extremely complex ordeal.
No doubt the follow-up and activation of numerous
provisions of the Council's resolutions could help in the
honourable endeavour of finding common ground for
national reconciliation and for the mobilization of regional
and international support to form a solid basis for a lasting,
comprehensive political settlement to the situation in
Somalia. Undoubtedly, the coordination of United Nations
efforts with those of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU), the Arab League and other regional and
international organizations will be of great help in the
efforts to achieve this vital objective.

In addressing you, Mr. President, and placing the
question of the Somali people and of Somalia before this
Council, as the main organ responsible for the maintenance
of international peace and security, we hope that the
Council will spare no effort in exploring the means and the
possible contacts with all the parties concerned, within and
outside Somalia, in order to halt the deterioration of the
situation and help in achieving a political settlement
ensuring the unity of Somalia and peace and stability for its
people.

We affirm the need to preserve a favourable
environment for the continuation of humanitarian activities
and not to permit the exploitation of any vacuum resulting
from the withdrawal of the international forces. We also
affirm the importance of continued strict application of the
embargo on the provision of weapons to Somalia under
Security Council resolution 733 (1992). I must also second
the proposals put forward in the discussion by some
delegations calling on the Council to dispatch a fact-finding
mission to Somalia in order to come up with definite
proposals and recommendations to deal with the situation.

In concluding my statement, I would like to reaffirm
that we appreciate the great efforts and the honourable
role of the Secretary-General. It would also be fitting to
request him to dispatch a special representative to explore
the views and inclinations of various parties. This would
be an effective means of finding options that might serve
as a point of departure for the Council in the future in its
important political efforts to deal with the question of
Somalia.

