Ms. Haq: Let me begin by acknowledging the
presence of Nobel Peace Laureate His Excellency
Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, President of Timor-Leste.
President Ramos-Horta tells me often about the request
he made in 2006, in this very Chamber, to establish the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
2

(UNMIT). It is remarkable that he is in this Chamber
today to discuss the end of that same Mission. Under
his leadership, as well as that of Prime Minister
Xanana Gusmao, Frente Revolucionaria do Timor-
Leste Independente (Fretilin) Secretary-General Mari
Alkatiri and others, Timor-Leste has made significant
strides in advancing peace and stability. In the light of
the overall stable situation, we are continuing to plan
for the expected close of UNMIT by December 2012.
Indeed, as part of our joint transition planning with the
Government and other stakeholders, we are already
discussing the post-2012 engagement of the United
Nations with Timor-Leste, so as to facilitate decisions
of the next Government and the Council. In the
meantime, UNMIT continues to support Timor-Leste's
efforts to ensure that the prevailing stability and
security continue through 2012 and beyond.

Timor-Leste is about to hold presidential and
parliamentary elections, and we have every reason to
believe that they will be successful. On 13 January, the
President signed a decree establishing 17 March as the
date of the presidential election. Thirteen candidates,
including two women, whose candidacies were
approved by the Court of Appeal will contest the
election. The legally established campaign period starts
on 29 February and ends on 14 March. A run-off, if
necessary, will be held in the third week of April. The
voter registration period closed on 11 January.
According to the Technical Secretariat for Electoral
Administration, 628,454 people were registered. That
is an increase of 89,015 voters from the registration
results in 2007, reflecting improved civic education
and outreach efforts on the part of the Technical
Secretariat, improved statistics through the census, and
the country's high rate of population growth. The
parliamentary election, the date of which is yet to be
established, is likely to take place in late June.

The electoral management bodies are striving to
deliver transparent and fair elections. As mentioned in
successive reports of the Secretary-General, their
capacities have increased since 2007, and there has
been an accompanying decrease in the level of United
Nations support. Still, the United Nations continues to
provide integrated technical assistance through the
joint United Nations Development Programme and
UNMIT electoral support team. The final group of 130
United Nations Volunteers, who arrived in January,
have deployed throughout the country to support the
Technical Secretariat for Electoral Administration and
12-23800
the National Electoral Commission with activities that
include operational planning, logistics, and voter and
civic education. That work is complemented by
operational support by UNMIT police to the Policia
Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL) during the elections,
and our good-offices efforts to help sustain a
constructive political environment.

During the electoral process, the Secretary-
General is planning to issue messages commending
Timor-Leste on its achievements and calling on all
Timorese to ensure that the presidential and
parliamentary elections are credible, transparent and
peaceful. Presidential candidates and political party
leaders are acting in that spirit; their constructive
messages about the need for peaceful elections are
central to maintaining public confidence in the
elections and political stability. My senior staff and I
have been travelling to many of the districts to get a
first-hand sense of the situation on the ground and the
readiness of the local authorities to carry out the
elections. For example, in Baucau on 20 January, I met
with the district administration and village chiefs and
was reassured to hear their expressions of confidence
in election preparations and public security.

National institutions are also taking increased
ownership of dialogue processes around elections. The
National Electoral Commission is developing a
national unity pact likely to be signed at the end of this
month by all presidential candidates and political
parties. As the Council may recall, UNMIT facilitated a
similar pact in 2007. It is encouraging that this
important work is now being done by national
institutions.

Maintaining a favourable security environment is
the most important task for the Policia Nacional de
Timor-Leste (PNTL). Some incidents involving martial
arts groups occurred in Dili in December, with the
alleged involvement of some members of the PNTL. In
an effort to prevent such incidents from becoming a
trend, the Council of Ministers recently adopted a
resolution prohibiting martial arts group activities for
one year. The PNTL has also identified seven officers
who took part in the December incidents. Three officers
have been recommended for dismissal and the remaining
four were recommended for written reprimand.
Following through on these recommendations through
decisive actions is important to maintaining public
confidence in the police service.
12-23800

The PNTL, with UNMIT police support, is
getting ready to ensure security during the electoral
period. A live exercise involving all security forces in
the country, including the Falintil-Forgas de Defesa de
Timor-Leste (F-FDTL) and the international security
forces, took place on 8 February. The President and I
were present to see this. The exercise tested the ability
of the respective forces to respond to possible security
incidents during elections, in accordance with their
respective roles and responsibilities.

In this context, I was heartened by the public
statements of the head of the armed forces, Major-
General Lere Anan Timur, regarding F-FDTL's role
during the elections as a support to the PNTL, if and
when requested by the appropriate civilian authorities.
Other joint PNTL-United Nations police election-
related activities include threat assessments conducted
in all districts, security assessments of all polling
centres, and election-specific training. I am confident
that these initiatives will help to ensure our joint
preparedness to respond to any eventuality during the
electoral period.

Preparations for the elections come in addition to
other capacity-building activities supported by UNMIT
police. Overall, progress of the Joint Development Plan
is encouraging, with 37 per cent of the 588 planned
activities completed as of 7 February. However,
UNMIT is facing difficulties in extending police
officers in key advisory positions. As the PNTL will
focus heavily on elections security in the coming
months, maintaining continuity and momentum in our
capacity-building work is becoming even more
important. Once again, I encourage police-contributing
countries to grant extension of officers in these
positions.

My assessment is that the PNTL will fulfil its role
in maintaining stability through 2012, with support
from UNMIT police, as required and requested. Of
course, building a professional and effective police
force is a major task that will continue long after
UNMIT's departure. I very much hope that bilateral
and multilateral support will be forthcoming to help the
PNTL's further development. Already, the institution is
on the right path, and it will continue along that path as
long as it demonstrates its commitment to integrity,
professionalism and capacity-building.

The Government and UNMIT have made good
progress in advancing UNMIT's transition. On
3
22 December, the Prime Minister signed a decree
establishing an inter-ministerial committee to manage
the transfer of certain UNMIT assets to national
authorities - a strong sign of the Government's
commitment to an orderly transition. On 2 February,
the High-level Committee on Transition reviewed the
encouraging progress in the implementation of the
Joint Transition Plan. The main challenge now is to
ensure that institutions taking on new responsibilities
have sufficient capacity and funding to carry them out
effectively.

In close collaboration with the Government, we
are also working to ensure that many of the Mission's
activities can transition seamlessly to the United
Nations country team in order to safeguard the
country's gains. We have developed a portfolio of 34
projects requiring $75 million in funding from 2012 to
2014, which leverage the country team's expertise in
four areas linked to UNMIT's work. The portfolio has
been approved by all relevant line ministries. This
morning, President Ramos-Horta, the Government,
UNMIT and the United Nations Development Group
presented the portfolio to Member States. I was
delighted with the positive reception, and hope that
bilateral support to United Nations agencies working in
Timor-Leste will be forthcoming.

More broadly, I hope that the Council will
recognize both the progress made in key areas of
UNMIT's mandate and the requirement for further
consolidation in the areas of justice, governance,
human rights, and capacity-building for the PNTL.
Such consolidation will very much tie in with the work
of the Group of Seven Plus on the new deal and the
peace and statebuilding goals - policy initiatives that
have been spearheaded by the Government of Timor-
Leste, in particular Finance Minister Emilia Pires.

Transition planning also entails improving the
capacity of national staff so that they can continue to
make a positive contribution to Timor-Leste's
development after UNNMIT leaves. UNMIT has an
extensive capacity-building programme to help its
national staff gain certification in various technical and
administrative areas. On 26 January, we held the latest
graduation ceremony for national staff participating in
this programme.

At the end of January, a joint team from the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
Department of Political Affairs, the United Nations
Development Group and UNMIT conducted a detailed
assessment of possible options for the United Nations
post-UNMT engagement in Timor-Leste based on those
identified in the Joint Transition Plan. The team sought
the views of a wide range of interlocutors, including
the President, the Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime
Minister - who is the overall focal point in the
Government for transition - and other Government
officials. The team also met with representatives of
political parties, civil society, media and the
international community. I would like to thank the
Government of Timor-Leste, especially its focal point
for post-UNMIT arrangements, Foreign Minister
Zacarias da Costa, for the warm welcome extended to
the team and the high level of attention accorded to the
transition by the Government.

In its meetings, the team encountered a
remarkable degree of coherence in the views of
different stakeholders. Interlocutors consistently
expressed the view that, on the understanding that
things go well this year, there should be no uniformed
United Nations personnel in Timor-Leste beyond 2012,
but that there is a need for a small political presence
with a link to the Secretariat, and through it to the
Security Council. Such a presence, it was suggested,
should focus on consolidating a culture of democratic
governance, nurturing a generation of future leaders,
consolidating gains in the areas of justice, governance,
human rights, and providing civilian advice to the
PNTL. Consultations on the post-UNMIT UN presence
will continue in the coming months on the
understanding that any final decision on this matter
will be taken only following consultation with the
Government formed after the parliamentary elections.
The early planning currently under way will enable
well-informed discussions with the newly elected
Government and lay the groundwork for a seamless
transition to a new form of partnership.

The year 2012 is a critical one for Timor-Leste,
marked by several key anniversaries, including the
tenth anniversary of the restoration of independence. I
count that this year will give us the opportunity to
celebrate peaceful elections, an orderly transition to a
new Government, continued stability and security and
further development of the PNTL's technical
capacities.

This year will also be a critical year for the
United Nations' long engagement with Timor-Leste. In
view of the developments that have been outlined in
his report to the Security Council, the Secretary-
General has asked that the Council extend UNMIT's
current mandate until 31 December 2012. Following
consultations with the new Government, and within 60
days of its formation, the Secretary-General would
submit a report containing his suggestions on UNMIT's
anticipated withdrawal and the post-UNMIT United
Nations presence in Timor-Leste. That report could
form the basis of a Council meeting in September or
October to enable a seamless transition to the post-
UNMIT presence. As the security situation permits, we
envisage that UNMIT police will begin a well-paced
drawdown following the parliamentary elections and
the formation of the new Government.

In conclusion, let me thank all of the United
Nations personnel in Timor-Leste. I would also like to
thank the leadership of Timor-Leste, and again
President Ramos-Horta, with whom we are here today.
Finally, allow me to thank the people of Timor-Leste
for their determination to establish a stable and
enduring peace for their country.

