Mr. Abdelaziz (League of Arab States) (spoke in Arabic): I would like to begin, Mr. President,
by expressing the gratitude of the League of Arab
States for inviting us to today's high-level debate and
congratulating the delegation of the Russian Federation
on its preparation of today's distinctive concept note
(S/2018/524, annex). We would also like to welcome the
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Russia, who has
been presiding over this important meeting.

As most speakers have said today, the Middle East
is the cradle of civilization. But since the founding of
the United Nations, it has witnessed several devastating
wars in which international foreign Powers have
participated. The wars in 1948, 1956, 1967 and 1973
opened the way for Arab countries to seriously seek a
just and comprehensive peace in the Middle East. That
endeavour began with the initiative of the late President
Anwar Sadat, who visited Israel, the signing in 1978
of two Camp David framework agreements for peace
between Israel and Egypt and Israel and Palestine,
the two peace treaties between Egypt and Israel and
Jordan and Israel, followed by the Oslo negotiations,
the Madrid Peace Conference and the 2002 Arab Peace
Initiative. All of those endorsed a two-State solution
as the basis for a fair and comprehensive settlement
of the conflict. A road map was adopted with the five
final status issues, which continue to be the elements
for a genuine peace process. In parallel, the Quartet
was established to directly oversee the implementation
process. The United Nations took part in order to ensure
that all of its organs, particularly the Security Council,
participated in the peaceful settlement of the dispute.
That is the backdrop to the current situation.

A fair examination by the United Nations of the
causes for the start and continuation of the wars in
the Middle East and for the Organization's failure to
establish international peace and security in our region
might highlight certain fundamental elements that can
be summarized as follows. First, there is a lack of a
clear political end to the peace process in the Middle
East that would take into account the plan submitted by
Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas to the Security
Council on 20 February (see S/PV.8183), as well as
various Arab League summit- and ministerial-level
resolutions, particularly in the light of the United States
Administration's decision to recognize Jerusalem
as the capital of Israel, defying the international
legitimacy, all previous agreements and conventions
and contradicting all the relevant General Assembly
and Security Council resolutions. The media is also
reporting that the United States will no longer pursue
negotiations on the five final status issues as a basis for
peace. Such negotiations will be replaced by an attempt
to launch major economic projects in the West Bank
and Gaza financed and supported by Arab countries
and others. There is no doubt that the situation will not
be helped by excluding Jerusalem from the final status
negotiations, seeking a unilateral decision, averting the
issue of refugees by failing to fund the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East, or failing to fund the activities of the
Palestinian Authority. There are also the attempts to
stand in the way of Palestinians protecting themselves
from Israeli military aggression. Some 13,000 have
been injured and more than 130 have been martyrs,
all of which shows that there need to be an exhaustive
attempt to bring the peace process back on track to
where it should be.
Secondly, the absence of a political horizon also
relates to the ambiguity posed by an arms build-up in
the region, namely, nuclear weapons and other weapons
of mass destruction, and the absence of any efforts on
the part of the three countries signatories of the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) or
of the Secretary-General to implement the fourth plan
of action adopted by the NPT Review Conference in
2010 by holding an international conference for the
establishment of a zone free of nuclear weapons and
all other weapons of mass destruction in the Middle
East, which did not take place. The deplorable result
is that Israel continues to maintain its nuclear capacity,
about which we do not know anything and which is not
subject to the safeguards guarantees of the International
Atomic Energy Agency. Furthermore, we see chemical
weapons being used in Syria, and the United Nations
is not even able to investigate and determine who is
responsible. All of that indicates that the Middle East
region could move into a new phase of an arms race for
conventional, and perhaps nuclear, weapons in order to
try to strike a certain strategic balance when it comes to
armaments, particularly with the growing international
concern about Iran's nuclear capability.

Thirdly, some international and regional Powers
wrongly interpret Arab trends towards change and
development, particularly in countries that have
experienced popular revolutions or societal movements
since 2011 or in countries that have seen changes in
their attempts to develop and modernize themselves.
We see this very clearly in the increase in the number of
flagrant violations and acts of interference in the internal
affairs of Arab countries that support certain religious
and ethnic movements, in order to defend restricted
interests that have nothing to do with the aspirations
of the Arab peoples for change. There are many clear
examples of that. There are those that support the
Kurds and incite them to declare their independence.
Some support Hizbullah, Hamas or Islamic Jihad in
order to impose their power and to stir up tensions
between Israel and Palestine, rather than resolving the
crisis. Others support the Muslim Brotherhood in order
to revitalize the failed visions of previous empires.
Some support the Shiites to destabilize the Sunni
countries and give support to extremist terrorist groups
such as Da'esh, the Al-Nusra Front and others in Arab
countries, in order to show that Governments are weak
and rejected by the people.

Fourthly, the Security Council and the international
community wrongly interpret differences among
Arabs, which contradicts its position in other parts of
the world where there are different political groupings
and where we see that the Council and the international
community support the settlement of disputes. They
put the common interests over and above individual
interests without foreign intervention. What exacerbates
the situation is the plethora of foreign mediators who
have opinions differing from those of the Arab peoples
and from those of the Arab States themselves. That
clearly shows that we need positive efforts in order to
resolve the differences between Arab countries and
to strengthen common Arab action, particularly since
the Arab countries have all the necessary human and
material resources to do so.

Fifthly, the Middle East region, in particular the
conflict areas, has become a battleground between
the major Powers. We have seen the use of the veto by
the major Powers in the Security Council, particularly
when it comes to issues relating to Palestine and Syria
and other urgent Arab issues. That is clear proof
that the major Powers use the destiny of our peoples
and countries to strengthen their areas of influence
and power in order to forge regional alliances, while
ignoring the great human and material suffering that
this imposes on the peoples of the Arab world. We see
that Arab conflicts have become proxy wars for the
major Powers, which limit our capacity as Arabs to do
away with the conflicts once and for all and to develop
ourselves. That is not really what these major Powers
should be doing in terms of their responsibilities at the
international level, especially when they are permanent
members of the Security Council.

We do not have enough time to delve into an
in-depth analysis of the root causes of the conflicts
in Middle East. It is a complicated issue where
everything is interconnected that would require many
meetings. But I would like to conclude with a final
point. With regard to your proposal, Mr. President,
to launch a regional dialogue similar to the Helsinki
process that was launched in Europe in the 1970s, with
the participation of foreign partners, such a process
should be based on the Arab Peace Initiative and on
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action on the Iranian
nuclear programme, in order to foster trust among Arab
countries and Israel and Iran. Such a proposal is not
being made for the first time. The main thing that we
need to ask ourselves here is what sort of trust we are
talking about. Israel continues to occupy territories
in Syria, Palestine and Lebanon and obstructs the
establishment of a Palestinian State with East Jerusalem
as its capital, and is supported in its positions by
foreign Powers. How can we speak about trust when
Israel and Iran continue to develop their undisclosed
nuclear capacities and when Iran flagrantly interferes
in the internal affairs of Arab countries by providing
support to organizations that are opposed to the Arab
Governments on ideological and religious bases?

The League of Arab States believes that a regional
dialogue based on a format similar to Helsinki could
be a positive development, but only if it were based on
practical processes that could bring about a just and
comprehensive peace, and provided that the territorial
sovereignty of Arab countries were respected, that all
parties undertook not to interfere in internal Arab affairs
and committed to respecting States' regional unity and
respecting international legitimacy, international law,
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
They should commit themselves to the Charter of the
United Nations and to Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions, in particular when it comes to
the creation of an independent Palestinian State within
1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and to
making the Middle East a zone free of nuclear weapons
and all other weapons of mass destruction. They should
also stop trying to impose hegemony on the Arab
region or any part of it. In that regard, the League of
Arab States would like the Secretary-General to play a
more effective and pivotal role in the political sphere,
through his good offices, in re-establishing peace and
stability in the region and ridding the Middle East of
weapons of mass destruction. We are sure that the Arab
world is able to overcome its current crisis and move
towards achieving peace, development and progress.

