Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me first to welcome Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch's presence
among us. We have listened with the greatest interest to
his detailed presentation. I must assure the High
Representative of France's full support in the
accomplishment of the important mission that he is
carrying out with talent, patience and determination.

With slightly more than two weeks to go before
the general elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina, how
can we fail to rejoice at the fact that the Bosnian people
will now have a chance to express through the ballot
their devotion to democracy, their aspiration to the rule
of law, their rejection of ethnic division and their
legitimate ambition to be fully a part of their family,
the European family. The report of the High
Representative very candidly stresses that the wounds
of the past will take a long time to heal. The decision
that Mr. Petritsch took yesterday regarding the
dignified burial ofthe victims of the Srebrenica tragedy
will contribute to this, but we must also hope that the
November elections will produce gains for the
moderate parties and less support for the errant radical
nationalists. Were such a development to occur, the
citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in the same way as
the Yugoslav and Croatian peoples, would be giving us
new reasons to hope, with prospects of peace,
reconciliation and economic development in the region.
A new step forward would be taken in the Bosnians'
chance to take control of their own fate, a process that
the international community seeks to encourage.

On 23 and 24 May, the Peace Implementation
Council met in Brussels and set the course. Institutions
in Bosnia and Herzegovina must be consolidated, the
economy must be reformed and the return of refugees
must remain a priority. The High Representative has
continued to work in this direction, with a blend of
dialogue and firmness: dialogue, because this is the
best way of bringing the Bosnian leaders to shoulder
their responsibilities; and firmness, particularly
through imposing laws or regulations when this is the
only way to put an end to intransigence, overcome the
resistance of elected or appointed officials who do not
act in good faith and, finally, to ensure that the general
interest prevails. In this spirit, I would like to note that
the single national passport of Bosnia and Herzegovina
was officially presented yesterday, 25 October, by the
Presidency and the High Representative.

We must hope that changes in the region will
create a new state of mind. We must hope that goodwill
will be contagious and that the prospect of
normalization, glimpsed yesterday at the Skopje
summit, will also have a beneficial impact in terms of
trade and, more generally, of opening up the economy,
a field in which there is an urgent need for reform.

I would like to underscore the European Union's
commitment to this process of integration and reform.
The Union is both the main donor and the main troop
contributor for Bosnia and Herzegovina. It will have an
opportunity to reaffirm its political involvement during
the Zagreb summit, to be held on 24 November on the
initiative of France.

I would also like to draw attention to a recent
initiative of the European Union in Mostar. It was
under the auspices of the Union, and thanks to the
spirit of cooperation displayed by the two leaders of
that divided city, that on 12 July the Mostar document
was adopted and signed by the conference of the city's
mayors. This document marks an important phase
towards the implementation of a final statute that
provides for a single, self-reliant and multi-ethnic
administration for the city.

