The President: In view of the lateness of the
hour, Uganda will be the last speaker of the morning. I
propose to resume the meeting at 3 pm. this afternoon
in order to listen to the other speakers on the list.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of Uganda.

I thank Mr. Fernandez-Taranco, Assistant
Secretary-General for his comprehensive briefing. I
also thank the representatives of Israel and Palestine
for their statements.

It is a matter of concern to my delegation that the
situation in the Middle East remains tense and fragile.
We were encouraged by the commencement of direct
negotiations between Israel and Palestine last month. It
is essential that the two parties uphold their
commitment to work towards a framework for
permanent peace.

There is no doubt that this negotiation process
will require courageous decisions and concessions by
both parties. Uganda is convinced that a
comprehensive and durable peace lies in a two-State
solution: Israel and Palestine living side by side in
peace and security. In this regard, we commend the
efforts undertaken by the international and regional
partners in facilitating the negotiations.

We salute the efforts of the Palestinian Authority
to fulfil their obligations under the Road Map,
particularly in the security sector, in institution-
building and in economic development. We, however,
remain concerned about divisions among the
Palestinians and call upon them to resolve their
differences through dialogue.

The continued settlement activity by Israel in
East Jerusalem is a recipe for conflict, which is a
matter of serious concern. We call upon Israel to freeze
all settlement activity, including natural growth. We are
also concerned over the continued rocket attacks from
Gaza into Israel, as well as Israeli air strikes into Gaza.
We call on both sides to exercise maximum restraint
and adhere to the ceasefire as envisaged in resolution
1860 (2009).
28
While the casing of the blockade on Gaza by
Israel is a positive step, we call for the total lifting of
the blockade.

On Lebanon, we are concerned about the
continued violations of resolution 1701 (2006). We call
on all parties to fully implement that resolution.

I resume my function as President of the Council.
As indicated earlier, I intend, with the concurrence of
Council members, to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.

The meeting was suspended at 1.20 p.m.
10-58828
