Mr. Plasai (Thailand) (spoke in French): Today,
peace and security are seriously threatened by terrorism
and violent extremism, which are exacerbating conflicts
in many countries around the world. Even more
alarmingly, a large number of our young people have
been affected by such hateful activities or have been
involved in them. The world's 1.8 billion young people
represent one quarter of the global population. They
hold the key to our future. They could be the catalysts
for peace, development, prosperity and progress.
Accordingly, as an essential element of our strategy
and efforts to combat terrorism and violent extremism,
we must take into account and examine the specific
situation of youth and the potential role of young
people for promoting peace. We therefore welcome the
timely initiative of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
in convening today's open debate. In that regard, I
would like to express the gratitude of the Kingdom of
Thailand to His Royal Highness Prince Al Hussein bin
Abdallah II of Jordan for presiding over this meeting. I
also thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Peter Neumann
and Mr. Scott Atrain for sharing their points of View on
the problem.

(spoke in English)

In order to effectively protect our youth from
violence and enhance their role in countering violent
extremism, the international community must adopt a
comprehensive approach that addresses the root causes
of the problem. Allow me to share with the Council
some perspectives as to how we can support our youth
in that regard.

First, we must cultivate an environment of tolerance
for cultural diversity and respect for the freedoms of
belief, thought and expression. At the national level,
Governments, academia, civil society and the media
all have a role to play in fostering a peaceful and
inclusive society through interfaith dialogue. That can
be complemented by efforts at the international level,
such as the commendable work of the United Nations
Alliance of Civilization and the Declaration and
Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace.

Secondly, quality education should be universally
accessible. Priority should be given to efforts to
enhance access for vulnerable groups such as children
of migrant workers or those living in remote areas.
Thirdly, decent employment must be ensured
for youth, so as to give them a sense of purpose and
belonging. National Governments have an important
role to play, particularly in matching skills with jobs,
promoting gender equality and ensuring an appropriate
legal environment to protect youth in the labour market.

Fourthly, youth are sensitive to romantic and
heroic ideas. They are therefore highly vulnerable
to the propaganda of terrorist and violent extremist
groups. Education and employment provide, to a
certain extent, a defence against youth recruitment and
association with radical groups. However, they may not
be sufficient in today's increasingly borderless world.
Governments must therefore focus on monitoring and
countering propaganda and recruitment techniques of
terrorist and violent extremist groups, especially those
made online. It goes without saying that there should
a balance between those efforts and the fundamental
principle of respect for privacy and the freedom of
expression.

Fifthly, of equal importance is the issue of the
rehabilitation and reintegration of youth who return
home after joining terrorist and Violent extremist
groups. Should they be treated as terrorists or healed as
youth with shattered dreams? Should they be severely
punished or given another chance? That issue should be
further discussed and adequately addressed.

Last but not least, regional and global international
organizations can play an important part in efforts
to effectively harness the role of youth in countering
terrorism and violent extremism and promoting peace.
The Kingdom of Thailand supports the efforts of the
Security Council in that regard, in particular resolution
2178 (2014), which encourages the Analytical Support
and Sanctions Monitoring Team to ensure coordination
among all United Nations counter-terrorism bodies.
We also urge greater coordination among the relevant
United Nations offices and agencies, in particular the
Office of the Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth,
the United Nations Development Programme and
UNESCO, in their efforts to protect our youth from
violence and enhance their role in promoting peace.

