Mr. Cabral (Portugal): I would like to welcome
the High Representative, Ambassador Valentin Inzko,
and convey to him Portugal's appreciation and support
for his important and demanding work and that of his
Office, in the interest of peace and stability in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. I also thank him for his very
comprehensive report (see S/2012/307).

Portugal naturally shares the views expressed in
the statement that will be made later by the observer of
the European Union, but allow me to underline some
issues of particular concern for my country.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has undertaken
significant efforts to overcome the political impasse
following the October 2010 elections, which affected
the development of national policies, its progress
towards meeting the 5+2 agenda to close the Office of
the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and its European Union and NATO integration. In that
regard, the constructive attitude of the political leaders
and the relevant authorities is much to be appreciated
and encouraged so that the positive momentum towards
the adoption of relevant reforms is not lost.

Among those reforms, the economic reforms are
of particular importance, given the difficult situation of
the country. In that context, we reiterate the urgent
need to adopt the 2012 State budget and the 2012-2014
global fiscal framework, as they would contribute to
the strengthening of Bosnia and Herzegovina's social
and economic stability and, ultimately, to peace and
security throughout the region. Challenges to the fiscal
structure of Bosnia and Herzegovina at its different
levels, as we have witnessed over the past months,
directly threaten the operation and sustainability of the
federal Government and risk creating new obstacles for
a Government, and indeed for an entire country, that
faces a very complex situation in that regard.

In conclusion, the international community, and
notably the European Union, must continue to be fully
engaged with Bosnia and Herzegovina. We welcome
the reinforcement of the European Union presence in
the country and we support the European Union forces,
particularly the European Union Police Mission, the
competencies of which will soon be assumed by the
European Union Special Representative and by the
European Union Force-Operation Althea, the mission
and presence of which, we believe, continue to be of
significant importance for Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
also bear in mind the ongoing discussions on the
reconfiguration of the international presence with a
view to reflecting on the specific needs of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and responding to them in an adequate,
constructive and open-minded manner.

