Mr. Faki Mahamat (spoke in French): I would like
to begin by addressing you, Mr. President, to thank you
and your Government for organizing this important
meeting on the state ofpeace and security in Africa and
partnership to strengthen regional peace and security.

Peace in Africa is undergoing significant changes.
We have finalized the preparation of a well-engineered
peace architecture with relatively effective organs. In the
interest of harmony and coherence, that architecture has
combined the efforts of our regional organizations - the
pillars of our African Union - with those of the Union
itself. On a doctrinal level, that architecture reflects a
foundation of shared values, coordinated around the
double principle that African problems must be solved
by Africans themselves and that the cost of so doing
should be borne, to a large extent, by Africa's own
resources. It is on the basis of that double principle that
the African Union has proposed here in the Security
Council and beyond an original model to fund African
peacekeeping operations.

While the overarching duty of Africa is to bear
responsibility for a significant part of that funding, that
cannot in any way relieve the Security Council, the sole
organ truly responsible for peace in the world, of its
obligations to provide funding for those operations from
the appropriate resources of the universal Organization.
That issue is today at the heart of peace and security
concerns in Africa.

The factors threatening peace in Africa make
it urgently important that we develop innovative
approaches to considering such factors and the
best ways and means to effectively respond. The
traditional mechanisms for responding to threats to
peace, peacebuilding and peacekeeping no longer
fully correspond to the new situation. Terrorism
in all its forms and illegal trafficking of all kinds
are unmanageable through the former models. The
costs, bureaucratic red tape, ways of functioning and
operational and tactical redeployment methods of
those models make them - to be frank - unsuitable,
ineffective and obsolete. A new model endowed with
a legal, political, financial and operational mechanism
that is better adapted to the social, cultural and religious
context of African societies must be conceived.

The African Union has repeatedly reiterated its
full readiness to work with the United Nations, and
the Security Council in particular, towards the desired
doctrinal and operational progress. I have come today
to reiterate Africa's continued readiness in that regard.

The panorama of peace in Africa highlights
some indisputable success stories. The normalization
of the situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Central African Republic through the
implementation of the agreements concluded under the
auspices of the African Union; the significant progress
made towards peace and reconciliation in South
Sudan; and a certain level of positive stabilization
against terrorism in Somalia and the Lake Chad area
are noteworthy. The latest addition to that series of
achievements is the significant success of African
mediation in the Sudan, which paved the way towards
a peaceful and consensus-based democratic transition
in the country.

Progress towards peace in Africa must not, however,
hide the weaknesses and, above all, the darker realities
that continue to cast shade on the overall outlook. In
the Sahel, the efforts of the international community to
contain and eradicate terrorism are not yet producing
the expected results as the phenomenon continues to
grow and threaten regions beyond northern Mali alone.
The countries of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-S Sahel) have therefore joined forces and decided to pool
their resources in order to provide the appropriate
responses. The support of the Security Council is
essential in that regard.

I take this opportunity to reiterate my calls for
real and effective solidarity with those countries, since
their fight against poverty and the cancer of that region,
terrorism, are concerns worthy of the most active
international solidarity. Any weak point in that desired
solidarity, regardless of the pretext, would facilitate
the spread of the terrorist hydra, which, at least in the
Sahel, has been fuelled by the fragmentation of another
African crisis. By way of conclusion, I will say a few
words on the crisis in Libya.

The Libyan crisis has been marked from the very
beginning by the frustrating marginalization of Africa,
which has been replaced by a plurality of external
actors, each of which is pursuing its own agenda, as
everyone knows. In less than a decade, that way of
addressing the Libyan issue has revealed the full extent
of its limitations as the crisis continues to deteriorate
and the suffering of the Libyan people only persists.
It is time to stop that infernal, senseless process. The
Security Council and Africa have an obligation to
collectively reconsider that situation and experiment
with another way.

First, we must clearly decide that there is no
military solution to the crisis. Rigorous enforcement
of the embargo on weapons - which continue to
proliferate throughout the country and allow those
waging war to continue to do so by financing their
weapons from Libya's own resources - is therefore
a matter of extreme urgency. We must then engage
in a process of genuinely inclusive and revitalized
political negotiations in order to outline a democratic
and consensual transition capable of dealing with
humanitarian emergencies and the organization of free
and transparent elections, which are the foundations of
true political legitimacy in that country.

That objective is easy to formulate, but complicated
to achieve. It requires a joint implementation
mechanism - with emphasis on "joint" - to take the
lead. In the establishment of that new joint mechanism,
it is crucial that we underscore the central role of
Africa in an issue that is just as African as any other
on our continent, in which the continental organization
has demonstrated its own competence, knowledge,
experience and expertise.

The centrality of the African Union is not a matter
of ego or self-importance. It is a matter of common
sense and the quest for efficiency and concrete results.
To implement it, the African Union, which has no
specific agenda, is seeking only collective action based
on respectful partnerships and not a substitute for
taking orders or clearing one's conscience. It is a matter
of working together, on the basis of common values,
in the sole and unique interest of peace, reconciliation
and democracy in Libya. In such a joint effort, we will
give specific content to our partnership with the United
Nations, in accordance with the framework agreement
signed in April 2017 here in New York.

