Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): We are gathered
here today in the name of prevention. International
peace and security are under threat, owing to North
Korea's unabated development of ballistic-missile and
nuclear-weapon technology. Despite concerted good-
faith efforts by the United States to negotiate a solution,
this year has seen 13 sets of illegal ballistic-missile
tests. We are therefore also gathered here today to send
a message to Pyongyang that it is not too late. It can
prevent the situation from worsening and should seize
this diplomatic opportunity, which has already been
repeated in this Council meeting. The expressed and
united will of the Security Council is that North Korea
should begin the process of complete, verifiable and
irreversible denuclearization, and the United Kingdom
will continue to work with international partners to
support that goal.

What is at stake bears repeating. As the Permanent
Representative of China said, this is truly and
quintessentially a matter for the Security Council, and
of all international bodies, only the Security Council
can really deal with such a challenge deriving from
weapons of mass destruction and proliferation. It is a
vital issue. It is hard to discern what lies behind North
Korea's provocative and dangerous moves. It has tested
three different types of short-range ballistic missiles
since May, and the tests have demonstrated that its illegal
and reckless weapons programme has made substantial
progress. As other representatives have said, each test
is a violation of Security Council resolutions, and
the Council should support the rigorous enforcement
of its sanctions in the face of such violations. At this
point, I also want to wholeheartedly endorse what the
representative of France said about the humanitarian
angle.

The sanctions regime imposed by the Council
will remain in place until North Korea takes concrete
steps towards denuclearization. Further breaches of
Security Council resolutions, whether with ballistic-
missile launches, space launch vehicles or nuclear tests,
will only harden the Council's resolve. And there are
further implications of the possession of such weapons.
It is in no Member State's interest to see North Korean
technology and expertise proliferate across borders.
With the fiftieth anniversary of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons coming up, next
year will be a very important moment to resolve this
issue.
We should not forget the suffering of the North
Korean people. The human rights situation in North
Korea is disturbing. It is the worst offender on the
Global Slavery Index and is ranked 179th out of 180
in the Reporters without Borders World Press Freedom
Index. The role of human rights in this issue is critical,
and we urge North Korea to concentrate on improving
the lives of its most vulnerable people.

All States have an obligation to enforce the Council's
sanctions. We urge action to address the continued
reports of fuel shipments to North Korea in violation of
the mandated annual import cap, and we urge vigilance
regarding North Korea's illegal fundraising activity,
including its use of cyberattacks. Lastly, if I may,
Madam President, we would like to remind States that
all North Korean overseas workers earning an income
should be repatriated by 22 December this year.

Our message as a Council must be united, and it is
a clear one. The continued development of programmes
in violation of Security Council resolutions will not
be tolerated. We urge North Korea to change course,
engage in meaningful negotiations with the United
States and begin a process of complete, verifiable and
irreversible denuclearization.

