Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank Indonesia for convening
today's meeting. I also thank the Secretary-General and
the two briefers for their insightful briefings.

Due to the difficult operational environments and
complex challenges that current peace operations are
facing, it is imperative to enhance both the performance
and the safety and security of peacekeepers. We
welcome the steps taken by the United Nations and
Member States to address those issues through training
and capacity-building. However, further efforts by
various stakeholders are necessary. Japan has supported
capacity-building for peacekeepers from 45 countries
over the past five years. Based on our experience, I
would like to make two suggestions that we believe will
help to ensure the effective delivery of training.

First, the training and capacity-building needs of
troop- and police-contributing countries (TCCs/PCCs)
and field missions should be addressed effectively
through partnerships. The Secretariat has several
channels to identify those needs, including assessment
and advisory visits of the Peacekeeping Capability
Readiness System and in-mission performance
evaluations of contingents. In order to conduct training
that incorporates those inputs, we will need strong
partnerships among TCCs and PCCs, the Secretariat
and supporting countries.

In 2014, the Secretariat launched an innovative
framework to promote such cooperation, called the
Triangular Partnership Project. Conducting training
through the project has allowed us to effectively
address the needs ofTCCs and PCCs and field missions,
because such training is organized by the Secretariat,
which receives direct feedback from the missions
and assessment and advisory Visits. That ensures that
personnel learn the specific skills that they need for
their mission.

Triangular partnerships can be applied to the
development of any type of capabilities, from infantry
to enablers. They can also be used to address a wide
spectrum of training needs, from basic training, to
predeployment training, to in-mission training. In
fact, the development potential goes beyond training.
The triangular partnership model can even serve as a
platform to facilitate innovative approaches, such as
equipment contribution and co-deployment.

Our second suggestion is to establish an effective
mechanism to rapidly scale up critical expertise for a
huge number of personnel in a short period of time. We
sometimes need to assist tens of thousands ofpersonnel
in acquiring standardized skills, in order to enhance
their performance and security. Buddy first aid is one
such skill. As one of the innovative approaches to achieve
such an ambitious goal, the Department of Operational
Support has been trying to establish trainer pyramids
in the field of medical training. That endeavour has
just begun, and further efforts are required to make the
trainer-pyramid concept work. For example, TCCs and
PCCs should dispatch qualified candidates to training
courses. The United Nations and supporting countries
have to certify trainees' performances according to
strict standards.

In conclusion, let me reiterate Japan's commitment
to capacity-building in order to ensure that peacekeepers
have the skills that they need to safely carry out their
mandates. We will continue to support engineering and
medical training through the triangular partnership
model, and we are ready to provide mobile training and
training-of-trainers courses in the area of engineering.

Japan will also continue to facilitate women's
participation in United Nations peace operations
through training. We co-hosted, with the Department
of Peace Operations, the first ever capacity-building
training for women's protection advisers in Tokyo
last December. We will continue to pursue that goal,
including through dispatching female trainers to
capacity-building programmes.

