Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my appreciation for the
efforts of the United Nations to help the Government
and the people of brotherly Iraq at this important
juncture. We also appreciate the work and coordination
with the Iraqi Government pursuant to resolution
2421 (2018) through the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). I would also like to take
this opportunity to congratulate Ms. Jeanine Hennis-
Plasschaert on her appointment as Head of UNAMI and
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Iraq. I thank her for her valuable and comprehensive
briefing and appreciate her efforts, as well as those of
her predecessor, Mr. Jan Kubis, to whom we wish every
success in his future endeavours.

With regard to the situation in the brotherly Republic
of Iraq and the responsibilities entrusted to UNAMI,
allow me to express my gratitude for the efforts of
the Mission and the United Nations in Iraq to build a
bright future for the country, beginning with creating
conditions conducive for security and stability, meeting
humanitarian needs and providing the prerequisites for
sustainable development. I should like to reiterate the
full continuing support of the State of Kuwait and our
cooperation with UNAMI and the country team in the
proper discharge of their functions.

We recognize that the upcoming phase is important
for Iraq in order to overcome the difficult conditions it
is experiencing, especially following the defeat of the
terrorist Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).
Iraq now requires international efforts to support, assist
with and meet the humanitarian needs of the affected
Iraqi people and ensure their security. That is also our
responsibility as one of Iraq's neighbours, as well as
of other countries in the region and the international
community at large - especially as we know that we
must make greater efforts so that Iraq can enjoy unity,
security and stability, free from crises and division

Since Iraq began its rebuilding phase after the
previous regime, the State of Kuwait has provided
assistance to its brothers in Iraq in order to help the
country maintain its independence, sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity. We also welcome the
comprehensive national dialogue and hope it will make
it possible for Iraqis to achieve national reconciliation,
combat extremism and terrorism, enhance the rule of
law and provide welfare and security for all segments of
Iraqi society without exception. We wish our brotherly
and neighbourly Iraq all progress and prosperity.

Since the emergence of the terrorist Da'esh group in
Iraq - and recognizing the scope of the destruction the
country has suffered - the leadership, the Government
and the people of the State of Kuwait have provided
assistance to the Iraqi people and have spared no effort
to stand by them. I would like to refer to the initiative
of His Highness the Amir of Kuwait, Sheikh Sabah
Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, to host the Kuwait
International Conference for Reconstruction of Iraq,
held in February 2018, to help alleviate the suffering of
the Iraqi people so that they can move towards stability
and reconstruction. We hope that countries that pledge
to provide assistance during the conference will honour
their obligations.

We share the concerns of the Secretary-General, as
set out in his report (S/2019/101), that sleeper terrorist
cells remain a threat to the stability and security of Iraq
and the region as a whole. We must all make additional
efforts and take further decisive measures to eradicate
terrorist activities and practices and hold accountable
those who have perpetrated such heinous crimes. They
must be brought to justice, in cooperation with the
United Nations mechanism established by the Security
Council, pursuant to resolution 2379 (2017).

Concerning international obligations and
remaining humanitarian issues pertaining to the
missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and
missing Kuwaiti property, including the national
archives, today's meeting takes place as we mark the
twenty-eighth anniversary of the liberation of the State
of Kuwait from Iraqi aggression. However, we cannot
fully commemorate that anniversary so long as the
fate of our missing people remains unknown. That
humanitarian issue will remain our top priority. We
will make every possible effort to determine the fate
of our martyrs now that we have almost lost all hope
of finding them alive. We appreciate the concern of
the members of the Security Council and the fact that
they have kept this humanitarian issue on the agenda
for all these years, as well as their follow-up with
respect to the implementation of all commitments set
out in relevant Council resolutions, in particular those
pertaining to the main remaining obligations that have
not been honoured since the liberation of the State of
Kuwait in 1991.

We commend the serious and genuine desire of
brotherly Iraq to meet all its remaining international
obligations towards the State of Kuwait. We have
been able to identify the remains of 236 individuals of
the 605 missing persons, which would not have been
possible without Iraq's cooperation. We hope that we
will continue to cooperate and work in the same spirit
with Iraq. However, we have been unable since 2004
to find the remains of any other missing persons.
We reiterate our readiness to support and assist
Iraq in order to expedite the implementation of the
remaining obligations, as set out in relevant Security
Council resolutions.

We appreciate the efforts of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, through its chairmanship
of the Tripartite Commission, as it seeks to honour
its obligations to complete the humanitarian dossier,
as appropriate. We believe that tangible progress is
possible if we scale up efforts and implement agreed
plans and programmes within the framework of the
Tripartite Commission and its Technical Subcommittee.
The State of Kuwait will spare no effort to support
endeavours to determine the fate of missing Kuwaiti
and third-country nationals.

At the same time, we urge UNAMI to continue to
implement its mandate regarding the issues of detainees,
missing persons and the return of property, including
Kuwait's national archives, pursuant to resolution 2107
(2013). We call on Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert to adopt a
new approach to ensure that we achieve progress on
the issue.

Other obligations to which I would like to draw the
Council's attention include Kuwaiti property, including
our national archives. They are just as important as
other obligations because our archives and property
represent true historic wealth - important heritage
for the national memory of the State and the people of
Kuwait. It is unfortunate that the fate of the archives
has remained unknown since the liberation of Kuwait
in 1991. We share the disappointment of the Secretary-
General in that regard.

In conclusion, the State of Kuwait realizes that the
new Iraq has nothing to do with the Iraq of the past. It is
high time that the international community supported
the efforts of Iraq to recover and play its role in the
region and the world - following the painful events it
has endured over the past few years in fighting terrorist
Da'esh - and build on the victories of its people. They
can overcome that difficult phase.

We hope that the formation of the Iraqi Government
can be completed in order to build the Iraq of the future.
We wish the Government every success in meeting the
aspirations of the Iraqi people. They deserve to live
in a stable, prosperous and safe country. The State of
Kuwait reiterates its solidarity with the leadership, the
Government and the people of Iraq in any step they take
to consecrate Iraqi national unity, roll back terrorism
and maintain their sovereignty and territorial integrity.

