Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): Mr. President, I
wish to convey my delegation's appreciation to you and
your team for an efficient and productive presidency
of the Council during this month. We are approaching
the end of 2014, arguably the most intensive year the
Council has ever had. I wish we could conclude this
year with a sense of accomplishment, but that is not
the case. The year 2015 will inherit the largest number
of refugees and displaced people ever, significant gaps
in accountability and ending impunity, a mutating
and expanding threat of terrorism, and an even more
diverse geography of conflicts that demand our urgent
attention.

Six months ago at the Asia Society, the Secretary-
General pleaded with the international community not
to abandon the people of Syria and the region to waves
of cruelty and devastation, and offered a six-point
plan ahead. Barely on one point 4 the destruction of
chemical weapons - progress has been achieved. The
people of Syria continue to suffer displacement, torture,
enforced disappearances, sieges, starvation and barrel
bombs at the hands of the tyrannical Al-Assad's regime
and murderous terrorist groups. Humanitarian access
continues to be denied, convoys delayed and vital
medicines confiscated, while doctors and humanitarian
workers remain under constant attack.
Resolution 2139 (2013) has been ignored or violated
on almost all points. Protected by a series of vetoes,
those who are causing such extraordinary destruction
and devastation continue to enjoy impunity. We
welcome the renewal last week for one year of the
provisions of resolution 2165 (2014), and thank the
penholders, Australia, Jordan and Luxembourg, for
their passionate and patient work throughout the year in
the face of that unprecedented humanitarian crisis. We
hope that the efforts of United Nations Special Envoy
for Syria Staffan de Mistura will lead to life-saving
solutions. We stress, however, that local freezes should
not become just another surrender-or-starve instrument
in the hands of the Al-Assad regime, or anyone else for
that matter.

The year 2014 has reminded us all how easily hopes
can be overturned and tenuous stories of success can
give way to more destruction and bloodshed. Thus, in
spite of the most competent and inclusive Government
in its history, Yemen is again at a dangerous crossroad
where peaceful transition and vital reforms can be
overtaken by more violence, growing sectarianism
and fragmentation of the State. A continued united
and firm stance and action on the part of the Council,
in cooperation with Yemen's neighbours, the Gulf
Cooperation Council countries, is paramount to
preventing such a negative outcome. If necessary, the
Council should be ready to expand the use of sanctions
regime, including new listings.

For a year now, the Council has been seized of the
situation in the youngest of United Nations Member
States, South Sudan, where personal ambitions and
complete disregard for the needs of the young nation
on the part of the country's leaders have crippled
the country and caused another major humanitarian
crisis. The continuous calls of the Council and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development to stop
fighting have been ignored. In the absence of tangible
progress, the Council should not shy away from taking
action against those impeding the peace process,
including sanctions and a full arms embargo, as a
means of protecting civilians in a situation where their
own leaders are unable and unwilling to protect.

The transformation of the African-led International
Support Mission for the Central African Republic
into the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic ,
supported by the ongoing efforts of Operation Sangaris
and the European Union, have brought renewed hopes
for an end to violence in the Central African Republic.
The much-too-easy access to illicit arms, the control by
the opposing militant groups of the extraction and sale
of diamonds and gold, the weakness of State institutions
and a pervasive sense of impunity remain an explosive
mix, however, that could erupt in renewed violence
any time. It is essential, therefore, that we do not lower
the Council's guard by indulging in a premature sense
of a mission accomplished. It is also essential that the
sanctions regime, including the arms embargo, be fully
implemented by all, including by the Central African
Republic's neighbours.

Since the most recent Council meeting on this
issue (see S/PV.7311), the situation in eastern Ukraine
and Crimea has not improved. Russian arms and
ammunition, as well as mercenary fighters, have
continued to cross into Ukrainian territory under
various guises, prolonging the conflict, which has
already displaced over 1 million people. In spite of the
ceasefire, barely a day has passed without casualties
on the Ukrainian side. Russia continues to block
an expansion of the Organizations for Security and
Cooperation border monitoring mission. The signals
that Russia intends to deploy offensive nuclear systems
in Crimea, in contravention of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapon, are profoundly
disturbing.

We reiterate our position that the Minsk agreements
must be implemented in full and by all parties. A
durable solution to that conflict can be based only on
full respect for the independence, sovereignty, unity
and territorial integrity of Ukraine. The issue should
remain on the Council agenda with regular updates,
including on the human rights situation. We welcome
a decision of the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights to continue reporting on the human
rights situation in Ukraine in 2015, because in the
occupied Crimea the indigenous Tatar population
continues to suffer persecution, while the separatist-
held areas of eastern Ukraine remain black holes
of impunity and lawlessness, with extrajudicial and
summary killings, torture, intimidation, ill-treatment,
extortion, abductions for ransom and forced labour as
the trademarks of pro-Russian militants.

Lithuania is also deeply concerned by Russia's
continued efforts to undermine Georgia's sovereignty
and independence. The so-called treaty on alliance and
strategic partnership signed recently between Russia
and the region of Abkhazia undermines all efforts to
find a solution to the conflict based on the principle of
Georgia's territorial integrity within its internationally
recognized borders, and constitutes a step towards the
annexation of Abkhazia by Russia. There are very real
fears that a similar scenario will be played out in the
Tskhinvali region of South Ossetia.

Let me now briefly move on to a few thematic
issues. In its resolution 2117 (2013), the Council
linked the illicit trade and misuse of small arms and
light weapons with negative consequences on human
rights, humanitarian efforts and development, and in
particular the protection of civilian populations. Next
year the Secretary-General is to submit a report on
small arms and light weapons. This, combined with
the entry into force of the Arms Trade Treaty, offers
an important opportunity to improve the protection of
civilians, as well as those who are there to help them on
the ground - humanitarian workers, medical staff and
peacekeepers.

The open debate on terrorism and cross-border
crime initiated by Chad (see S/PV.7351) reminded us
all of the importance of breaking the nefarious links
between criminality and terrorism and disrupting
terrorism financing, which relies on an increasing
variety of sources. The urgency of working out
effective counter-narratives to expose the terrorists for
what they are - nothing else but despicable rapists,
murderers and executioners of sleeping children,
helpless elderly, women and girls - cannot be stressed
enough. In fact, the need for a breakthrough in the ever
more sophisticated battle for the hearts and minds of
potential terrorism recruits has never been more urgent.

Finally, with regard to the sanctions regimes,
which are more numerous than at any time before in
the Council's history, we remain of a view that the
Australian draft resolution was a missed opportunity
to improve the application of that important tool
at the Council's disposal to sharpen the impact on
the perpetrators, while at the same time improving
necessary assistance and capacity building to the
affected States. We appreciate Australia's efforts in that
direction.

I would like to conclude by joining my colleagues
in welcoming the incoming non-permanent members
of the Security Council, and conveying our deepest
appreciation to the outgoing teams of Australia, Korea,
Rwanda, Argentina and Luxembourg for their dedicated
work and collegiality during this incredibly busy year.
They will be missed. And I wish all the best to Chile for
its forthcoming presidency in January.

