Mr. Laram (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
allow me to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting. This is an important opportunity to
make heard the voice of all children affected by armed
conflict. In that regard, I also commend you, Sir, for
providing the concept note (S/2015/168, annex). I would
be remiss ifI failed to express thanks to the Secretary-
General and his Special Representative on Children
and Armed Conflict, as well as the Deputy Executive
Director of UNICEF, the child-care consultant from
Save the Children, as well as Mr. Junior Nzita, who
shared his painful experience with us.

This year we are observing the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1612 (2005), which established the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict, and the first
anniversary of the campaign "Children, Not Soldiers."

Undoubtedly, the terrible cycle of violence affecting
children in armed conflict, in which children fall victim
to all forms of violence, particularly sexual violence,
generates challenges requiring accelerated action and
intensified cooperation on the part of Member States in
order to hold all perpetrators of those grave violations
accountable. For the most part, the perpetrators of those
horrendous forms of aggression, which rise to the level
of war crimes and grave violations of international
humanitarian law, enjoy impunity in the absence of any
accountability.

We therefore welcome the Guidance Note on
Security Council Resolution 1998 (2011), issued
by the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict,
concerning attacks on schools and hospitals. This
issue is also addressed in resolution 2143 (2014), in
which the Council demanded strengthened and more
systematic monitoring and reporting of such attacks.
The systematic targeting of schools, which should serve
exclusively as safe educational institutions, exposes
children to danger and deprives them of their basic
right to education. In that connection, we renew our call
for effective measures to be taken, in accordance with
international humanitarian law and relevant Security
Council resolutions, to put an immediate stop to such
violations that deprive children of their right to the
education. Obstacles that prevent children from going
to school and deprive them of their legitimate right to
education instil a culture of fear and despair rather than
foster a culture of life and hope.

It is clear that education provides the skills and
knowledge necessary to the growth of children and the
building of society, while protecting them from violence
and extremism. In that regard, we would highlight
Qatar's Education Above All initiative, comprising
programmes providing educational opportunities
to societies affected by conflict and poverty. These
programmes include the Educate a Child initiative,
which is being implemented in conjunction with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and seeks to provide high-quality, basic
education to children throughout the world, especially
those affected by conflict. We also pay tribute to the
Global Coalition to Protect Education from Attack,
which seeks to prevent schools and universities from
being used by military forces during armed conflict.

The report of the Secretary-General on the grave
violations committed against children in armed conflict
(S/2014/339) sheds light on the role played by the parties
to conflict and underscores their responsibility to protect
children in accordance with the Geneva Conventions
of 1949. According to the report of the Secretary-
General, children in the occupied Arab territories and
in Syria bear the brunt of the suffering resulting from
grave violations of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. Their suffering will
continue, with further losses among the victims, unless
the international community takes effective steps to put
an end to the violations. Perhaps today's meeting will
serve as an additional incentive to intensify efforts in
that regard. We are faced with a test of our ability to
respect and implement the international instruments
adopted by the international community, if we are truly
to protect international peace and security.

