Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on presiding over
the Security Council this month, as well as to thank
you for having convened this open debate. That
initiative is consistent with the long and courageous
efforts of President Oscar Arias to support
disarmament and peace, which we sincerely appreciate.

We are also grateful for the clear concept paper
that your delegation has circulated among all
delegations. The topic identified by you and your
colleagues for this meeting can be addressed in many
different ways. What makes the most sense to the vast
majority of the countries of the world is the fact that
spending on armaments and disproportionately sized
military forces constitutes a poor allocation of
resources. That is especially so given that the main
threats facing humankind today are of equal to, or even
greater than, those of armed aggression and terrorism.
They include, first, hunger, poverty and social
exclusion; secondly, environmental challenges,
including global warming; and, thirdly, organized
crime.

Your own country, Mr. President, is an example
of the positive effects of diverting public resources
from maintaining armed forces to social expenditures.
That has produced notable tangible results, given Costa
Rica's health and education indicators as compared to
those of the rest of Central America.

Another element of this issue pertains to the
institutional aspects of disarmament, in particular when
it comes to determining who does what. For example,
there is no clear dividing line within the United
Nations between the functions of the General Assembly
and those of the Security Council, nor between the
work of the Conference on Disarmament at Geneva and
the bodies based in New York, including the
Disarmament Commission. Nor is there a neat dividing
line between the functions of the United Nations and
those of regional institutions, although we believe that
the concept paper that Costa Rica has prepared for us is
correct in placing strong emphasis on the cooperative
relationship between the United Nations and regional
disarmament bodies.

Another issue worth mentioning is the great value
of conflict prevention efforts. Among other things,
such efforts contribute to establishing an environment
where States feel less inclined to undertake armed
aggression. Such an environment is also conducive to

the pursuit of positive steps through reciprocal
unilateral measures that are conducive to averting
competition for military supremacy among States.

From the vantage point of my own country, our
priority is to reduce and control small arms and light
weapons and to prevent, combat and eradicate the
illicit manufacturing, transfer, circulation and
proliferation of those weapons. That priority gave rise
to one of the many commitments contained in our
peace accords of 1996, which we are attempting to
implement through the adoption of a new arms and
munitions law currently being debated in Guatemala's
Congress.

We are also participating actively in the Central
American Programme on Small Arms Control. The
exchange of information on issues relating to control
and tracing is one of the areas in which that regional
programme is active. Guatemala therefore supports the
early adoption of a legally binding instrument to
establish common international standards on the
import, export and transfer of conventional arms. Such
a treaty should be transparent, non-discriminatory and
negotiated at the multilateral level.

It is for all those reasons that we agree with the
Government of Costa Rica that disarmament should
have a prominent place on humankind's thematic
agenda, as well as on that of the United Nations. My
delegation believes that the efforts of the international
community to address the problem of disarmament -
in particular that of small arms - and the attention that
the General Assembly has given to the issue will be
significantly strengthened by the adoption of the draft
presidential statement before the Security Council
today. We are confident that it will provide further
political impetus to efforts to implement the 2001
Programme of Action. It will also ensure that the
United Nations continues to play a central role in the
multilateral effort to combat the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons in all its aspects.

