Mr. Pleuger (Germany): First of all, I welcome
the presence of the Secretary-General at this very
important meeting. As this is the first time that I
address you, Sir, in your new capacity as President of
the Council, I would like to congratulate you and
assure you that we will support your presidency as far
as we can. I would also like to thank Ambassador Arias
for the very able way in which he conducted the
business of the Council during the previous month.
Last but not least, I would like to thank Ambassador
Negroponte for having presented us with the draft
resolution on which we are going to vote today.

We deeply deplore the dramatic events that are
taking place in Liberia. The reports that are coming out
of that country are deeply disturbing. The constant
killing of civilians, children and women in particular is
to be deplored. As was stated by Ambassador Aguilar
Zinser, the Council must react quickly and swiftly. It is
already quite late to do so. Therefore, Germany
supports the rapid deployment of a multinational force
and subsequently of a United Nations force. We
therefore urged, together with others, the presidency to
convene this meeting. We also urged that the 24-hour
rule be waived so that we could come to a decision at
an early stage. We thus are in favour of all parts of the
draft resolution that pertain to the mission in Liberia.

However, we must also admit that we would have
liked to see one more paragraph in the draft resolution
pertaining to children and their well-being. We would
have liked to have not only the very welcome second
preambular paragraph, which pertains to the well-being
and rehabilitation of children, but also a stronger
operative paragraph calling on all Liberian parties to
ensure the protection, well-being and rehabilitation of
children in accordance with international obligations
and the provisions of Security Council resolutions 1261
(1999), 1314 (2000), 1379 (2001) and 1460 (2003).

Having said that, I have to state that my
delegation cannot agree with paragraph 7 of the draft
resolution. Paragraph 7 goes far beyond what the
Council decided just a few weeks ago in resolution
1487 (2003), on which we abstained. Paragraph 7 not
only limits the jurisdiction of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), it goes beyond that. It limits
national jurisdiction of third countries with respect to
crimes committed by members of the multinational
force or a United Nations stabilization force if that
member is the national of a State not party to the Rome
Statute of the ICC.

Therefore, it is our view that the proposed
paragraph would prevent prosecutors in States that may
have to exercise jurisdiction over crimes committed
against their nationals abroad from investigating and
prosecuting those crimes. In practical terms, for our
legal system that would mean that if a German were
killed in Liberia, no German court could prosecute the
perpetrator.

The second point is that prosecuting what we
consider to be international crimes, such as trafficking
in human beings - trafficking in women - piracy or
other international crimes, under Germany law by any
German court, regardless of where the crimes are
committed and by whom, would not be possible. We
feel that the purpose of that paragraph could have been
met by concluding a bilateral status of forces
agreement, as has been done in previous instances and
in other peacekeeping operations.

There is no precedent for that. There is no reason
to limit the national jurisdiction of third countries.
There is no justification for discriminating against
peacekeepers from countries that are members of the
Rome Statute of the ICC. Therefore, we feel that that
paragraph is not in accordance with international and
German law, and we regret not being able to accept it.
Therefore, Germany has no choice but to abstain in the
vote. Although - and I would like to stress this - we
support wholeheartedly the rest of the draft resolution,
we would have preferred to have voted on the draft
resolution paragraph by paragraph to make clear that
the Security Council has consensus on all parts of the
draft resolution except paragraph 7.

