Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in French): We, too, would like to thank Mr. Valentin
Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, for the comprehensive presentation of his
report (S/2OIl/682, annex). We congratulate him and
his team for their sustained efforts for lasting peace
and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the context
of implementing the Dayton Peace Agreement and the
reforms so necessary to that country's integration
within the European Union.

Gabon continues to support the unwavering
commitment of the international community to the
building of a Bosnia and Herzegovina founded on the
rule of law and supported by stable and lasting
institutions. The Dayton Agreement, whose
implementation we strongly supported, is the basis for
the entire political process in the country. We would
like to make some remarks on security and political
aspects.

With regard to security, we welcome the central
role that the European Union Force in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (EUFOR) continues to play in ensuring a
stable environment in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Its
presence and numerous actions of the ground are very
commendable despite the increasingly difficult
political and security situation.

The political climate remains strongly affected by
the inability of the main political parties to have a
shared vision, making it possible to form a federal
Government. We are concerned about that political
stalemate, itself exacerbated by the nationalist rhetoric
that hampers the normal functioning of institutions and
prevents the federal State from assuming its
governmental duties. Gabon deplores that situation and
urges all parties to dialogue and to tolerance. We also
call for constructive dialogue in favour of national
reconciliation.

Gabon welcomes the cooperation between
EUFOR and the other international organizations in
implementing the United Nations mandate in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We urge the international community
to maintain its commitment and to increase its
assistance to the parties in order to achieve the five
objectives and to meet the two conditions set by the
Council for implementing peace, in accordance with
the Dayton Agreement.

However, we remain convinced that the task of
building a stable and prosperous Bosnia and
Herzegovina is the primary responsibility of the
Bosnians themselves. We therefore call upon them to
strengthen their cooperation with the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, NATO, the
International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia, and EUFOR, the renewal of whose
mandate, once again, we support. Likewise, we would
call upon the international community to intensify its
support for the various parties in order to encourage
them to implement the five objectives and the two
conditions under to the Dayton Agreement.

Gabon will continue to support the efforts of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to move towards unity and
stability.

