Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
First of all, I too would like to say how much we
appreciate the fact that Denmark has taken the
initiative to organize today's consideration of the
Security Council's contribution to strengthening
international law.

As set out in the Preamble to the Charter, our
Organization was born out of the desire to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
protect fundamental human rights and ensure justice
and respect for international law. Each of the organs of
the Organization must play its role. We have had the
honour to hear from the President of the principal legal
organ of the United Nations, who emphasized the
relevance of the work of the International Court of
Justice. The number of inter-State disputes submitted
to it and of requests for opinions by United Nations
organs testifies to the Court's vitality. To dispense
justice is a crucial responsibility in terms of defining
the structure of the international system. Applying
justice is also vital.

The Secretary-General, on whose behalf
Mr. Nicolas Michel, Under-Secretary-General for
Legal Affairs, has just spoken, also plays a significant
role in that regard, as demonstrated by the recent
signing of the agreement on implementation of the
International Court of Justice judgment concerning the
Bakassi Peninsula.

The Council's essential contribution in ensuring
respect for international law in situations where there
is a threat to international peace and security is well
known. I would therefore like to address myself to the
most recent changes in the practices of the Security
Council, as well as to set out a few guidelines for
future undertakings.

First of all, with regard to ensuring the
responsibility to protect, at the September 2005 summit
heads of State or Government solemnly acknowledged
the responsibility to protect populations from genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity. That represented significant progress and
was the outcome of a long process - undoubtedly
launched by the Council when it acknowledged, in
resolution 688 (1991), the impact of the repression of
the Iraqi civilian population on peace and security in
the region. The Security Council must always bear that
responsibility in mind, and act when a State is clearly
not protecting its own people from such serious crimes.
The international community must take timely action.

The second development pertains to combating
impunity. When we have been unable to avert tragedy,
we must prevent it from being repeated. One way of
doing that is by identifying and punishing those
principally responsible.

In creating the international criminal tribunals for

the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, the Council has

made the fight against impunity an essential element in

the restoration of peace in societies that have

experienced large-scale atrocities. In so doing, it has

promoted the expansion of international justice,

culminating in the creation of the International
Criminal Court.

The establishment of that first permanent and
universal Court is a cause for great hope. No
perpetrator of the most serious violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights today
can hope to go unpunished. The Council must not
hesitate to submit situations to the Prosecutor of the
Court, as it has done in the case of Darfur. The Council
must provide determined and tireless assistance to the
institutions it has established, referred to or supported.
While Charles Taylor is being sent to The Hague, with
our support, it is unacceptable that, so many years after
the tragedies that led to the creation of the ad hoc
tribunals, high-level indictees remain at large. States
must cooperate fully with the International Criminal
Court and with the mixed or international tribunes.

The Council must also ensure that, in matters
with which it is seized, States' requests to the
Secretary-General for assistance in the field of justice
are satisfied. That is the case for both Burundi and
Lebanon. The Council must continue to help the latter
country and its people as they seek the truth and in
their resolve to bring to justice all those who
participated in the terrorist attack on Rafik Hariri by
creating an international tribunal. The Council has
given the Secretary-General a mandate to that end, and
we look forward to the early completion of discussions
with the Lebanese authorities.

Thirdly, as to promoting the rule of law, it is by
supporting the establishment of political institutions
that respect the rule of law and human rights, and by
encouraging the creation of effective national measures
to counteract terrorism and impunity, that the Council
can ensure the durability of peace and security. The
Secretary-General's 2004 report on re-establishing the
rule of law - a remarkable document that remains
relevant today - has lessons to teach that should be
heeded by the Peacebuilding Commission, which will
hold its inaugural meeting tomorrow.

The assistance to be provided by the international
community to countries emerging from conflict should

be based on an in-depth analysis of local capacities and
needs, and not on external models. Such an analysis
should be made by recognized experts who understand
the local environment and based on international norms
for the protection of the individual. It should also be
part of a comprehensive approach and - a point that
my country wishes to highlight - take greatest
account of the victims, who must be recognized,
rehabilitated and compensated.

I turn now to the issue of the effectiveness of
sanctions, which must be strengthened. Sanctions are
an absolutely essential political instrument for applying
pressure. The Council has gradually improved its
sanctions regimes by targeting individuals who have
violated embargoes, hindered peace processes, been
linked to Al-Qaida, perpetrated crimes or incited
hatred. We must improve that instrument.

The Council's effectiveness depends in part on its
capacity to persuade States resolutely to implement the
measures that it has established. That is particularly
clear in the field of counter-terrorism. Recently,
however, we have seen a sudden loss of confidence in
some countries with regard to the delisting mechanisms
of the sanctions committees. Some States, believing
that, once listed, an individual cannot practically be
delisted, hesitate to add new names to the list of the Al-
Qaida/Taliban committee. The Council must correct
that view by creating an effective mechanism.

To that end, France has proposed the creation
within the Secretariat of a focal point for receiving
delisting and exemption requests directly from the
individuals listed. The creation of such a focal point, to
be shared by all the sanctions committees, would allow
the procedure to be more accessible, transparent and
standardized and ensure that all requests are
considered. We deeply hope that our proposal will
enjoy broad support and be implemented as soon as
possible.

Exercising the responsibility to protect, fighting
impunity, establishing the rule of law and improving
the sanctions system are goals that my country hopes to
see implemented and pursued by the Council with
greater resolve.

