The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Brazil.

Brazil is in favour of the referral of the situation
in Darfur to the International Criminal Court (ICC).
Nevertheless, Brazil was not able to join those
members that voted in favour of the resolution. We
remain committed to bringing to justice those accused
of the crimes mentioned in the report of the
Commission of Inquiry, and in that sense we are ready
to fully cooperate whenever necessary with the
International Criminal Court.

The maintenance of international peace and the
fight against impunity cannot be viewed as conflicting
objectives. Brazil reiterates that the ICC provides all
the necessary checks and balances to prevent possible
abuses and politically motivated misuse of its
jurisdiction. Thus, efforts to secure broader immunities
from the jurisdiction of the Court are both unwarranted
and unhelpful, in our view.

This is the first time the Council has approved a
referral of criminal matters to the International
Criminal Court, and that approval offers a rare
opportunity for the Council to act promptly in one of
the most important issues on the international agenda.
However, from our point of view, the referral should
not be approved at any cost. Brazil understands that
there are limits to negotiating the approval of the
referral within the Council, and they refer, first, to the
responsibilities of the Council vis-a-vis an
international instrument; secondly, to the integrity of
the Rome Statute, which now has 98 ratifications; and
thirdly, to the consistency of the position we have
sustained since the negotiations on the Rome Statute.
For those reasons, Brazil abstained in the voting on the
resolution on the referral.

As recommended by the report of the
International Commission of Inquiry, the ICC remains
the only acceptable instance of criminal law for dealing
with the issue of accountability in the Sudan. We have
exhaustively negotiated a text that could better reflect
both the concerns of countries non-parties to the Rome
Statute, as well as the commitments of those countries
that have ratified that instrument.

For the sake of the referral, Brazil painstakingly
agreed during the negotiations upon provisions that
presented a serious level of difficulty for my
Government, such as the exemption from jurisdiction
for nationals of those countries not parties to the
Statute, even though - considering the need to
approve the referral - Brazil acceded to such a limited
immunity. To go further would constitute an inadequate
and risky interference of the Council in the
constitutional basis of an independent judicial body
and a position inconsistent with the principles we have
defended in the past on this issue. The text just
approved contains a preambular paragraph through
which the Council takes note of the existence of
agreements referred to in article 98-2 of the Rome
Statute. My delegation has difficulty in supporting a
reference that not only does not favour the fight against
impunity but also stresses a provision whose
application has been a highly controversial issue. We
understand that it would be a contradiction to mention,
in the very text of a referral by the Council to the ICC,
measures that limit the jurisdictional activity of the
Court.

In addition, Brazil also was not in a position to
support operative paragraph 6, through which the
Council recognizes the existence of exclusive
jurisdiction, a legal exception that is inconsistent in
international law.

These are substantial issues that, in our view, will
not contribute to strengthening the role of the ICC -
which is our aspiration. Brazil has consistently rejected
initiatives aimed at extending exemptions of certain
categories of individuals from ICC jurisdiction, and we
maintain our position to prevent efforts that may have
the effect of dismantling the achievements reached in
the field of international criminal justice. Both the
acceleration and the format of negotiations during the
last few days have prevented some delegations from
balancing the clear objective of referral to the ICC
against the hindrances imposed thereon.
Insurmountable constraints thus prevented Brazil from
voting in favour of a proposal that we have always
understood would be the appropriate instrument to help
curb violence and end impunity in Darfur.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.
