Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania): We
join in welcoming the foreign ministers who are here
today.

We would like to thank the United States and
France for their tireless efforts, which made it possible
for the Security Council to vote on today's important
resolution.

In a Government statement issued on 31 July,
Tanzania called for an immediate ceasefire in the
hostilities between Israel and Hizbollah in order to put
an end to the mounting deaths and the suffering of
innocent civilians and also to avert the further
destruction of property and civilian infrastructure.

The Government statement urged the
international community to intervene to end the
bloodshed. It regretted that so many innocent civilians
in Lebanon and in Israel had died and that many more
were being displaced in Lebanon, and called for urgent
action by the Security Council to resolve the crisis. It
emphasized the need to implement resolution 1559
(2004) and deeply regretted that so much time had
been spent before the Council could act.

06-4649]

It was with the same sense of urgency that we
welcomed the efforts that made possible the resolution,
which we believe creates the necessary framework for
a cessation of hostilities. Our short-term objective has
always been to stop further humanitarian casualties and
suffering and to allow immediate humanitarian access and
assistance. That is still our primary objective tonight.

Our second objective springs from the realization
that a political solution to the current crisis must also
be sought with urgency. In our view, any expectation
that military action will bring about a political solution
can only engender grave humanitarian consequences
and render it considerably harder to promote a political
solution, which must be preferred if sustainable peace
is to be attained.

It is also our view that the Government and the
entire nation of Lebanon need not be the victims of the
events that triggered the current crisis - events which the
United Republic of Tanzania has condemned. However,
we have always believed that this crisis need not escalate
further. It was therefore with a sense of relief that we
received the news of the outcome of the efforts that made
it possible for us to vote in favour of the resolution.

We want to commend the Government of
Lebanon for its seven-point plan, which was
augmented by an offer to deploy 15,000 troops in
southern Lebanon to control its territory, in
collaboration with the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon. We also commend the Government of Israel
for having given that proposal due consideration.
The international community has an important
role to play in support of the resolution. We commend
potential troop-contributing countries and urge them to
act with urgency, and we appeal for assistance for the
return and resettlement of displaced persons and for the
reconstruction of Lebanon.

We also believe that the resolution that has been
adopted is but a first step. Its relevance and
effectiveness will demand the utmost good faith of the
parties. That will be critical if the present understanding is
to become a building block to a broader comprehensive
peace for the Middle East, and especially to a durable
solution to the Palestinian question.

