Ms. Grignon (Kenya): On behalf of the Kenyan
delegation, I wish to congratulate the Jordanian
presidency on convening today's open debate on the
role of youth in countering Violent extremism and
promoting peace. We also wish to commend you on
the manner in which you have conducted the affairs of
the Council during the month of April, during which
important deliberations and conclusions have been
achieved.

We also wish to thank you for the detailed concept
paper (S/2015/231, annex) that has guided today's
debate. We appreciate the commitment shown by His
Royal Highness the Crown Prince of Jordan in chairing
the morning session in person. Indeed, my President,
President Uhuru Kenyatta, was in the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan just a few days ago, where he and
his colleagues attended a coordination meeting for the
Horn of Africa countries, focusing on the fight against
terrorism and radicalization.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive remarks on the subject, as well as
the two keynote speakers, for their incisive comments.

I would like to align our statement with that of
Ambassador Tete Antonio on behalf of the African
Union, and to add some of our own Views in my national
capacity.

My delegation notes with satisfaction the Security
Council's concerted efforts to address violent extremism
through various resolutions, and commends it for its
current efforts, as the custodian of international peace
and security, to eradicate the threats posed by Violent
extremist groups around the world.

Today's debate has a very special significance
for Kenya. As the Council is aware, Kenya and other
countries in East Africa and the Horn of Africa have
been subjected to violent extremism in terrorist
attacks perpetrated mainly by Al-Shabaab, a Somali-
based Al-Qaida affiliate. The recent attack targeting
Christian students at Garissa University College, in
which 148 young people were killed, is a case in point.
The young people themselves have been fundamentally
affected - indeed, in this case both the perpetrators and
the victims were young. That act was essentially aimed
at emasculating Kenya and its future. The perpetrators
of terrorism are just out to kill, irrespective of their
targets. Our experience shows that the psychology of the
perpetrators is devoid of any form of consciousness or
humanity. At this stage, they are just killing machines.
That is why preventive efforts, aimed at stopping young
people before they reach that stage, are critical.

Today, most regions of the world are grappling with
an unprecedented rise in Violent extremism, mainly
targeting the most important and most vulnerable
segment of our society - young people, who are being
lured to abandon their promising future as responsible
citizens. Young people hold the key to future stability
for families, society and nations. Attempts to radicalize
them in order to put them on a tragic path of violence
and destruction based on ideological beliefs, with the
goal of achieving rapid social and political change
outside accepted norms, must be addressed now. Those
luring young people into extremism have exploited
common grievances. A lot ofthose grievances have been
mentioned today, to which I will just add those such as
hopelessness, perceived injustices and marginalization,
all of which can help radicalize young people and rally
them to a cause, often in the name of religion. We
condemn such actions in the strongest possible terms
and declare that the causes must be addressed.

My delegation believes that together we can
overcome Violent extremism and help our young people
to effectively resist its lure and that of radicalization.
We can help them become champions and key actors
in countering such extremism by addressing the
conditions conducive to its spread and to that of
terrorism, as outlined in the first pillar of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, in an inclusive manner
that involves young people themselves at each stage of
the process, whereby we can actually create societies
free of Violent extremism. That requires re-examining
the way in which we deal with and treat young people
in our intergovernmental dialogue, national discourse
and local conversations. We must look at young people
more as presenting an opportunity to defeat violent
extremism and radicalization. To do that, we must
empower them with various tools so they can confront
the agenda of Violent extremism. That should include a
powerful counter-narrative that they can embrace.

The Government of Kenya has launched various
strategic initiatives designed to put young people at the
forefront of the fight against violent extremism and to
promote peace by encouraging resilience in the face of
extremism. The measures that we have adopted and are
implementing include, first, education policies ensuring
that the maximum educational opportunities are
available to all young people at the primary, secondary
and tertiary levels, as a bulwark against extremism.
They include specific education and outreach policies
targeted to those who are most vulnerable to Violent
extremism, and innovative programmes that nurture
young people through the development of talent. Youth
development programmes teaching young people about
peaceful co-existence have also been initiated.

Second, we have also put in place a special fund,
known as the Uwezo Fund, which seeks to expand access
to financing and promote enterprises led by women,
young people and persons with disabilities. It provides
mentorship opportunities to enable young people to take
advantage of their 30 per cent Government procurement
preference through its capacity-building programme. It
is an avenue that is creating employment.

Third, the Government is now giving sustained fiscal
attention to focusing more on economic transformation
priorities, which are likely to have the greatest impact
on youth economic empowerment. These include
investments in information and communications
technology, agricultural transformation and food
security; in modern transport and logistics; in accessible
health care and the strengthening of social safety nets
in order to reduce household burdens.

Fourth, a national youth council and youth fund
are fully operational and working to oversee the
programmatic aspects of the economic transformation
agenda, which, among other things, calls for enhanced
support for devolved governance and resources aimed
at enhancing service delivery at the grass-roots level.

Fifth, through its National Youth Service, the
Government has initiated programmes that seek to
rehabilitate and mentor destitute children and young
people vulnerable to radicalization and recruitment.
The Youth Service empowers them with values that
give them a sense of identity, belonging and direction,
as well as promoting national values of tolerance,
patriotism, loyalty and unity.

Sixth, the Government is also committed to creating
partnerships with local communities, civil society and
religious leaders, and to engaging other actors to keep
vulnerable young people positively engaged.

Seventh, we have launched initiatives for regional
cooperation and inter-regional youth exchanges, aimed
at developing and promoting a common understanding
on addressing youth-related issues with a view to
enhancing resilience in the face of extremism and other
social problems. This involves sharing experiences
and best practices that can help young people to
empower themselves in confronting radicalization and
extremism.

Eighth and last is the enhancement of the capacity
of Kenyan prison authorities to identify specific cases
of possible radicalization in corrective institutions and
facilities, and to initiate rehabilitation programmes that
target such cases.

The delegation of Kenya wishes to assure the
Security Council that our Government will continue
to build institutional and community-level capacity,
especially at the grassroots level, that can enable youth
and women's groups to counter Violent extremism in
their communities, and will continue to partner with
the United Nations and other development partners and
stakeholders to identify new approaches and innovative
ways to counter violent extremism and radicalization.

