Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I would like to thank
Togo for its leadership in convening this important
debate, President Gnassingbe, and you, Mr. Minister,
for your presence here today. I wish also to thank the
Secretary-General and Mr. Shehu.

There is no doubt that, as everyone has said, Africa
is the new theatre in the fight against terrorism and that
the terrorist threat in Africa poses new and particularly
complex challenges. Terrorist groups are showing
greater skill at forming alliances and manipulating
grievances or insurgencies, and taking advantage of
ungoverned spaces. They are increasingly working
together, across borders, regions and continents.
Australian terrorism investigations have revealed that
African terrorist groups have influenced Australian
youths through radicalization.

As we know, terrorist groups in parts of Africa
are exploiting vulnerabilities in States, including
institutions with limited capacity, porous borders,
existing grievances, and poverty and unemployment.
Terrorist activities themselves then exacerbate those
conditions.

To break that vicious circle, we need to tackle the
threat at three levels: through capacity, prevention and
coordination.

First, with respect to capacity, many African
States want better law-enforcement capacity and
training. Stronger policing and intelligence and closer
cooperation with prosecutors, defence counsel and
judges nationally and regionally is needed to develop
an effective criminal justice approach. We have
learned from experience, for example in Indonesia,
that one of the most powerful tools in this fight is
actual prosecutions and convictions, some based on
joint investigations. That requires effective laws and
dedicated regional training facilities in Africa, which
strengthen relationships and information-sharing,
including intelligence.

Drawing on the experience, for example, of the
Jakarta Centre for Law Enforcement Cooperation, my
own country is supporting the creation of an Eastern
African regional counter-terrorism centre, as well as
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
workshops for police and prosecutors in East Africa
and Nigeria on effectively bringing terrorists to justice.
We have also just finalized a handbook for the African
Union on criminalizing terrorism, to assist African
policymakers in developing effective criminal laws to
combat terrorism.

Secondly, equal efforts must be made to prevent
terrorism and extremism from emerging, arming and
recruiting. Prevention is a complex and difficult task,
often without measurable results, but it is equally
a decisive component of a comprehensive strategy.
Governments need to actively counter the negative
drumbeat ofterrorist messaging and close opportunities
for narratives of injustice or exclusion to resonate and
radicalize.

We understand that 46 per cent of those who joined
ideological militant movements in Mali have said they
were motivated by a sense of injustice and revenge,
while 21 per cent were motivated by unemployment.
Key prevention strategies include building resilience
in communities, including ensuring that they promote
values of tolerance and understanding and dialogue
and respect for diversity. Mali's new dialogue and
reconciliation commission will have a critical role
to play in that regard. Opening up opportunities for
economic and social advancement - particularly in
relation to engaging youth, which account for more
than 60 per cent of Africa's unemployed, with around
10-12 million youth entering the job market each
year - is a decisive vulnerability. The average age
of terrorists, we must remember, is getting younger.
Strengthening governance, democracy, the rule of
law and trusted security sector institutions includes
good service delivery and the extension of State
authority to regional areas. The new United Nations
mission in Somalia has a strong mandate to assist the
federal Government in that regard. We should stress
the importance of proactive efforts on security sector
reform and on the physical security of State weapons
arsenals to prevent arms from leaking into the hands of
terrorists, which is one of the key lessons of the Mali
cr1s1s.

Thirdly, there is the importance of greater
coordination at national and regional levels, particularly
through the African Union, and at the international
level. Today's presidential statement (S/PRST/2013/5)
very usefully highlights that. As the Secretary-General
and others have already said today, the long-awaited
integrated strategy for the Sahel should provide a strong
template for coordinated activity across the Sahel region,
encompassing security, governance, development,
human rights and humanitarian assistance.

There are other areas where the United Nations
and the Security Council could be doing more on
coordination. The Council's sanctions regime targeting
Al-Qaida has enormous potential to assist in turning
the tide against Al-Qaida affiliates in Africa. To be
effective, the Council and African States need to work
together to target those entities, their leaders and, most
important, their enablers that provide arms, funds and
recruits.

To that end, the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) has
taken a focused look at the threat posed by Al-Qaida in
the Islamic Maghreb, the Movement for Unity and Jihad
in West Africa and Ansar Dine and is moving forward
with a plan for outreach to countries of the region, with
a view to providing assistance to effectively implement
the sanctions measures and to encourage partnership
with those States to identify the right targets that will
deliver the maximum impact.

Mr. Shehu told us clearly this morning that we
need to improve our performance in targeting and
implementing our sanctions. We need to mainstream
the analysis of terrorism, its causes and measures to
address it into the United Nations peace and security
agenda, including mandates and field missions, as the
representative of Pakistan said this morning.

Too often, we focus our response and peacekeeping
and stabilization efforts on a country, when we know the
threat can transcend borders and materialize elsewhere.
We need to consider further the ways that the United
Nations system can buffer the impact of the threat and
the response on the immediate region.

The Council and the United Nations can work in
partnership with neighbouring countries and strengthen
dialogue with them to better understand the threat
and the risks and to mobilize the necessary support
from subsidiary bodies, the rest of the United Nations
system and partners to counter the spread of conflict,
extremism, arms and funds.

Support is often needed particularly in policing,
securing borders, securing arms stockpiles and
addressing counter-terrorism financing. Stronger
coordination between political missions, country and
regional offices and panels of experts will also improve
the effectiveness of missions and help identify early
emerging threats.

In conclusion, it is vital that the Council sends
a message today - as I believe we are - that the
international community will cooperate across borders
to defeat terrorists and their criminal supporters who
are undermining progress and prosperity in Africa.

I would also like to join others in expressing
condolences to the people and Government of Turkey
over the terrorist attacks it suffered over the weekend.

