Mr. Farhfidi (Afghanistan) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, I am thankful to you for presiding once
again over a meeting dedicated to Afghanistan. We
appreciate the report of the Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, Mr. Prendergast. His report
enables me to shorten my statement.

Approximately six months have passed since the
Afghan Interim Administration was created by the
Bonn Agreement. Despite enormous obstacles and
difficulties, the accomplishments of the Interim
Administration are considerable. That peace and
security have been generally ensured in the country as
a whole, with the exception of a border region in the
south-east, deserves esteem. The process for the loya
jirga, which will convene 10 June, is proceeding in the
country as a whole, generally speaking with success. A
considerable number of refugees are returning to
Afghanistan. So many Afghans are attempting to find
again their place in society. Certain rebuilding efforts
have started throughout the country. All these
accomplishments could not be realized without the
assistance of the international community.
In that regard, we express our gratitude to the
Security Council for the special attention it has given
situation in Afghanistan. The International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) has played a positive role in
Afghanistan, including the restoration of peace and
security. We thank the United Kingdom for directing
ISAF with great skill. We would like to assure Turkey
that Afghanistan's Interim Administration will continue
to extend its cooperation when Turkey assumes the
direction of ISAF. I would like to recall that it was
Turkey's top leaders who in the 1920s gave the order to
their military officials and those responsible for
training the army to come to Afghanistan, and that
process continued until the 1960s.

At the Geneva recent conference, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan presented in detail the
position of the Afghan Interim Administration on the
number and composition of the Afghanistan security
force. We believe that the establishment of that force
could greatly contribute to security and stability
throughout the country.

The consolidation of peace in Afghanistan
depends not only on the efforts to re-establish the
security force but on the reconstruction efforts and
rehabilitation of the country. In some respects, one
could say that the financing of efforts to rebuild the
country is a higher priority than re-establishing the
security force. In effect, the demobilization and the
reintegration of combatants and the reintegration of
thousands of refuges will enable us to well ensure
peace and security. A worker who receives his modest
salary will not seek to fight alongside a warlord.

We would also like to thank the Security Council
for the resolution it will be adopting today to extend
the ISAF mandate for six months. We would also like
to thank Turkey, a country with which we have historic
ties of friendship and fraternity and which is assuming
the direction of ISAF. We also wish to express our
gratitude to all the countries that have contributed to
and participated in the efforts of the Force and the
efforts to combat the terrorist networks in Afghanistan.
We are very grateful to the individuals of friendly
countries who came to Afghanistan personally to verify
how the Interim Administration was functioning; that
was very valuable to us.

We are in favour of the text of the draft resolution
contained in document S/2002/569, which the
Afghanistan Interim Administration supports. We are
very satisfied that the letter addressed to the President
of the Security Council by the Afghan Minister was
confirmed in the preamble of the draft resolution.

