Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): Let me take this opportunity
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February. Given your experience and diplomatic skill, we
have no doubt that the Council will be provided with sure
leadership. At the same time, we wish to extend our sincere
congratulations to your predecessor, Ambassador Owada of
Japan, for the remarkable way in which he conducted the
affairs of the Council during the month of January.

My delegation would also like to express its
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report on the situation in Angola, contained in document
S/1997/115 of 7 February 1997, and for his efforts to
further the cause of peace in that country. The same
sentiments are extended to his Special Representative, Mr.
Alioune Blondin Beye, whose devotion to bringing peace to
Angola has been exemplary.

Let me also extend my Government's gratitude to the
troika - the Governments of Portugal, Russia and the
United States - in their search for peace in Angola. Our
appreciation is also extended to the entire UNAVEM. III
staff, the United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organizations for their tireless efforts in carrying out their
respective mandates with determination under difficult
conditions. I would like to assure them of my
Government's full support.

On 11 December 1996, I made a statement before
this body in which, among other things, I expressed the
grave concern to my Government over certain areas: the
desertion of UNITA troops from the quartering areas; the
delay in implementing all outstanding political and
military issues, especially the agreement on the status of
the leader of UNITA; the establishment of the
Government of National Unity and Reconciliation; the
establishment of state administration in various regions of
the country; and the demobilization and incorporation of
UNITA troops into the Angolan Armed Forces. Despite
the fact that the peace process has witnessed some
encouraging developments in recent months, these
concerns today remain unresolved, owing mainly to the
lack of cooperation by UNITA.
The delay by UNITA creates serious doubts in our
minds about whether it is really committed to the
implementation of the letter and spirit of the Lusaka
Protocol. In this regard, we call upon the parties, in
particular UNITA, to consider, first of all, the interests of
the people of Angola, who have seen no peace in their
lifetime. UNITA needs to be reminded in a very clear
message that the people of Angola need peace and that
Angola needs development. This is the primary
responsibility of all the leaders in Angola. They should
therefore come together and form the Government of
National Unity and Reconciliation without further delay.
If they fail to do this, the Security Council must consider
taking appropriate measures, including the imposition of
sanctions against UNITA, in accordance with its relevant
resolutions on Angola.

Finally, my delegation is pleased with the adoption
this morning of Security Council resolution 1098 (1997),
which, among other things, extends the mandate of
UNAVEM. III until 31 March 1997. We fully agree with
the recommendation of the Secretary-General that the
United Nations maintain its presence in Angola until the
end of 1997 in order to ensure that the achievements
made so far are consolidated.

