Mr. Weisleder (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, we commend you and the Mission of the
United States on your skilful and effective leadership
of the Council during this month of July.

Costa Rica has decided to speak at this meeting, as
we believe that it comes at a particularly important and
auspicious moment for the Middle East. The interest we
attach to this debate is evidenced by the five continuous
hours that we have remained here to listen to the
speakers. Unlike in previous months, today there is a
small glimmer of hope that a negotiated solution might
be found to the long and complex conflict between the
States of Israel and Palestine, with clear repercussions
for the rest of the area.

While the eventual negotiation process is still in its
preliminary stages and many difficulties still lie ahead,
we must underscore the constructive and systematically
dedicated role that has been played by the Secretary of
State of the United States, John Kerry. His commitment
and effective efforts merit our gratitude.

Costa Rica, as a peace-loving country that
voluntarily disarmed more than 60 years ago, is
a firm believer in a peaceful solution to conflicts
between peoples and States, in the framework of
international law and multilateral diplomacy. We are
therefore delighted by the announcement made last
week regarding the beginning of talks between the
Palestinian and Israeli parties aimed at establishing
the basis for direct negotiations leading to what is an
accepted objective for the international community,
that is, peaceful coexistence between an independent
and viable Palestinian State and the State of Israel.

We know that this is but a first step. The road ahead
is full of difficulties and obstacles. There will certainly
be those who seek to impose their perverse goals or
exclusive viewpoints, or their obsolete intolerance or
extremism, which not only rejects reconciliation and
prevents progress in this difficult process, but is also
based on outdated, sterile and unjust visions for both
peoples.

Costa Rica has no false illusions about this
emerging negotiation process, but we believe in the
creative power of good judgement, realism and human
persistence. We believe that history is written, first and
foremost, thanks to the will of individuals. Through
that will, and within realistic parameters, human action
can change the course of events. That is what we are
now witnessing as a possibility in this prolonged and
painful conflict. It is essential to exchange the logic
of confrontation, blame and war for one of good faith,
resolve, good will and peace. The logic of peace will
transform confrontation into a search for common
ground, demands into proposals and hatred into
hope for tomorrow. We believe that the Israeli and
Palestinian leadership, and those who share in helping
them to shoulder their great responsibilities, will have
the courage to move forward whenever possible so
as to overcome their differences. None of the parties
will achieve everything they are seeking, but there is
an opportunity for all to attain the minimum to which
they aspire and for both sides to achieve the end goal of
peace and coexistence.

The Security Council, the Secretary-General and
the United Nations as a whole should work so that leaders
can help their peoples understand that concessions are
not defeats, but rather the cement that binds together
the pieces of a structure that, if it is completed, will
become the home where each of those peoples live in
a safer and more peaceful neighbourhood. In order to
resolve this conflict, the extremists must be isolated
and the moderate forces strengthened on both sides. As
an organization and as countries we should be ready to
cooperate in that undertaking. Costa Rica is prepared to
participate in that task, however small our contribution
may be. We are not stakeholders in this effort, but as a
peace-loving country, a friend ofIsrael and of Palestine,
and a society accustomed to peaceful coexistence, we
call on the parties to do their best in tirelessly seeking
just and legal solutions to their differences and to work
with whomever can help them where necessary in order
to emerge from an impasse.

We believe that sooner rather than later we will be
returning to this Chamber, no longer calling for tolerance
and intelligence in order to begin the negotiating
process between Palestinians and Israelis but rather to
celebrate their agreements and the end of the conflict,
and to begin to discuss plans for harmonious relations
between their peoples.

