Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): Botswana's support for the
pacific settlement of conflicts is well known. It is born out
of our national traditions and experience in our part of the
world. We come from a part of Africa which has hitherto
been engulfed in conflict and war. The dust of conflict is
just settling in Mozambique and South Africa, and Angola
is still tottering towards peace. We therefore know the
difference between the benefits of peace and the
wretchedness of war brought about by political inequities.

The experience of the people of El Salvador is in
many ways similar to ours in southern Africa. After many
years of an internecine, fratricidal war of attrition, the
Salvadorans have finally realized the futility of war. We are
encouraged by their continued commitment to the
development of a new political culture in their country
based on the principles of democracy, political
reconciliation and broad-based national consensus.

We would have wished that the United Nations
Observer Mission in El Salvador (ONUSAL) had been the
totally resounding success we expect all United Nations
peace-keeping operations to be, but we are pragmatic
enough to know that all political undertakings are often
victims of human frailties. Differences and mutual
suspicion can be expected after many years of conflict. It
is our hope, however, that the Government of El Salvador
and the Frente Farabundo Marti para la Liberacion
Nacional (FMLN) will fully cooperate with the United
Nations residual team which is intended to help them
implement the Peace Accords to finality and ensure that
the political gains made so far are not reversed.

The United Nations has nursed the people of El
Salvador to the current stage in the peace process. It is
now up to the people of El Salvador and their leaders to
carry the peace process beyond the point where it will no
longer be assailable. The international community can
provide as much assistance as the country has the
absorption capacity for - as the resolution we are about
to adopt requests - but such assistance will be beneficial
to the people of El Salvador only in conditions of peace
and tranquillity. The onus for achieving durable peace and
sustainable development and for avoiding a reversion to
war and destruction rests with the Salvadorans
themselves. The United Nations is a peace arbiter, an
honest broker which is ready and willing to help the
people of El Salvador in post-conflict peace-building. The
Salvadorans should take full advantage of the presence of
the United Nations office and resolve amicably whatever
differences they still have. They owe that responsibility to
themselves and to future generations of Salvadorans.

In this valedictory meeting of the Security Council
on ONUSAL, the United Nations can pat itself on the
back as it adds El Salvador to the list of its recent success
stories in peace-keeping operations, such as Cambodia
and Mozambique. We congratulate the troop contributors
and the men and women of ONUSAL on a job well done,
and we congratulate the Secretary-General and his staff.
We also salute the men and women of peace in El
Salvador who steadfastly cooperated with the United
Nations to ensure the success of the mission and the
return of conditions of relative peace and stability in their
country.

