Mr. Solana (spoke in French): I am taking the
floor before the Council after having just completed the
mission to the Great Lakes region, which enabled me to
speak with Presidents Kabila, Kagame and Museveni
and to visit Bunia, where the Interim Emergency
Multinational Force, Artemis, is deployed under
European Union auspices. I should like to share with
you some thoughts, some European Union
commitments and some concerns.

In response to the Secretary-General's appeal, the
European Union decided to deploy a multinational
force to Bunia. That operation - a first for the
European Union, which had never before sent military
contingents outside Europe - made it possible to stop
the massacres at Bunia and helped to relaunch the
peace process, which had stalled at Kinshasa.

(spoke in Spanish)

In fact, the peace process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has been characterized from its
outset by a fundamental anomaly: the coexistence of
the political option and the military option. On the one
hand, the belligerent parties negotiate and sign
ceasefire agreements, while on the other, those same
persons or groups continue their military operations on
the ground in the hope of achieving a military victory.
That ambiguity has been perpetuated by what we have
called "negative forces", present in all the components
and armed units, for whom maintenance of the status
quo seems more desirable than implementation of the
peace agreement, since that would result in the loss of
their personal power.

Those "negative forces" have done everything
possible to defeat the peace process several times.
They have not succeeded, thanks to the determination
of the Congolese people and their leaders, who wanted
peace, and thanks to the vigilance and resolve of the
international community. However, they have not given
up completely on their objectives. The escalation of the
Ituri crisis gave those forces a new opportunity to
jeopardize the peace process: the capture of Bunia by
the Union of Congolese Patriots (UPC), the reaction of
the Kinshasa Government and the offensive launched
against Beni by the Rassemblement congolais pour la
democratie (RCD), with the risk of a direct
intervention by Uganda and Rwanda, led, inevitably, to
the undermining of the Sun City agreements.
I believe that the rapid deployment of the
European Multinational Force halted that dangerous
downward spiral in the process and made it possible to
relaunch negotiations, which had been bogged down
for weeks. The agreement related to the staff of the
armed forces has finally been concluded, thus creating
the conditions for the establishment of a Government
of National Unity and transitional institutions that
involve all Congolese parties. That was a fundamental
step made possible by the commitment of, among
others, the Secretary-General's Special Envoy,
Mr. Moustapha Niasse, and the delegation of
facilitators from the Republic of South Africa. Here, I
should like to pay tribute to them on behalf of the
European Union, which, through its Special
Representative, assisted them throughout the
negotiation period in Pretoria and Kinshasa. An
important role was also played by the International
Committee in Support of the Transition, which paved
the way for the agreement on the military issue.

The European Union's mission to Bunia has been
going smoothly thus far. After the minor incidents that
marked the beginning of the operation and led the
Force to use its weapons, the situation stabilized
rapidly. The Force was able to secure the airport and
the refugee camps, to prohibit the open bearing of arms
in Bunia from 24 June onwards, and to establish
checkpoints at the city's entrances. The Force reached
its full deployment at the beginning of July, one week
ahead of schedule. Thus, the objectives set for the force
have been attained.

The improvement in security conditions is
obvious; there are many positive indicators, as I saw a
few days ago on the ground. Humanitarian
organizations are now able to leave Bunia to visit
peoples that they could not reach before. A constant
flow of refugees - 1,000 to 1,500 people daily - is
returning to the city, and the Ituri Interim
Administration can again carry out some activities. On
my trip to Bunia, I was able to see that improvement
for myself. I saw the smiling faces of the children in
the refugee camps, despite conditions that remain
precarious, and the warm thanks expressed by the
members of the interim administration of Ituri and the
gratitude of non-governmental organizations for the
action of the European Union force are a tribute to
what has been accomplished.
But it is essential to preserve the achievements
made so far. For that reason, as the 27 May report of
the Secretary-General (S/2003/566) emphasizes, a
strengthened presence of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) must be deployed in Bunia
within the planned time frame. That force must, in our
view, have a mandate and rules of engagement similar
to those of the European Union Force - in other
words, a mandate under Chapter VII. It must also have
the equipment and the military resources needed for the
mission's functioning and for the implementation of the
mandate and the rules of engagement. If we wish to be
able to re-establish security in the region beyond the
limits of the capital city, we shall also have to deploy
greater forces.

We believe that that point is of capital importance
if we wish to avoid further difficulties being created by
the European Force's departure at the end of its
mandate. The commander of the Artemis operation has
done everything necessary to ensure that the transition
to the strengthened MONUC force will take place
under the best possible conditions.

At the same time, strong pressure should be
brought to bear on the warlords who are leading the
militias. The European Union resolutely backs the
proposal for an embargo on arms aimed at North Kivu,
South Kivu and Ituri. The European Union intends to
promote initiatives aimed at preventing those
responsible for war crimes, crimes against humanity
and acts of genocide committed in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo from enjoying impunity.

In our view, efforts to stabilize the military
situation must be accompanied and supported by a
process of political normalization through the
consolidation of the interim institutions set up by the
Ituri Pacification Commission; the return to the rule of
law; the observance by the various militias of the
ceasefire agreement signed in Dar es-Salaam last May;
the control, and, ultimately, the abolition of those
militias; and an end to external interference. We
believe it essential that MONUC succeed in setting up
a political unit in Bunia that is capable of administering
this particularly delicate and complex process.

The European Union, for its part, is determined to
use every means at its disposal to support the political
process now under way. That involves technical and
financial support for the Ituri Interim Administration
and the Ituri Pacification Commission, as well as for
the process of disarming, demobilizing and
reintegrating combatants into the Ituri district. The
European Union also commits itself to supporting
programmes for the socio-economic rehabilitation of
Ituri and the local reconciliation process.

We are also prepared and committed to continue
supporting the transitional process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo until the elections are held.
Throughout this period, the Union will strive, through
the use of every means at its disposal, to make a
substantial contribution to funding for the
reconstruction, rehabilitation and development of the
Democratic Republic in the Congo in all areas, in
accordance with the priorities set by the recently
established Government of National Unity. In that
context, I am pleased to announce the adoption on
9 July of a programme of strategic support amounting
to 205 million euros.

Among the priorities of the new Government will
be the creation of the integrated and restructured
National Republican Army and the start of a
demobilization and reintegration programme for all
combatants who have not been integrated into that
army. The international community will have to give its
determined support to these complex priority projects.
The European Union undertakes to firmly support the
demobilization and reintegration programme. As
members are aware, the European Union has also
begun discussions on support for the peacekeeping
forces of the African Union, which have just resulted in
the adoption of a financing mechanism, announced by
the European Union at the Maputo Summit.

The holding of elections within the timetable set
by the Peace Agreement is a further challenge that the
transitional Government will have to face. President
Kabila has again put to me his request for assistance,
which he has already made on several occasions. I can
inform members that the European Union, for its part,
is in the process of examining arrangements for
providing aid, which could include significant support
for the Independent Electoral Commission. The
Commission's first task will be to conduct a census on
which future electoral rolls will be based. We are all
aware that that is a huge task, given the country's large
size and limited infrastructure and communication
links. That is why it is necessary to begin that
operation immediately, even though the elections may
not be held for another two years. In that context, the
logistical support of MONUC will be indispensable.
Here the model used in Mozambique, where the United
Nations Operation in Mozambique (UNOMOZ) made
its logistical and transportation resources available to
the national electoral commission, could serve as a
precedent.

(spoke in English)

Before concluding, I would like to make a final
point. Progress in the peace process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and its positive effects
throughout the central African region have made it
possible to envisage organizing a regional conference
on the peace, security and development of the Great
Lakes region. The European Union has been calling for
such a conference for many years. The Secretary-
General has entrusted its preparation to Mr. Ibrahima
Fall, whose already considerable work is to be
applauded. The holding of such a conference clearly
depends on the consolidation of the peace processes in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Burundi,
where, regrettably, the situation is still deteriorating
and where there is still a considerable way to go. The
conference should, however, remain a priority
objective for all of us.

With the establishment of the Government of
National Unity in Kinshasa, I think that a window of
opportunity has been opened in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in the Great Lakes region as
a whole. This fundamental step in the peace process
has been made possible not only as a result of the
desire for peace of the Congolese people and of their
leaders - beginning with President Kabila, to whom I
pay tribute - but also because of the unfailing
commitment of the international community, which has
been able to speak with one voice and bring the
necessary pressure to bear on the warring factions to
defeat the resistance put up by the enemies of peace.
That commitment must be maintained and, indeed,
reinforced now that the new Government of National
Unity is setting out on the difficult road of transition
towards elections.

I would like to restate the firm intention of the
European Union to step up its efforts to give the new
Congolese Government the political, economic and
financial support it needs successfully to complete the
complicated transitional process, put an end to the
suffering of the Congolese people and guide the
country towards democracy.

