Mrs. Bangura (Sierra Leone): At the outset, I
would like to convey the sincere appreciation of His
Excellency Mr. Ernest Bai Koroma, President of the
Republic of Sierra Leone, for the invitation extended to
him to participate in this debate. While also
congratulating President Thabo Mbeki on conceiving
this laudable initiative, allow me to convey President
Koroma's profound regret for his inability to be
personally present to contribute to this all-important
subject, due to compelling preoccupations at home.

My gratitude also goes to the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive report to the Security Council
08-30700
on this subject (S/2008/l86) and the recommendations
therein.

The remarkable talent and ability of President
Mbeki, coupled with his consummate experience,
convince us that we can exude pride and confidence
that his special talents can be brought to bear on the
proceedings of this meeting.

Partnership and cooperation provide the
opportunity to tap into the comparative advantages of
the United Nations and regional stakeholders to
respectively contribute to addressing threats to
international peace and security. Thus a concerted
effort in managing, resolving and preventing conflicts
constitutes a vital ingredient for international peace,
security and prosperity.

As a nation that has emerged from a protracted
conflict and that is still grappling with the effects of
that menace, Sierra Leone is a living testimony to the
critical importance of a regional approach to conflict
resolution and prevention. The historic decision by
Security Council in resolution 1181 (1998), in
welcoming and recognizing the important contribution
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) in support of Sierra Leone Government's
efforts to re-establish effective administration and the
democratic process and to embark on the task of
national reconciliation, reconstruction and
rehabilitation, is a clear demonstration of the
imperative of these partnerships.

With two thirds of the world's poorest countries,
Africa has experienced a myriad of civil conflicts that
resulted in abject poverty and socio-economic
exclusion. Efforts by the African Union (AU) and
subregional organizations such as ECOWAS in
establishing mechanisms for conflict prevention,
management and resolution - particularly the crisis
situations in Liberia, Sierra Leone, Guinea-Bissau,
Cote d'Ivoire and the Darfur region in the Sudan -
clearly demonstrate the willingness and commitment of
the continent to take on its responsibility for peace,
security and stability in the continent.

Despite positive trends and advances with regard
to obtaining durable peace in Africa, the conditions
required for sustainable development have yet to be
consolidated throughout the continent. Thus, these
efforts can yield dividends only through the
cooperation and support of the international
community, based on the principle of mutual respect

and trust. There is therefore an urgent need to intensify
and harmonize national, regional and international
efforts in order to develop African human and
institutional capacities, particularly in countries
emerging from conflict.

The need to support those countries in getting
back on their feet is more than imperative, and it
involves peacebuilding and preventive diplomacy. We
know only too well the challenges faced by post-
conflict countries after years of civil strife. Such
countries, often fragile and reeling under the weight of
poverty, are usually not equal to the Herculean task of
rebuilding what has been scarred by years of
devastation. Supporting those countries in order to heal
the wounds of conflict is, in itself, an antidote that
could stabilize them as well as prevent them from
sliding down the thorny path that leads to renewed
conflict.

It is in that light that we applaud and greatly
appreciate the efforts and engagement of the
Peacebuilding Commission regarding countries like
ours, grappling with post-conflict reconstruction. We
trust that the call for close collaboration between the
Peacebuilding Commission and the AU Standing
Multidimensional Committee could be strengthened
through regular consultation and coordination. The
abundant resources that we muster for intervention and
peacekeeping operations could be significantly reduced
if we heavily invest in preventive diplomacy, by
tackling the root causes of conflicts upstream. Thus, a
stitch in time saves nine.

In order to accomplish that goal, the United
Nations system should adapt itself to the
transformations and developments that the continent is
currently experiencing, particularly in the context of
the evolving structures and programmes of the AU. In
the spirit of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations, the AU and subregional organizations have
devised mechanisms to strengthen their peacekeeping
capacity and to take the lead in peacekeeping
operations on the continent. Those ongoing efforts
require close collaboration and coordination between
the United Nations and the AU.

In concluding, I wish to emphasize that, in the
promotion of international peace and security, the real
challenge lies in strengthening partnership and
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations, in particular the African Union. That
5
also calls for implementation of the relevant mandates
of the General Assembly and the Security Council and
highlights the need for the United Nations and the
international community to provide further support to
the AU in the following ways.

First, the AU Peace Fund should be replenished,
and flexible, predictable and sustainable financing
should be ensured for AU peacekeeping operations so
that they can expedite or step up troop deployment in
peacekeeping operations. Secondly, the initiatives of
the African Union and subregional organizations to
prevent, mediate and resolve conflicts with the
assistance of the United Nations should be encouraged
and supported. Thirdly, cooperation with the New
Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD) should
be strengthened by providing coherent support for its
programmes through the mobilization of internal and
external financial resources. Fourthly, the individual
and collective efforts of African countries should be
supplemented so that agricultural productivity can be
increased in a sustainable way, in order to ensure food
security in the context of NEPAD's Comprehensive
Africa Agriculture Development Programme. Finally, a
well-structured multi-stakeholder post-conflict
peacebuilding programme that has clearly defined and
coordinated roles for each partner should be
established.

