Mr. Assaf (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, Mr. President, I would like to thank you for having
invited us to participate in this meeting. We express
our gratitude for your efforts and those of the
Secretary-General, in following recent developments in
the situation in my country.

I would also like to thank the United Nations
International Independent Investigation Commission
(UNIIIC), which is responsible for the inquiry into the
assassination of former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri, as
well as its head, Mr. Detlev Mehlis, for their enormous
and effective professional efforts. These are reflected
in the report submitted today.
We wish Judge Mehlis every success in his future
tasks after his praiseworthy efforts in Lebanon. We
hope that we can continue our constructive cooperation
with his successor so that the investigation can proceed
with the same energy and determination. That is vital,
and it is the wish of all sectors of the Lebanese people.

We hope that, as we have requested, and in
accordance with resolution 1636 (2005), the Security
Council will decide to extend the mandate of the
International Independent Investigation Commission
for a renewable six-month period, according to the
Commission's needs. The judicial and security bodies
of Lebanon will continue their cooperation with the
Commission. In that context, we invite all parties
concerned to extend their genuine and rapid
cooperation to the Commission, in accordance with
Security Council resolutions 1595 (2005) and 1636
(2005), by shedding light on all aspects of that terrorist
crime and punishing all the perpetrators in order to
preserve the region's stability and security.

International precedents show that the best way to
judge those involved in serious crimes of this nature is
to establish an international tribunal so that justice can
be delivered through fair trials free of pressure and
obstacles. In accordance with paragraph 14 of Security
Council resolution 1636 (2005), by which the Security
Council expresses its readiness to consider any
additional request for assistance from the Lebanese
Government to ensure that all those responsible for the
crime are held responsible, the Government of
Lebanon today asked the Security Council to establish
an international tribunal, which could have its seat
either in or outside Lebanon, and which would try all
those who, in the judgement of the Commission, were
involved in the terrorist crime that claimed the lives of
Prime Minister Rafik Hariri, Member of Parliament
Bassil Fuleihan and their companions.

The series of terrorist acts has continued. The
latest incident occurred yesterday, when Member of
Parliament and journalist Mr. Gebrane Tueni was
killed. We have seen that there is a link joining the
terrorist crimes that began with the attempted
assassination of Economy Minister Marwan Hamadeh
on 1 October 2004. All those crimes have been
thoroughly condemned by the Lebanese people. The
Security Council too has condemned those crimes.
Accordingly, the Government of Lebanon has
requested in writing that the Security Council extend
the mandate of the International Independent
Investigation Commission established pursuant to
resolution 1595 (2005) or that it establish another
international investigation commission to help the
Lebanese authorities in the current investigation of all
other terrorist crimes, assassinations and attempted
assassinations of political and media figures in
Lebanon, starting with the attempted assassination of
Mr. Marwan Hamadeh on 1 October 2004.

