Mr. Sun Joun-yung (Republic of Korea): First of
all, let me thank you, Mr. President, for reconvening
this open debate on the situation in the Middle East.

The Republic of Korea is deeply concerned about
the continuing escalation of violence in the Middle
East. We are particularly distressed by the
humanitarian situation in the region, and we urge the
parties concerned to respect international humanitarian
law to ensure the protection of civilians as well as the
safety of international humanitarian workers.

The Government of the Republic of Korea has
firmly opposed any form of violence that jeopardizes
efforts to achieve peace and stability in the region. We
share the view of all other members of the international
community that violence cannot be a solution to the
current situation. It is only through political dialogue
and negotiations that the two parties can achieve a
lasting peace in the Middle East.

In that regard, my Government gives its
unreserved support to Security Council resolutions
1397 (2002), 1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002), calling for
an immediate ceasefire and the withdrawal of Israeli
troops from Palestinian cities. We also welcome the
Tenet plan and the Mitchell report recommendations as
an effective framework for bringing peace to the
region. The Republic of Korea believes that those
initiatives should be put into practice promptly.

In that context, we hope that the visit of United
States Secretary of State Colin Powell to the region
will lead to a ceasefire and meaningful negotiations. At
the same time, we commend the ongoing efforts by the
international community for peace, in particular those
of the "quartet" of international envoys.

The Government of the Republic of Korea
believes that the peace process between Israel and
Palestine is of critical importance to the peace and
stability of the region and to the world as a whole. The
potential spread of the conflict to other areas is a
matter of grave concern. In particular, we are greatly
disturbed by the recent eruption of violence along the
Blue Line between Israel and Lebanon.

We join the international community in calling
upon both parties to take their differences to the
negotiating table for a peaceful resolution of the
conflict, in compliance with the Security Council's
resolutions.

