Mr. Kubis: Khanjar Wabel Abdallah of Lebanon,
Basra Hassan of the United States and of Somali origin,
Nasreen Khan of Pakistan and Vadim Nazarov of the
Russian Federation are four members of the United
Nations family who were brutally murdered in January.
They died, along with 17 other Afghan and international
civilians, in a suicide assault in Kabul city. I offer my
deepest condolences to their families in recognizing the
sacrifice of those dedicated international civil servants.

In less than three weeks' time, Afghanistan intends
to hold presidential and provincial council elections,
which will effect the country's first democratic transfer
of power. Leadership and commitment remain critical
to the holding of that historic event. In underscoring
a stable political dispensation, those elections are a
defining moment that will earn President Hamid Karzai
a place in history.

I urge all eligible Afghan citizens - men and
women - to exercise their franchise on 5 April. I urge
them to not let spoilers and terrorists deprive them of
their choice or of their future. Participation as voters,
elections officials and observers is a rejection of force,
violence and intimidation as the means by which their
proud nation decides its leadership. At this delicate
juncture in Afghanistan's transitions, it is a credible
electoral transition that can provide much-needed
stability and predictability through a popular mandate
across ethnic lines for broader political, economic
and social development agendas, including peace and
reconciliation.

Technical preparations for what is an Afghan-
managed and Afghan-led electoral process remain
on track and are of a better quality than previously,
including in fraud prevention and mitigation.

In addition to the electoral authorities, the
responsibility for peaceful and credible polls largely
rests with political leaders, candidates and their
supporters. I urge all candidates to guide and shape the
actions and attitudes of their supporters with serious
public commitment to opposing fraud committed in
their name. Where there are alleged electoral violations,
complainants should seek immediate redress through
institutional means.

Elections will necessarily have losers, but, in
particular in the current conditions in Afghanistan,
they should not be a winner-takes-all contest. While in
no way replacing the people's voice at the polls, I urge
candidates to come to the understanding that not being
the winner is not prima facie evidence of fraud. Threats
of civil disobedience over alleged fraud now, weeks
before the elections, or the resort to civil disruption
only increase tensions and create confusion.

Security will have a major impact on the polls. To
date, election-related violence has been of a lower order
than in 2009 or 2010, even as general security incidents
have increased. However, even election violence is on
the rise.
I welcome the support for the electoral process
expressed by parts of the insurgency, notably Gulbuddin
Hekmatyar's armed wing of Hezb-e Islami. However, I
want to make very clear that even groups such as the
Taliban that reject the elections have an obligation to
respect a civilian process. I am gravely disturbed by
the Taliban's recent declaration that it will seek to
disrupt the process by force, unleashing a campaign
of terror. Voters, electoral workers, candidates and
observers are all civilians. Targeting civilians or
carrying out indiscriminate attacks on polling centres
and other civilian locations undermine any claims to
legitimate political status and are acts punishable under
international law.

I bear with me, for the Secretary-General, a
message signed by a quarter ofa million Afghan women
in support of peace. I commend the organizers and
petitioners who have raised their voice - the voices
of the majority of Afghans. These women demand only
the chance for a secure future for their families. It is
a message of hope and resilience amid the misery and
death inflicted by terrorism, extremism, transnational
criminal networks and local power-holders.

A breakthrough in direct talks between Afghan
authorities and the Taliban remains elusive thus far,
despite some interesting recent initiatives by the High
Peace Council. Efforts to build understanding and agree
on frameworks must continue while patiently building
an environment conducive to later, more formal efforts,
in which the United Nations should, and will, have a
more prominent role.

Afghanistan's ultimate stability and sustainability
lies in the region. As other international actors draw
down, I am pleased to see neighbouring countries
and regional powers recognizing the need for active
engagement in support of Afghan solutions. There is
a realization that a peaceful, stable and prosperous
Afghanistan is ultimately in the self-interest of all.

I am pleased to note continued practical progress
being made under the Istanbul Process on Regional
Security and Cooperation for a Secure and Stable
Afghanistan. Peace and stability in Afghanistan will not
be sustainable without economic and social transitions
assisted by donors meeting their commitments in the
years to come. At January's special Joint Coordination
and Monitoring Board meeting, in which all 11
presidential candidates participated, representatives of
50 Member States underscored their continuing support
for Afghanistan. The levels of international assistance
pledged remains truly exceptional, while remaining
dependent on successful political transition and
demonstrable progress in Government commitments
to governance, reforms, economic sustainability and a
rights-based agenda.

I welcome assurances by the presidential
candidates of their commitment to sustaining and
accelerating momentum under the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework. There are risks, but there
are even more opportunities in returning to a more
normalized development agenda. In looking forward to
the ministerial-level development conference with the
new Government later this year, it cannot be business
as usual. Strengthening employment, generating licit
economic activity and undercutting the burgeoning
illicit economy should be central to all development
approaches.

Narcotics production and trafficking undermine the
well-being of the population, economy and institutions
of Afghanistan and the wider region and increasingly
contribute to the financing of terrorism. A shared
long-term strategy, high-level leadership and genuine
political will are required of both the Government and
the international community.

Sustaining the gains Afghanistan has made in
human rights over the past decade and, in particular, the
rights of women and children is not a luxury and must
not be sacrificed to short-term political expediency.
Justice, good governance, the rule of law and human
rights are crucial elements of lasting peace, equitable
development and human security.

I welcome the Government's commitment to
ending child recruitment by 2016, which requires
that implementation of the action plan on underage
recruitment be expedited.

As the new United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) mandate is renewed, I again
stress the United Nations' long-term commitment
to a peaceful and prosperous Afghanistan. Given
the current elements of uncertainty, interlocutors
almost unanimously stress the continuity and value
that UNAMA brings in the exercise of good offices,
the protection and promotion of human rights and the
facilitation of international development coherence.
The Mission's national footprint continues to be an
invaluable asset in undertaking mandated elections,
outreach and human rights activities. Indeed, as
other international institutions and Member States
reduce their sub-national presence, the international
community is increasingly seeking our support in
understanding and accessing a diverse country. All that
work in implementing our complex mandate requires
adequate and predictable resources.

In highlighting progress and positive momentum,
I emphasize that gains are fragile. Yet Afghanistan is
not poised atop an inevitable post-2014 abyss, as some
doomsayers have predicted. What is needed in such
a period of unpredictability is the smooth and timely
transfer ofpolitical power. The success ofthe April 2014
elections will be of critical significance in reinforcing
Afghanistan's institutional and political stability and
instilling confidence in the future.

