Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome
the convening of this meeting and your presence here
today in presiding over our meeting, Madam President.
We thank the Secretary-General and the briefers for
their valuable statements.

We believe it is essential for troop- and
police-contributing countries to participate actively
in the institutional reforms and changes aimed at
making peacekeeping operations more efficient, just
as we believe that it is the Security Council's job to
provide the troops participating in those operations
with clear and precise mandates. We believe that for
this analysis to be productive it is essential to diagnose
the many challenges and difficulties currently facing
peace operations. The troops deployed to missions are
operating in increasingly hostile environments and
dealing with many different kinds of non-State actors,
including insurgent groups, terrorists and organized
criminals, which makes their work extremely complex
and risky. They must therefore be given the specialized
training they need to enable them to carry out their
mandates successfully. In that regard we note with
concern the frequent attacks on Blue Helmets, and
we pay tribute to those who have lost their lives in
the execution of their duties. This difficult scenario
requires an adequate response from States in terms
of training, and that means going beyond a model of
general preparation towards a more specialized one that
takes into account the specific characteristics of the
environment where the personnel will be deployed and
the specific tasks that the Council will require of them.

In our View it is also crucial to provide training
in a number of other areas. They include the specifics
of mandates and the tasks to be implemented on the
ground, which means that the Council's resolutions
should establish clear mandates and achievable
objectives in operational terms; individual missions'
specific tasks, such as the protection of civilians and
the protection of critical infrastructure, strategies
for ex-combatants' disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, security-sector reform and demining
operations; international humanitarian law and human
rights, with a particular focus on combating sexual
exploitation and abuse by peacekeeping personnel,
who must sign and implement the voluntary compact
on preventing and addressing sexual exploitation and
abuse; capacity-building and integration projects in
host societies, with a View to building relationships
of respect and trust with the people; the use of new
and appropriate technologies, which can contribute
substantially to peacekeepers' security and fulfilment
of their mandates, particularly with regard to the
protection of civilians; and, lastly, a strengthened focus
on gender. As co-Chair of the Informal Expert Group
on Women and Peace and Security, we recognize the
importance of raising the awareness of uniformed
personnel with regard to the special protection and
empowerment needs of women in conflict and post-
conflict situations.

In achieving those objectives, we believe it is useful
to share the important synergies that exist in Latin
America. They are not limited to bilateral relations,
through exchanges of officials and instructors or
lessons learned on doctrine and course design, but are in
fact multilateral, thanks to the creation of ALCOPAZ,
our Latin American association of peace operations
training centres, which is aimed at mutual integration
and cooperation. It is currently chaired by Peru and
continues to strengthen its links and capacity in various
technical areas. We believe that similar approaches
could be applied to police and civilian involvement in
peace operations. We also consider it important to link
such efforts with the experience of other continents
in order to generate synergies of greater scope. In
addition, we believe that it is crucial to complement
those positive practices with the involvement of civil
society organizations, such as research centres, think
tanks and universities, with which partnerships and
cooperation agreements should be developed.

In conclusion, I would like to recall that, as
the Minister for Defence of Peru announced at the
Peacekeeping Ministerial held on 29 March, Peru
will host the twenty-fifth Annual Conference of the
International Association of Peacekeeping Training
Centres, to be held in October. We call on all countries
that have training centres to continue to contribute to
the strengthening of those key capacities and the joint
task ofinvesting in peace.

