Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I
welcome the vote by the General Assembly this
morning which confirmed, by an overwhelming
majority, the reintegration of Libya within the United
Nations family, which today welcomes the
representatives of the new Libya. I would like to
welcome Ambassador Dabbashi, whose personal valour
is well known.

A historic step has been made to restore Libya to
a normalized international status. It is one further step
towards the establishment of a democratic Libya, with
which France will be proud to associate. It is now up to
the Security Council to play its part in contributing to
this process, as it has already done in adopting
resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011). In that
context, we have just adopted resolution 2009 (2011),
which provides the Libyan people with the instruments
necessary to build a better future. The Security Council
has also demonstrated its commitment to supporting
the legitimate expectations of the Libyan people.

The United Nations Support Mission in Libya
will provide the Libyan people with all necessary
assistance in order to prepare for elections, draft a
constitution and build the institutions of a democratic
and free State that respects human rights and the rule
of law, as the representatives of the new Libya have
pledged to do. It is also our responsibility to restore to
the Libyan authorities the economic means for their
activities. The gradual unfreezing of assets through a
clear and well-organized mechanism will help the
Libyan economy recover, thus promoting the
reconstruction of the country.

But we must first and foremost congratulate the
Libyan people. They have demonstrated magnificent
courage and determination. In rising up against
oppression, they have manifested their will to defend
their right to live in dignity in a free and democratic
country. As President of the French Republic Nicolas
Sarkozy said yesterday in Tripoli and in Benghazi, we
will continue to stand alongside the Libyan people who
won peace, freedom and economic progress and, along
with our European partners and the Council, we will
give them our full support.

