Mr. Soares (Portugal): Our deep concern at the
situation in Kosovo cannot be overstated. Not only are
issues of political and human rights at stake, but

 

instability in Kosovo also threatens international peace and
security in the region. The international community should
send an unambiguous signal of its concern and should unite
in its efforts to bring about a peaceful resolution on
Kosovo.

We therefore fully support the role assumed by the
Contact Group in defining an action plan to end the
violence in Kosovo and to bring about a political solution
through unconditional dialogue, as set out in the statements
issued by Contact Group Foreign Ministers at London on 9
March and at Bonn on 25 March. Consequently, we
strongly support the draft resolution before the Council
today, which would establish an arms embargo on the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. The goal of the draft
resolution is clear: to end the violence both by the security
forces of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and by
terrorists, and to promote a meaningful process of
unconditional dialogue with the leadership of the Kosovar
Albanian community.

This unconditional dialogue should be oriented
towards giving Kosovo a substantially greater degree of
autonomy, including meaningful self-administration. The
outcome of the dialogue should not be predetermined, and
it should be based on the territorial integrity of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, as well as on the principles of the
Helsinki Final Act adopted by the Conference on Security
and Cooperation in Europe and of the United Nations
Charter.

Let us be clear: we support neither independence nor
the status quo. We call on the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and the Kosovar Albanian community to
renounce violence and to pursue this dialogue and reach a
mutually acceptable agreement. We utterly condemn the use
of force by either side.

An important step towards a process of dialogue has
been the agreement on measures to implement the 1996
Education Agreement. We urge that this be followed
through effectively.

The role of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in bringing about an
acceptable resolution on Kosovo is equally important, and
we urge the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to cooperate
fully with the Personal Representative of Chairman-in-
Office of OSCE and Special Representative of the
European Union, Mr. Felipe Gonzalez, and to allow the
return of the long-term OSCE mission.

We hope that the arms embargo the Council is
establishing today will not be in place for long. It is in
the best interests of all concerned that swift measures be
taken to initiate the peaceful dialogue to which I have
referred. We trust that this opportunity will be seized.

In conclusion, I wish also to say that as a member
of the European Union, Portugal's position on the matter
before the Council today is fully reflected in the statement
to be made by the representative of the United Kingdom
on behalf of the European Union.

