Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate you, Madam, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month and on the initiatives that the delegation
of the United States has proposed for the programme of
work for this period. In particular, the holding of this
open debate on the question concerning Haiti gives us
the opportunity to discuss points of view with regard to
the upcoming renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).

I would also like to thank former President Bill
Clinton, the United Nations Special Envoy for Haiti,
for his informative briefing. His indisputable
leadership contributes to revitalizing international
commitment and support so that Haiti can successfully
tackle the challenges that it faces. I would also like to
express my gratitude to the Prime Minister of Haiti,
Mrs. Michele Duvivier Pierre-Louis, and to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti,
Mr. Hedi Annabi.

The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/439) on MINUSTAH recounts the
achievements of the past five years. However, it also
reminds us of the fragility of the progress if the
commitment and joint action of the leaders and the
people of Haiti, the United Nations and the
international community are not sustained.

My country wishes to underscore the importance
of those efforts being guided by a comprehensive
vision that seeks to improve the economic and social
conditions in Haiti and fosters development and
institution-building. In that endeavour, we believe that
it is vital to restore an environment of security that
guarantees lasting stability.

That is why Colombia focuses its cooperation
initiatives with Haiti within the broader context of its
assistance for the development of the wider Caribbean
region. At the same time, it supplements those efforts
with timely bilateral and regional initiatives.

Within the technical cooperation initiatives with
the wider Caribbean, we have had the opportunity to
support Haiti in three areas essential to its economic
development: food security, work-oriented education
and disaster prevention. In addition, through
inter-institutional initiatives and with other donors, we
have given support in the environmental field through
initiatives of solid residue treatment and hydrographic
basin management.

In MINUSTAH, we have contributed to
institutional capacity-building initiatives by increasing
the number of police experts in the fight against
kidnapping and the global drug problem, and in
training for the police and the judicial police. We have
gone from contributing two officers in 2006 to
27 officers in the current year.

I would like also to highlight the information
provided by the Assistant Secretary-General for

Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Edmond Mulet, at a
recent meeting with the troop-contributing countries in
Haiti, in which he underscored the success of
MINUSTAH's anti-kidnapping efforts. The decrease
from some 30 kidnappings a month in the first six
months of 2008 to less than eight per month in the
same period of 2009 is a promising development.

My country knows the value of those outcomes.
Consequently, we will continue to expand our
contribution to MINUSTAH and to work jointly with
the other countries of the region that support the
mission's work.

In the spirit of finding comprehensive and
effective solutions, my country is participating in two
cases of coordination with Latin American countries:
the Coordination Group for Latin American
Cooperation with the Haitian National Police and the
2x9 mechanism, comprising the Deputy Ministers for
Defence and for Foreign Affairs of countries in the
region. We find the contribution of those mechanisms
to be of great value and will continue to support their
work.

Also in the area of security, the Ministry of
National Defence of Colombia and the Ministry of
Justice and Public Security of Haiti have signed a
memorandum of understanding in order to strengthen
bilateral cooperation in tackling the challenges of
transnational organized crime, the illicit trade in drugs
and psychotropic substances, kidnapping and extortion,
through training activities, equipment donation and
institutional capacity-building.

Under that agreement, a high-level Colombian
National Police mission was deployed in Haiti from
June 2009 for a period of 60 days to advise Haitian
police personnel on strategic planning and institution-
building, as well as on the capabilities needed to
address the security challenges. In addition, police
support equipment will be delivered, and training
programmes on human rights and the handling of
equipment provided by Colombia will take place.

Colombia acknowledges the importance attached,
in considering the renewal of MINUSTAH's mandate,
to efforts to strengthen the fight against illicit drug
trafficking, in particular with regard to resources for
land and maritime interdiction. That is essential in the
context of a comprehensive strategy aimed at
institution-building. My country will continue to
provide support to MINUSTAH in the field of security
and reaffirms its readiness to offer its experience and
the expertise of its officials in training the specialized
anti-narcotics teams of the Haitian National Police.

Lastly, I would like to highlight the importance of
the efforts to preserve the progress made in developing
the capacities of the Haitian National Police. The
principal security challenges that Haiti faces are of a
civilian nature and need a police approach. In
particular, it is very important, with regard to
initiatives such as the one described by the Secretary-
General in paragraph 37 of his report, that alternatives
be explored to avoid reducing material and human
resources in the ongoing reform of the Haitian National
Police.

