Mr. Hoxhaj: It is a great honour for me to
address the Security Council again regarding the recent
developments in Kosovo. I also express the gratitude of
the people of the Republic of Kosovo for the Council's
support for our young but functional and multi-ethnic
democracy.

Before us is the most recent report of the
Secretary-General on Kosovo (S/2011/675). The
situation outlined in that report helps to remind us that
Kosovo is an important State in the Balkans. In its
fourth year as an independent nation, Kosovo has
proven to be a factor of peace and stability and security
in the region and throughout Europe.

Allow me to speak about four key developments
in Kosovo.

The first deals with the further consolidation of
Kosovo's statehood. In the last three months, we made
crucial progress in strengthening our institutions.
Kosovo has maintained institutional stability, and there
are visible improvements in all aspects of life,
including democratic governance, the rule of law and a
market-based economy. It has proved to be a cohesive
State. A report published recently by the United
Nations Development Programme states that there has
been a general increase in people's satisfaction with the
work of the key executive, legislative and judicial
institutions.

The democratization process is going in the right
direction. There is an open and democratic dialogue
that includes all stakeholders in our society and that
covers a wide range of different policies and issues.
That is illustrated by the work of the commission for
constitutional changes and the commission for a new
election law. Cooperation between all political parties
and other, non-political actors is excellent. The Kosovo
Assembly has passed 33 laws on issues such as
municipal cooperation, missing persons, education,
cadastral regulations and international legal
cooperation in criminal matters.

We are committed to strengthening the rule of
law. The Kosovo justice system is engaged in fighting
organized crime and corruption. There have been
concrete results on cases involving war crimes,
organized crime and corruption. Kosovo has had
excellent preparation with the European Union Rule of
Law Mission (EULEX) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia on all those cases.
Once again, we consider the rule of law fundamental
for Kosovo's development and the development of the
Western Balkans.

Like other countries in the region, we have had
many challenges this year. Despite the fact that our
people are optimistic about the prospects for economic
development, unemployment remains one of the key
problems that we face today. For that reason, we are
working very hard to ensure economic growth and
social welfare.

Kosovo has maintained macroeconomic stability
and continuous economic growth. While Europe is
facing a debt crisis, Kosovo remains the least indebted
country in the Balkans. The new budget law was
presented to Parliament earlier this month. It foresees a
6 per cent increase in gross domestic production for the
next year. We aim to accomplish this through
investments, exports and consumption, which in turn
will provide jobs and help ease unemployment. We
consider economic growth a crucial element of our
social cohesion and our efforts at ethnic integration.

In this reporting period we made significant
progress in our efforts to participate in regional and
international initiatives. We have been and we remain a
responsible member of the international community.
The size and geographic scope of Kosovo's recognition
is global, which demonstrates that Kosovo's
independence is a geopolitical reality. In that
connection I would like to thank the Governments of
Gabon, Kuwait and the Ivory Coast for their decisions
to recognize independent Kosovo. We strongly believe
that many other countries will follow suit in the near
future. Following the firm verdict of the International
Court of Justice, which confirmed that the declaration
of Kosovo's independence did not violate international
law and resolution 1244 (1999), there are no legal
reasons to further delay the recognition of Kosovo's
independence.

The second point I wish to make has to do with
the process of European integration. We see Kosovo,
like other countries in the Balkans, as a critical part of
Europe in terms of history, geography and culture.
However, political integration, in terms of the
European integration process, is the best framework for
ensuring long-term peace, stability and prosperity in
our region. At the same time, it is also the best way for
the region to overcome divisions, through a process of
reform and mutual support.

I would like to inform the Council that on
12 October we received the European Commission's
progress report on Kosovo, which correctly reflects the
situation on the ground, stating that "Kosovo has made
progress as regards the political criteria in a number of
important areas". The work of the central and local
governments and relevant departments is praised.
Progress was also mentioned in our decentralization
efforts in building multi-ethnic institutions and a
diverse society.

Like our neighbours, we aspire to secure visa
liberalization for all citizens and contractual relations
with the European Union. Due to our progress, the
report delivered the long-awaited news about launching
a dialogue on the visa liberalization process towards
the end of this year. That is a remarkable achievement
for Kosovo. Now we also hope that the European
Council will support us by concluding a contractual
relationship in the form of a trade agreement or even a
stabilization and association agreement.

I believe that Kosovo should not be a forgotten
and isolated country. In 2011, Kosovo made important
steps towards European integration. We hope that 2012
will be the year of a European Kosovo.

The third important point for the Government of
Kosovo and for the future of the region is the situation
in the north of the country. In our previous meetings in
this Chamber, I presented my Government's views with
respect to the situation in the north of Kosovo. Again, I
consider it very important to inform the Council about
the latest developments.

The state of affairs in the north of Kosovo is
complex. It threatens the functionality of Kosovo as a
multi-ethnic State and is a serious threat to regional
peace and security. The status quo has been tolerated
since 1999, in violation of resolution 1244 (1999).
Under these circumstances, the Government of Serbia
has maintained control and has sponsored a complete,
illegal system of its structures. Security and police
units, as well as paramilitary and defence structures,
are still present and operating in that part of Kosovo.
This is taking place in direct violation of resolution
1244 (1999) and of the Kumanovo Agreement, which
explicitly prohibits Serbia from maintaining a security
and armed forces presence.

The operation of illegal Serbian structures has
posed a significant obstacle to the integration of the
local population and to the implementation of the rule

of law. This is the only corner of Europe that has not
had free and democratic elections or participation in
democratic institutions in the last twelve years. It is
also the only case in Europe in which one country,
through its security forces, is controlling part of
another country. In that area, where law and order are
absent, criminal activities and organized crime have
flourished. As we have seen, besides the economic
implications for Kosovo, Serbia and the rest of the
Balkans, such a black-hole situation has seriously
threatened regional security.

The illegal security structures of organized crime
aim to create a status quo in order to safeguard their
illegal economic activities, such as smuggling,
trafficking and others. With the support of the Serbian
Government, illegal structures have held the local
population hostage and threaten peace and order.

It is necessary to mention here that since 1999 we
have been a great financial contributor to the local
institutions in that part of Kosovo. Just this year, we
invested over €5 million in different projects, and we
will do more. Unfortunately, Belgrade has at all times
interfered and denied every form of cooperation for the
good of the local Serb community there.

The Government of Kosovo has shown patience
for a year. We have insisted that the situation should be
resolved in cooperation with international mechanisms.
We have been and remain committed to resolving this
situation through cooperation, not confrontation. But
our approach - to give peace and understanding a
chance - has been misused by the Government of
Serbia. Serbia refers to resolution 1244 (1999) over
and over again, as it did today. However, Serbia has
done everything in its power to prevent the
implementation of that resolution in the north of
Kosovo and to prevent the development of the multi-
ethnic character of our society there.

The same has happened with the Ahtisaari Plan
since 2008. Most of the provisions of the Ahtisaari
Plan are aimed at ensuring the best mechanisms and
rights for the Kosovo Serbs. To date, Kosovo has
implemented more than 90 per cent of the Plan, and the
integration of the Kosovo Serbs across the country is a
reality. The Plan could not be implemented in the north
because Serbia never showed any interest in improving
the lives of the local Serbs there.

When I mention the north of Kosovo, I am
specifically referring to the three and a half
municipalities: the northern part of the city of
Mitrovica, Leposavie, Zvecan and Zubin Potok.
Thirteen thousand people live in this part of Kosovo,
but the majority of Kosovo Serbs live across Kosovo,
and around 100,000 take part in all levels of Kosovo
institutions.

The decision of the Kosovo Government to
establish the rule of law and to enforce reciprocity
measures in trade relations was not a violent act. It was
an attempt to establish the rule of law and order and to
implement the agreement on Customs stamps reached
in Brussels. The Government of Kosovo has been
working in close coordination with international
partners to secure basic freedom of movement and the
rule of law.

What is currently happening in that part of
Kosovo, even as we meet here today? The situation
remains unchanged, blocked and threatening. Trucks,
rocks and various obstacles are blocking most of the
roads in the three municipalities in the north. A total of
18 roadblocks are preventing the free movement of
people and goods. Even the troops of the Kosovo Force
(KFOR), a force mandated by resolution 1244 (1999),
and the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) are prevented from crossing those
barricades. This poses a real threat to security within
Kosovo and to regional peace and stability.

At the same time, we are concerned about the war
narratives that are still present in the Serbian political
discourse. That was confirmed last week by the
statements made by members of the Serbian
Government, who, when talking about Kosovo, said
that Serbia could not and would not watch peacefully if
a red line was crossed. They sent threatening messages
and promoted the concept of a balance of fear between
Kosovo and Serbia.

It is necessary to mention here that since 25 July,
the Kosovo institutions have not been the ones to use
violence. The opposite is true. The illegal Serbian
security structures have systematically used violence
against citizens and peacekeeping soldiers. In the last
two weeks alone, more than 54 soldiers have been
wounded, including in the escalation of violence that
occurred yesterday.

We have been patient, hoping that our neighbour,
Serbia, would understand that roadblocks and threats
are not solutions to our problems. We do not wish to be
part of destabilizing scenarios, and we will not tolerate
being threatened by destructive forms of intimidation.
We are a constructive partner in resolving the issues we
face, but we will not give up our serenity or the
functioning of our young, democratic State. We are
working to improve our good-neighbourly relations,
always oriented towards dialogue and European
integration.

This brings me to my last point: the technical
dialogue. Our dedication to peace and stability and to a
European future for the whole region led us to engage
in a dialogue with Serbia that is facilitated by the
European Union. This technical dialogue is aimed at
finding solutions to the practical issues that our people
are faced with every day.

Dialogue is a very important instrument for us to
build good-neighbourly relations as two independent
States. We are willing to put the past behind us and
work together for a better future. It is for that reason
that we are participating in this dialogue in a
constructive manner and in good faith. We are working
towards outcomes that improve the lives of all citizens
in Kosovo and Serbia. The resolution of issues
concerning the freedom of movement of people and
goods will greatly benefit people in both countries.

Our goal is to bring services closer to all citizens
of Kosovo, and all of the solutions that we have
proposed so far are aimed at bringing communities
together, not dividing them. I do not believe that there
should be, or could be, ethnic electricity, ethnic mobile
telephones or ethnic car plates, as these concepts are
against European values and norms. We will therefore
accept all solutions that are European solutions. Such
solutions should be clear and easy to implement and
should not produce more parallelism.

But let me make clear the position of my
Government on the dialogue. Kosovo is and will be
part of this dialogue. We welcome the fact that Serbia,
after some months of boycott, returned to the
negotiating table last week. However, we should not
understand dialogue as a process that involves simply
attending meetings, without any concrete results. We
are very much interested in outcomes and in the
implementation of agreements.

As I reported here at previous meetings in July
and September, Kosovo and Serbia agreed on many
important issues. To date, only one agreement has been
implemented by Serbia. This undermines the trust
between both sides and hinders the prospects for new
agreements.

Kosovo supports the integration of the region into
the European Union. However, we will never accept
countries aspiring to integration, such as Serbia,
undermining Kosovo's statehood and controlling part
of its territory through illegal security structures. We
therefore believe that the time has come for Serbia to
remove the roadblocks, dismantle its security structures
and accept the European model of integrated border
management between the two countries.

We are deeply committed to the implementation
of the entire Ahtisaari Plan as the best model for the
integration of the Kosovo Serbs. According to the Plan,
Kosovo Serbs in these three municipalities can have
full self-governance, something that no other
community can enjoy today in Europe.

We expect that the next round of dialogue,
scheduled for tomorrow, will take place and will bring
concrete outcomes in the areas of regional cooperation,
integrated border management, telecommunications
and energy. But let me repeat: we are very interested in
reaching agreement on those issues, and, more
importantly, implementing them on the ground. We
hope that Serbia is not using the dialogue to score
political points in order to get European Union
candidate status. We also hope that it will not boycott it
again after 9 December, when the European Council
will take important decisions for the Balkans.

Let me conclude by saying that the Government
of Kosovo is committed to providing all its citizens the
peaceful and prosperous future that they deserve. We
are determined to integrate the people in this part of
Kosovo with the rest of the country and maintain our
internationally recognized borders. We will make every
effort to communicate with the Kosovo Serbs in the
north, and we will spare no resource to enable the
creation of free and democratic institutions in the
north, so that people can live free of fear and
intimidation. The Government of Kosovo will exercise
its legitimate right to guarantee law, order and peace in
its entire territory. The municipalities in the north are
part of Kosovo. They will be so forever. We will never
accept a status quo, a frozen situation or ethnic
partition, as senior-level officials in Serbia are
promoting.

I think that, after 20 years, the time has come for
Serbia to define its national interests in terms of
political integration within Europe and economic
development, and not in terms of territory. Serbia
should come to terms with independent Kosovo. We
remain willing to normalize relations with Serbia. The
policy goal of my Government is the integration of
Kosovo into the Euro-Atlantic institutions.

Finally, the Security Council can count on
Kosovo for cooperation in order to maintain
international peace and security. As the report of the
Secretary-General shows, a threat to Kosovo's peace is
indeed a threat to regional security and stability.

