Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): We truly respect the
decision of the Security Council to give us this little
time to come and speak, but we would like to put to the
Council for next time that the issue of the Middle East
is extremely important to us and we would really like
to have the time one day for our views to be heard.

My statement is being circulated, so I will abide
by the three-minute rule and simply say that we are
especially concerned about a decision taken by the
Israeli cabinet to expel President Arafat, who embodies
Palestinian identity and national aspirations. My
Government believes that advocating the removal, or
even the killing, of the democratically elected President
of the people of Palestine is utterly unacceptable and
must be condemned in the strongest possible terms.

The Israelis and Palestinians cannot hope to
approach a solution for peace by vowing to kill each
other. The South African Government has always
stated that violence as a tactic or strategy will never
deliver the peace so dearly sought by the people of
Palestine and Israel. We therefore join the international
community in condemning all acts of terrorism and
violence, particularly against Palestinian and Israeli
civilians. The international community is heading for a
serious crisis unless immediate measures are taken to
stabilize this situation.

The Security Council has consistently been
unable to enforce its resolutions on the Middle East. As
a result, the Council's pronouncements go unheeded
and are violated with impunity. This adds to the
growing perception that the Council is unwilling to act
and that it risks becoming marginalized in dealing with
this important issue.

The Security Council should immediately adopt a
resolution under Chapter VII of the Charter calling for
a complete cessation of all acts of violence, terror,
provocation, incitement and destruction. Such a
Chapter VII resolution should also demand that Israel,
as the occupying Power, abide by its obligations under
international humanitarian law, including the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Times of War, as 12 August 1949. In
particular, the Council needs to place on record the fact
that threats to deport or kill leaders of the Palestinian
people are unacceptable and illegal, as is the
construction of a separation wall on Palestinian land.
The Council should mandate the deployment of an
international presence to monitor the implementation
of the Chapter VII resolution by both sides.

The South African Government calls on the
Israeli Government to act with restraint and expresses
the hope that the Israeli Government will reverse its
decision to expel President Arafat. At the same time,
the South African Government also calls on the
Palestinian people not to use violence as a means to
acquire peace. We condemn all acts of terrorism and
firmly believe that violence as a tactic or strategy can
never be a substitute for a negotiated peaceful
settlement.

