Mr. Hague (United Kingdom): I begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for convening this
summit. Given the new security threats and economic
constraints we face, this debate provides an
opportunity to reaffirm our commitment to improving
the ability of the United Nations to prevent conflict, to
forge sustainable peace agreements and to keep and
build peace.

Instability and conflict have a devastating impact
around the world. They affect the lives of millions of
people and the prosperity of countries and whole
regions. Twenty-two of the 34 countries furthest from
achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)
are in the midst of, or are emerging from, violent
conflict. Instability and lawlessness provide fertile
ground for extremism, organized crime and
terrorism- threats that reach beyond the borders of
single States. Delivering national security has become
a global effort and a global responsibility. Tackling
conflict requires a cohesive, strategic and integrated
response. In the United Kingdom, one of our first acts
in the new Government was to establish a national
security council to coordinate efforts across foreign
affairs, defence and international development. In the
United Nations we have supported reform to ensure
coherence across conflict prevention, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, something that the Security Council,
and the whole United Nations system, has collectively
sought to deliver in recent years.

But the real test is whether such reforms are
making a difference on the ground. We strongly
commend the dedication of United Nations
peacekeepers around the world. In the year ahead,
major challenges will continue to place significant
demands on these dedicated men and women.
Peacekeepers will play a critical role supporting the
referendum in the Sudan; and in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo we will require still greater
effort and innovation from our peacekeepers as they
seek to halt attacks on civilians, and in particular on
women and children.
But peacekeeping alone cannot deliver long-term
stability in fragile States. Peacebuilding is critical if we
are to address the underlying causes of conflict, such as
corruption, ethnic hatred and marginalization. It is
critical if we are to strengthen national capacity to
manage political disputes peacefully. And it is critical
if we are to be better at helping countries re-establish
the rule of law, reform security services, shore up good
governance and begin economic development.
Peacebuilding needs to happen as soon as possible, in
order for belligerents and the wider population to have
the confidence to invest in a peace agreement.

In the year ahead we need to see the conclusion
of reform that remains incomplete. The United Nations
review of international civilian capacities should set
out bold recommendations on how the United Nations
can much more quickly deploy the right expertise to
post-conflict countries. This includes making much
better use of the capacity of regional organizations and
Member States, particularly those of the South. We also
need to see more effective use of the Peacebuilding
Commission. We support the recent review, but we
now need to encourage the Commission to take on the
really difficult challenges to peacebuilding and provide
advice to the Council, and others, on the course of
action required to resolve them. In the year ahead
Liberia will be a proving ground for the Peacebuilding
Commission. It must help build local capacity to
maintain the rule of law so that the United Nations can
transfer responsibility for security to national
authorities.

If we are serious about tackling conflict, then the
Security Council, along with the rest of the United
Nations system, needs to develop a genuine culture of
prevention. This is a question of political will. The
Council must be prepared to take up fast-moving
situations in countries that are not on its agenda. We
must support regular analysis of potential conflict by
the Secretary-General and his senior staff. We should
encourage experts across the United Nations system to
share information on potential precursors to conflict.
Our human rights specialists must be able to share their
concerns with those looking for early signs of conflict,
and we must have a stronger dialogue with regional
and subregional organizations on ways to prevent
conflict, including on issues that drive conflict, such as
illicit extraction of natural resources.

In the year ahead, if we are to tackle these new
threats to security, we will need to deliver regular
improvement and lasting impact on the ground. We
will need to demonstrate that we are tackling potential
conflict in this Council. We will need to show that, by
the decisions we take and the actions we mandate, we
are reducing the impact of violence on civilian
populations, and we will need to be confident that we
are building national security sectors so that we can
withdraw peacekeeping operations, strong in the
knowledge that we have supported sustainable peace.

