Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to thank
Mr. Mladenov for his comprehensive and very useful
briefing.

It is self-evident thatpeace and stability in the Middle
East have broader implications for the maintenance of
international peace and security. For Africa, and for
the Horn of Africa in particular, developments in the
region have significant meaning for our own peace and
security, owing to our close proximity. The growing
threats of terrorism and violent extremism and the
possibility of Da'esh and Al-Qaida establishing links
with Al-Shabaab are no longer matters for speculation;
they are real. The recent geopolitical shifts in the Middle
East and the Red Sea region have also dramatically
changed the security dynamics, further complicating
the peace and stability of our region. Here I would
like to emphasize our vehement condemnation of the
terrorist attack in Jerusalem a few days ago. We fully
understand the challenge that Israel is dealing with in
that regard.

The Israeli-Palestinian conflict has been one of
the disputes at the core of the dangerous situation that
has essentially defined the Middle East for the past
several decades. The situation has been compounded
by recent conflicts plaguing other countries in the
region. The collapse of State institutions, the growing
influence of terrorists and the escalation of sectarian
violence threaten to unravel the whole region. It is not
too much of an exaggeration to say that the fallout from
the crisis in the Middle East is likely to have a huge
impact on our region, which is partly why we support
a peaceful resolution of the conflicts in the Middle
East, particularly the long-standing Israeli-Palestinian
dispute.

As a country that is friendly to both Israel and
Palestine, Ethiopia is very concerned about the lack of
progress in their peace process. Not only have they not
made much progress towards resolving the crisis; even
more worryingly, there seems to be no real possibility
for making progress in the future towards the only Viable
option for a durable peace - a two-State solution. But
we continue to hope that progress is still possible and
not all is lost. Such positive developments as the signing
two days ago of an agreement renewing the activity of
the joint Israeli-Palestinian water committee could give
us reason to hope.

Ethiopia's position on the Israeli-Palestinian dispute
has always been clear. As much as we support Israel's
right to exist in peace and security, we also support
the inalienable right of the Palestinian people to self-
determination and Palestine's right to exist as a free
and independent State. Given the many problems we
have in Africa, and specifically in the Horn of Africa,
we should perhaps tread carefully lest we appear to be
pontificating on how to achieve peace in the Middle
East. But we take the Security Council and the United
Nations seriously. We feel that being a member of the
Council carries with it an obligation to the Charter of
the United Nations and to an institution that emerged
from the Second World War - a historical fact that for
a variety of reasons can sometimes be overlooked - "to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war".

But still, given the political realities, we realize that
the Security Council cannot resolve the Israel-Palestine
conflict. Only the two parties concerned can do that.
But neither can the Council be a mere spectator, which
amounts to an abdication of responsibility. It can and
must nudge, prod and encourage the parties to make
sure that a two-State solution remains viable and that
peace is secured, justice is done and the countries'
security protected. As the previous Secretary-General
said in one of his last speeches to the Council, " The
right of the Jewish people to have a State does not
negate the right of the Palestinian people to statehood"
(S/PV. 7839, p. 2). Accordingly, Ethiopia fully supports
the goal of two States living side by side in peace and
security as the only viable option for a resolution of the
Israeli-Palestinian dispute. We believe that is not only
in the best interests of both Israel and Palestine but that
it will also significantly advance peace and security in
the Middle East.

We all know that many initiatives have been
launched to facilitate negotiation between the
Israelis and Palestinians with a view to achieving a
comprehensive, just and lasting resolution. We are
meeting just two days after the Paris Middle East
Peace Conference, which we welcomed and which is
aimed at creating political momentum conducive to
new negotiations between the Israelis and Palestinians
themselves. Unfortunately, peace has so far remained
elusive, to the detriment of Israelis and Palestinians
as well as to peace and stability in the Middle East.
Actions on both sides that run counter to the possibility
of achieving a negotiated peace are not only increasing
frustration and mistrust but also undermine the very
viability ofa two-State solution.

At a time when terrorists are expanding their
influence in the region and sectarian violence is on the
rise, the absence of any meaningful progress will be
a recipe for disaster, increasing the radicalization that
creates the conditions in which extremists thrive. It is
therefore imperative that the two sides resume direct and
meaningful negotiations to achieve a comprehensive,
just and lasting solution on the basis of mutual trust
and a spirit of compromise that ensures Israeli security
and Palestinian aspirations to statehood. That is what
the situation calls for, and it is also in the best interests
of the two parties and of the international community
as a whole.

