Ms. Gueguen Mohsen (France) (spoke in French):
I will be brief. The Council has been clear and
unanimous in presidential statement S/PRST/2016/l8,
which was read at the start of today's meeting. I will
make three points.

First, the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo remains of concern. The country is at a
critical juncture in terms of its political and security
environment, and a fully inclusive political agreement
has not yet been reached in spite of the messages
conveyed during the visit of the Security Council and
the mediation efforts of the Conference episcopale
nationale du Congo, which we support and believe
must continue. The temptation to be swept into a
power struggle is present on all sides, but that game
is a dangerous one. If the downward spiral of violence
begins, no one will be able to predict how it might be
stopped. It must be prevented at all costs.

Secondly, the Council must steadfastly pursue the
preventive diplomacy efforts that it has undertaken
since its visit to the country. We have been unanimous in
reiterating the expectations of the Council with regard
to Congolese political leaders by encouraging a full-
fledged, consensus-based dialogue to peaceably settle
ongoing disputes and by urging the Government to
implement the confidence-building measures necessary
to bring about a swift conclusion to the dialogue, such
as the release of political prisoners, the end to judicial
proceedings and the removal of obstacles to freedom
of the press. The onus is on Congolese political
stakeholders to take the steps necessary to maintain
stability and hold elections as quickly as possible, in
line with the provisions of the Constitution. To date,
that has not occurred. We must therefore steer them in
that direction.

Thirdly, that is indeed the goal of the presidential
statement that we just adopted. France thanks all
members of the Council for the constructive work
that has allowed the text to be adopted by consensus.
The presidential statement is a clear expression of the
Council's expectations on confidence-building measures
and the need for flexibility in a spirit of compromise. A
political agreement that is more in-depth and inclusive
must be swiftly reached. It is key to preventing a major
political crisis in the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo
that could destabilize the entire region.

