Saint Vincent and the Grenadines voted in favour of resolution 2518 (2020), on the safety and security of peacekeepers. Admittedly, we are neither a troop- nor a police-contributing country. However, we acknowledge that peacekeeping remains a central instrument in our collective struggle against the scourge of war. We wish to reiterate that, while peacekeeping operations may facilitate a cessation of hostilities in the short or medium term, moving from a ceasefire towards a lasting and sustainable peace requires a multidimensional approach that addresses the root causes of conflict. To that end, peacekeeping operations must always form part of a broader, nationally led and inclusive political process in order to achieve those desired outcomes. Uniformed and civilian personnel in the employ of these stabilization missions must always be provided with adequate training to allow them to carry out their mandates in accordance with these broader political objectives. Peacekeeping engagements have become increasingly complicated as modern globalization has produced an uncertain security landscape that continues to evolve. The rise of non-traditional threats including, but not limited to, cross-border terrorism, mass displacement of persons, epidemics, climate change and other forms of human insecurity, add to this complex security landscape, while escalating tensions are serving as key triggers for conflict. Meanwhile, peacekeepers are tasked with carrying out their mandates in these increasingly harsh political, security and environmental contexts. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines extends its gratitude to all troop- and police-contributing countries and to their uniformed personnel for their ongoing commitments and sacrifices. We welcome any initiative designed to improve the safety and security of peacekeepers by ensuring they have access to the necessary operational, logistical, medical, financial and personal support. A central aspect of promoting the safety and security of peacekeepers is ensuring that they have the right mindset to carry out complex tasks under difficult conditions. To that end, we welcome the ongoing thrust to improve performance and accountability under the Secretary-General's Action for Peacekeeping initiative. We furthermore welcome the range of tools and instruments that are being progressively rolled out under the initiative, such as the Comprehensive Performance Assessment System and the Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System. Our delegation emphasizes, however, that peacekeepers themselves must be provided with the requisite guarantees that they will be rewarded for their hard work and commitment. That means that all Member States must make good on their obligations to provide the necessary funding to the United Nations system through their assessed contributions. Without those contributions, shortfalls emerge in the peacekeeping budget that may hinder the delivery of mandates by creating delays in reimbursing troop- and police- contributing countries, generating a lack of necessary equipment and producing low morale among uniformed personnel. The environmental conditions under which peacekeepers are asked to carry out their mandated tasks are increasingly impacted by climate change phenomena. Unpredictable weather patterns, such as erratic precipitation and flooding, serve to add further complexity to the navigational and logistical challenges facing peacekeeping missions and their personnel. Those factors also exacerbate the political and security landscapes in many host States, putting further strain on peacekeeping operations, while creating personal risks for peacekeepers themselves. We therefore consider it absolutely necessary for the international community to mobilize sufficient financial support to assist countries that are affected by climate change. From the Sahel to the Horn of Africa, strategies to build resilience and mitigate the hazards of climate change must be developed and implemented in order to strengthen our efforts to achieve lasting peace and security.
