Mr. Al-Malki (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): On
behalf of Palestine, I congratulate you warmly, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council and affirm our full confidence in your able and
wise guidance of our important proceedings today and
the Security Council's agenda this month.

I also express greatly appreciation to the
delegation of the Libyan Arab J amahiriya for its efforts
to accelerate the Council's consideration of the critical
and tense situation in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, and particularly with regard
to the disturbing findings of the United Nations Fact-
Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict. We thank as
well the Arab Group, the Organization of the Islamic
Conference and the Non-Aligned Movement for their
endorsement of the initiative to prompt the Council to
seriously consider this grave issue, in line with its
Charter responsibilities.

I also wish to thank Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs Lynn Pascoe for his important briefing
today. Regrettably, all recent assessments of the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory attest to
its severity on all fronts. The negative consequences of

the continued failure to ensure Israel's compliance with
international law and to promote appropriate
conditions for the resumption of the peace process
should give rise to concern in the international
community.

We regret that, despite the persistent efforts of the
United States Administration, the members of the
Quartet, countries of the region and other concerned
parties, no real progress has been made towards peace.
This is precisely because of the failure to address the
major issues of concern, foremost among which is the
ongoing Israeli settler colonization campaign in the
West Bank, especially in and around East Jerusalem,
and the raging humanitarian crisis in the Gaza Strip as
a consequence of Israel's military aggression and
ongoing blockade. Israel's intransigence and defiance
of the international will continue to jeopardize the
prospects for realizing a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East.

We are at a critical juncture. Sensitivities are
rising to all-time highs and the need and calls for
responsible action, accountability and justice are
intense and must be heeded. In this regard, the report
of the United Nations Fact Finding Mission on the
Gaza Conflict, also known as the Goldstone report
(A/HRC/ 12/48), constitutes yet another wake-up call to
the international community that must not be ignored.
At the same time, the explosive situation in occupied
East Jerusalem, the heart of the occupied Palestinian
territory, with all the attendant consequences should it
spiral further out of control, remind us of the centrality
of this issue to regional peace and security and require
urgent attention.

With respect to Gaza, we are all too aware of the
tragic consequences of the savage Israeli military
aggression launched on 27 December 2008 against the
defenceless and besieged Palestinian civilian
population. More than 1,400 of them, including
hundreds of innocent women and children were killed,
and more than 5,500 were injured, many permanently,
as the occupying forces rampaged through Gaza, using
all means of heavy and lethal weaponry and exhibiting
a callous disregard for human life. The widespread
destruction deliberately wreaked by the occupying
forces on the Gaza Strip remains shockingly in full
view, as Israel continues to obstruct the reconstruction
of thousands of homes, vital infrastructure, hospitals
and schools, mosques, economic, industrial and
agricultural facilities and even United Nations facilities
damaged or destroyed in the Israeli onslaught.

The continued imposition of this immoral,
unlawful Israeli blockade and collective punishment of
the population has insured that the Palestinian people
in the Gaza Strip continue to live in misery amid the
ruins of their homes, deepening their humanitarian
hardship and stoking the raw feelings of injustice.

The investigation conducted by Justice Goldstone
and his team to follow up the request by the Human
Rights Council led to findings that clearly confirm that
Israel, the occupying Power, committed serious human
rights violations and grave breaches of international
humanitarian law, including the Fourth Geneva
Convention, that amount to war crimes and even
crimes against humanity against the Palestinian people.
They include the wilful killing of civilians, torture and
inhuman treatment wilfully causing great suffering,
serious injury to body and soul and extensive
destruction of property not justified by military
necessity. All this was carried out unlawfully and
wantonly and gives rise to Israeli criminal
responsibility.

The investigation concluded that Israel failed to
take the precautions required by international law to
avoid or minimize loss of civilian life, injury to
civilians and damage to civilian property, flagrantly
violating the principle of distinction. Moreover, it
concluded that that Israeli military campaign was
planned in all of its phases as a deliberately
disproportionate and systematic attack aimed at
punishing, humiliating and terrorizing the Palestinian
civilian population, radically diminishing its domestic
economic capacity to sustain itself and forcing upon it
a heightened sense of dependency and vulnerability.
That shocking finding is confirmed thousands of times
over by the depth of the trauma and anguish suffered
by the Palestinian people to this day. All the
Palestinians - men, women, the disabled - suffered
much, and that affirms the veracity of those facts.

The members of the United Nations Fact-Finding
Mission on the Gaza Conflict - Justice
Richard Goldstone, Professor Christine Chinkin,
Ms.Hina Jilani and Colonel Desmond Travers -
should be commended for the thorough investigation
they carried out and for the comprehensive and serious
report they compiled under difficult circumstances,
including Israel's refusal to cooperate with the
Mission. Those individuals are eminent jurists and
experts of integrity and professionalism who cannot be
challenged by anybody.

In that context, we are aware that the Mission
investigated all allegations of violations of
international law in the course of the Gaza conflict,
including the allegations against the Palestinian side.
While we reject any equation of the occupying Power's
aggression and crimes with actions committed in
response by the Palestinian side, we wish to reaffirm
that there is no symmetry or proportionality between
the occupier and the occupied. We take very seriously
the allegations contained in the Goldstone report
regarding possible Palestinian violations.

We once again affirm our respect for and
conviction of the rule of law, including international
humanitarian law. We reiterate the commitment, as
publicly stated, to the pursuit of domestic legal
investigations to address that crucial matter.

Yet what the Goldstone report essentially
constitutes is another damning record of the Israeli
crimes committed against our people under occupation.
Its recommendations represent a significant
contribution to the pursuit of accountability and
justice. In this regard, while significant deterrent power
is presented by this report, along with other pertinent
investigations that preceded it - including the report
of the Secretary-General's board of inquiry and
investigations by the League of Arab States
Independent Fact-Finding Committee on Gaza, the
International Committee of the Red Cross, Amnesty
International, Human Rights Watch and numerous
other organizations - it is clear that serious and
responsible follow-up at all levels is imperative. This is
very important to prevent the recurrence of such Israeli
crimes against our people.

Tomorrow the Human Rights Council will
convene a special session based on a Palestinian
initiative at the call of His Excellency President
Mahmoud Abbas to rectify the malfunction that
occurred at the Council in Geneva two weeks earlier.
We thank all the countries that supported the request
for this session. We hope that the Human Rights
Council will endorse the Goldstone report and will
formally convey it to the pertinent United Nations
bodies, in conformity with the report's
recommendations.

We firmly believe that in the long run the pursuit
of accountability for war crimes will better serve the
cause of peace, which cannot be attained without
justice. In that connection, we recall sage words by
eminent signatories of the 16 March 2009 open letter to
the Secretary-General and the Security Council:

"We have seen at first hand the importance of
investigating the truth and delivering justice for
the victims of conflict. We believe it is a
precondition to move forward and achieve peace
in the Middle East."

We thus believe that the implementation of the
recommendations contained in the Goldstone report
must be seriously pursued. The Security Council must
uphold its Charter duty to address matters crucial to the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
General Assembly, the International Criminal Court,
the Secretary-General, the High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the international community as a
whole, here at the United Nations, as High Contracting
Parties to the Geneva Convention - all should act on
the report's recommendations, in implementation of the
principle of universal jurisdiction and in accordance
with their respective roles and responsibilities. The
credibility and foundations of international human
rights law and humanitarian law, as well as of the
United Nations as a whole, is at stake.

The world has for too long witnessed Israel's
impunity, knowing well that it has been repeatedly
fuelled by the lack of punishment and accountability.
The tragic consequences have been suffered by
generations of innocents throughout sixty years of
statelessness and diaspora and over 42 years of
occupation. We must break that vicious cycle. There
must be an outcry against the perpetrators of war
crimes, not against those who seek justice for the
victims.

Israel must be stopped from committing the
Violations and crimes it continues to carry out against
the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem. In that
connection, I wish to emphasize today the gravity of
the situation prevailing there. The situation is highly
volatile due to Israel's illegal and provocative actions
and incitement, including flagrant pursuit of settlement
activities and acts by extremist settlers at the Al-Haram
Al-Sharif compound, including closing and besieging
the Al-Aqsa mosque, threatening to use force, inciting

feelings and other provocations so that Israel can avoid
resumption of the peace process and can claim that
there is no Palestinian partner for peace. All this
requires urgent attention and action by the international
community, including this Security Council. They
threaten the use of force and to block the Al-Haram
Al-Sharif compound. This gives the Israelis a excuse to
justify their control of the Al-Aqsa mosque and to shirk
the responsibilities of peace, resorting to the same
bankrupt rhetoric and claiming that there is no
Palestinian peace partner. Such conduct calls for just
and firm action by the international community,
including the Security Council.

In recent months and weeks, we have drawn the
Council's attention to the increasing and unprecedented
levels of Israeli aggression in occupied East Jerusalem.
The occupying Power's settler colonization measures
and the lawless acts of terror, violence and provocation
committed by its settlers in the city are inflaming
tensions and threatening to ignite an already fragile,
precarious situation on the ground. The entire
international community has called for the full and
immediate cessation of Israeli settlement activities,
including so-called natural growth in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem.

Yet Israel continues to blatantly flout these calls,
international law and United Nations resolutions; to
construct and expand settlements, settlement
infrastructure and the separation wall; to confiscate
more Palestinian land; to transfer more Israeli settlers,
especially in and around East Jerusalem; and to take
other illegal measures aimed at altering the
demographic composition, character, nature and status
of occupied East Jerusalem, including the ongoing
demolition of Palestinian homes, the eviction of
Palestinian families and their replacement by settlers,
as well as the revocation of residency permits. Israel
builds new settlement neighbourhoods, such as those in
Al-Bustan, Silwan, Jabal Mukkabir and Al-Sheikh
Jarrah. It also continues to carry out excavations,
including around and beneath Al-Haram Al-Sharif,
where it has also permitted extremists to perpetrate acts
of provocation and incitement, inflaming religious
sensitivities not only in the Holy City but far beyond,
throughout the Arab and Islamic world.
If such illegal actions and incitement remain
unaddressed, the consequences at the political and
security levels will surely be grave. Not only do such
actions have enormous potential to reignite the cycle of
violence between the two sides, but, as we have
repeatedly cautioned, every such illegal act of
colonization and provocation further threatens the
prospects for reviving the peace process and for
achieving the two-State solution for peace on the basis
of the 1967 borders. That could very well be one of
Israel's aim today.

History has shown that the prosecution of war
crimes and the achievement of justice are, regrettably,
not an immediate process. They require perseverance,
principled positions and commitment based on
international law and moral principles. We will
therefore continue our pursuit of justice and to reject
and call for an end to the impunity that has allowed
Israel for all these years to commit mass crimes against
the Palestinian people without fear of punishment. We
want to turn the page on this horrific and tragic chapter
for Palestine and cross the threshold into a new era in
which our people can live in peace, freedom and
dignity in an independent State of Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, exercising the rights to which
all human beings are entitled but which have so long
been denied them.

To that end, we will have to act, individually and
collectively, with the utmost urgency and responsibility
to promote respect for the human rights and
international law that are essential to making this new
era a reality and to achieving genuine peace and
coexistence in the region. Unchecked impunity and the
absence of justice will only continue to obstruct peace
efforts and prolong this tragic conflict and civilian
suffering. As Justice Goldstone said before the Human
Rights Council,

"a culture of impunity in the region has lasted for
too long. The lack of accountability for war
crimes and possible crimes against humanity has
reached a crisis point The mission is
convinced that the international community must
confront the realities highlighted in this report
and by doing so find a meaningful basis for the
pursuit of peace and security for all the people of
the region. Only in that way will the human
dignity and security of these people be realized."

