Mr. ngowe (Botswana): The delegation of Botswana
follows the developments in Haiti with keen interest, and in
this regard we are grateful to the Secretary-General for his
report on the United Nations Mission in Haiti (UNMIH).
We note with satisfaction that Haiti has already achieved
such a level of stability that it qualified as the venue for a
successful general assembly of the Organization of
American States (OAS), among other international activities
in the country.

We are a little concerned that the conduct of the
municipal and legislative elections was, in some respects,
not as smooth as we would have otherwise wished it to be.
We are, however, gratified that all the organizational
problems and shortcomings enumerated in the report of the
Secretary-General were genuine mistakes, which were not
directed at any participating political party or meant to
benefit anybody. We hope that all concerned individuals
and organizations will treat them as useful lessons that will
be helpful in the remaining elections, to be held later this
year.

UNMIH is doing a marvellous job to assist in the
democratization process in Haiti, and it deserves the
commendation of the Security Council, especially for its
contribution to the prevailing sense of safety and security
in the country. It is interesting to note that the rather
pervasive spate of politically motivated and vigilante
killings that prevailed at the beginning of the year is
giving way to an atmosphere of relative calm and
stability. In this regard, we note with satisfaction the
progress being made in the training and deployment of
the Haitian National Police and other security units, which
are gradually assuming greater responsibility for law and
order in the country.

We support the incorporation of elements of
economic and social development into peace-keeping
operations, but within certain limits of the mandate of the
mission itself. We believe that the twin processes of
peace and development should go hand in hand, as
economic development is indispensable to post-conflict
stability in the country when the United Nations peace-
keeping Mission has left. This is already paying dividends
in Haiti. Economic revival in Haiti would open up
employment opportunities for the demobilized police and
military personnel, who could otherwise become a source
of political instability.

The people of Haiti deserve the assistance and
cooperation of the international community to consolidate
the gains made so far and as they tackle the tasks ahead.
We hope that such support will be forthcoming.

We are in full support of the extension of the
mandate of UNMIH until the end of February 1996. We
hope that there will be no need for the Security Council
to renew the mandate next year. UNMIH is, on the
whole, doing so well that there is no reason to doubt the
successful conclusion of its work. We shall therefore vote
in favour of the draft resolution.

