Mr. Ben Mustapha (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I
wish at the outset to thank you, Sir, for convening this
formal meeting of the Security Council at the very start
of your presidency of the Council for the month of
October. We appreciate the serious-mindedness and
determination you have demonstrated in discharging
your responsibilities, and we wish you every success as
you carry out your duties this month. I take this
opportunity also to pay tribute to Ambassador Ouane
for his skilful stewardship of the Council last month.

This meeting is of extraordinary importance
because of the painful events and distressing
developments we are witnessing in the occupied
Palestinian territories. The situation in Jerusalem and in
the occupied Palestinian territories is highly explosive,
and grows more dangerous daily owing to the
provocative actions being taken against Palestinian
citizens and against their religious feelings.

As part of the campaign mounted by the Israeli
forces against Palestinian civilians, particularly in
Jerusalem, as pointed out by all speakers, the Israeli
military forces have used excessive force, including
snipers, live ammunition, helicopter gunships and tanks
in Palestinian towns to gun down innocent Palestinian
civilians. These brutal acts by Israeli forces resulted in
the deaths of scores of Palestinians, including innocent
children, and injury to hundreds of Palestinian
civilians. That intimidated the entire population, which
should have enjoyed the protection of the occupying
Power.

We in Tunisia express our profound condolences
to the families of the victims. We strongly condemn
those Israeli actions, which violate the Geneva
Conventions and are a violation of holy sites.

The Permanent Observer of Palestine has outlined
the events that graphically show the gravity of the
situation and its deterioration. These actions not only
are a violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention and
Israel's responsibilities towards its citizens, they also
constitute a serious threat to the peace process in the
Middle East. Against this serious backdrop, the whole
world is looking to the Security Council, which has the
primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security, to carry out its responsibility. The
world expects quick action to stop the serious
deterioration of the situation, to protect innocent,
helpless Palestinian civilians and to demonstrate
respect for hundreds of millions of Muslims
worldwide, primarily through the withdrawal of Israeli
security forces from Al-Haram Al-Sharif and ending
the brutal campaign against the Palestinians.

Delays in ending these violations and
provocations will exacerbate the situation and
aggravate the Palestinian population's sense of
frustration and injustice at this critical moment, when
the Middle East peace process needs everyone's
support and commitment, especially that of the parties
directly involved. The occurrence of these events at
this particular juncture of the peace process places it in
jeopardy. This will only serve the interest of the parties
that have no interest in the peace process.

Our duty today, as it has been since the beginning
of the peace process, is to deny the efforts of those
parties and to create conditions for resuming and
continuing the peace process, which is the
responsibility of the international community,
particularly the co-sponsors and the European Union,
in order to end one of the most serious and complicated
conflicts of the twentieth century.

The Security Council is called upon to create
those conditions by authorizing an immediate and
transparent international inquiry into these events so
that the peace process can resume with a View to
achieving a lasting, comprehensive and just peace,
based on United Nations resolutions and the land-for-
peace formula agreed to by all parties.

Today's urgent Security Council meeting is a
clear invitation to stand up to the use of power, to show
our respect for the legitimate rights of the Palestinian
people and their religious sentiments, to show our
sympathy for the victims' families, to create conditions
to restore and revive the peace process and to
encourage dialogue and negotiation. These actions are
at the core of Security Council responsibilities, which
remains the highest authority charged with maintaining
international peace and security.

In this context, we hope the Palestinian-Israeli
summit, to be held tomorrow in Paris under the
sponsorship of the United States, will help calm the
situation and seriously advance the peace process by
showing respect for international law and the
agreements undertaken by the parties concerned.

