Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I wish at
the outset to thank you, Mr. President, for having
placed the Democratic Republic of the Congo at the
heart of the Security Council's agenda for the month of
February, during which you will be presiding over the
work ofthe Council. I want also to thank the Secretary-
General for the message of hope he has just conveyed
to the Security Council: hope that peace will be
restored in the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo.

I thank President Joseph Kabila for his presence
here today, and for the statement he has just made. On
behalf of the French leadership, I extend our
condolences to President Kabila on the tragic death of
his father, President Laurent-Desire Kabila. We believe
that President Joseph Kabila's decision to come to New
York to address the Security Council, only a few days
after officially taking office, is particularly significant
and encouraging. That gesture reflects a desire for true
relations of trust and partnership between the United
Nations and the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and we hope that those relations will continue and
deepen.

In his statement, President Joseph Kabila has just
reaffirmed an approach based on dialogue and
reconciliation, which we welcome. His inauguration
statement before the Congolese nation had already laid
the foundations for that. Further, President Kabila
discussed this with President Chirac two days ago in
Paris, and President Chirac indicated to President
Kabila that he supported his avowals of peace and
dialogue. We are particularly encouraged by President
Joseph Kabila's commitments with respect to peace
and to the restoration of the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
through the implementation of the Lusaka Agreement
and the relaunching of the inter-Congolese dialogue.
Also encouraging is the President's wish to facilitate
the deployment of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC), under the fine leadership of Ambassador
Kamel Morjane, to whom we convey our greetings.
The role of the international community here is
resolutely to encourage and support the Congolese
authorities on the path of peace and dialogue, while, of
course, giving them time to build these new
approaches. The international community must
encourage the other signatories of the Lusaka
Agreement to respond without delay to the overtures
made by the new President of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

My country's position on the resolution of the
Congolese crisis was clearly reflected in the recent
conclusions adopted by the Council of Ministers of the
European Union. Here, my delegation wishes to recall
several simple principles that should guide the
implementation of the peace process in the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo.

First, it is essential that all the parties implement
their commitments under the Lusaka Agreement and
that they respect the various resolutions of the Security
Council. The withdrawal of foreign forces from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, especially the
withdrawal of uninvited forces, is imperative. Without
such a withdrawal there can be no lasting peace in the
Democratic Republic ofthe Congo.

Secondly, as President Kabila has just forcefully
said, the plundering of the natural resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo must cease. This
ongoing violation of the sovereignty of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is unacceptable. Those who
carry out such activities should in due course be
punished by the international community. France
eagerly awaits the final report of the panel of experts
on the illegal exploitation of the natural resources of
the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo.

Thirdly, the withdrawal of foreign forces from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo must be
accompanied by rapid deployment of MONUC.
MONUC observation of the disengagement and
withdrawal of forces and the regular reports on this
matter to be made to the Security Council will serve as
a guarantee to the parties and will encourage them to
carry out their commitments. All parties concerned
must effectively ensure the safety, security and
freedom of movement of MONUC personnel. France is
also well aware of the security problems that could
arise along the borders with some countries
neighbouring the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We continue to support the principle of MONUC
deployment in border areas, especially Goma and
Bukavu.

Finally, the relaunching of national dialogue, in a
framework that can undoubtedly be adjusted, should
facilitate the solution of the specific political
difficulties of the Congolese. As President Kabila has
just said, the door to inter-Congolese dialogue must be
open to all, without preconditions and without
exclusion.

France encourages President Joseph Kabila to
continue the constructive talks with Burundi that have
been underway for some months - as he has just said
he will. As President Kabila has just indicated, peace in
the region must be comprehensive and lasting if it is to
lead at last to the implementation of the policies of
development, growth and democracy for which the
peoples ofthe Great Lakes region long.

Today's gathering inaugurates a series of
meetings which will include the visit here on 21 and 22
February, under your presidency, Sir, of the members
of the Political Committee of the Lusaka Agreement.
We must take the opportunity vigorously to relaunch
the peace process and to hasten the settlement of a
conflict that has caused all too much harm to civilian
populations. It is in that spirit that France will work in
the coming weeks - a period that we hope will be
decisive.

