Mr. Terzi di Sant'Agata (Italy): I join previous
speakers in extending a warm welcome to President
Ramos-Horta, who honours us with his presence today.
His wisdom and vision have guided his young country
through its first years of existence, and they are still
needed to stay the course. I also thank the Japanese
presidency of the Council for convening today's open
debate, the Secretary-General for his detailed briefing
on the situation in Timor-Leste and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the
leadership that he has shown in this Mission in a
challenging environment.

Italy aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the Permanent Representative of the Czech Republic
on behalf of the European Union. I would like to add
just a few remarks drawing on the Italian national
experience.

Together with its European Union partners, Italy
has supported the national reconciliation process and
the consolidation of Timorese democracy at every
stage of its development. We have done so through
bilateral initiatives and contributions to multilateral
institutions. I should like to mention our participation
in the multinational force and, in the years following
independence, our initiatives to support the local
population and consolidate Timorese democracy. We
have focused on key sectors, such as training civil
servants, justice and support for the Parliament in Dili.

Italy remains committed to supporting Timor-
Leste in its quest to consolidate peace, democracy and
development. Let me therefore express our satisfaction
at the country's progress, particularly in the area of
security and in dealing with the closure of camps for
internally displaced persons and the reintegration of
the petitioners into civilian life.
Both the performance and the organization of the
Timor-Leste police have improved. Nevertheless, we
believe that the process of strengthening security will
take several years and that UNMIT still has an
essential role to play in that context. We therefore fully
support the Secretary-General's recommendation that
UNMIT's mandate be extended for another 12 months
and that the Mission's current composition and strength
be maintained. Nevertheless, appropriate adjustments
to the mandate could be required in the future to
gradually reflect the increasing ownership of the
Timorese authorities and to strengthen the country's
institutions.

We also believe that the local elections,
scheduled to take place in the second half of this year,
represent a crucial moment in the consolidation of the
country's democratic institutions and in evaluating the
success of the international strategy. We therefore
support the Secretary-General's recommendation that
UNMIT meet the Government's request for assistance.

The Timorese representative institutions,
including the Parliament, are functioning well.
Nevertheless, the performance of public administration
continues to be hampered by a lack of human and
financial resources. Through the years, the
international community has provided important
support for the empowerment and development of
those democratic institutions. For its part, my country
has contributed to the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) project Strengthening
Parliamentary Democracy in Timor-Leste and has
renewed its support for the development of further
UNDP programmes in 2009. My country is also
including Timorese officers in specialized public
management courses and programmes.

We appreciate the efforts of the Government in
Dili to strengthen the judiciary sector through the
allocation of greater financial resources and the
creation of an anti-corruption commission, a court of
auditors and a public services commission to oversee
the management and recruitment of personnel.

Concerns persist, however, over the country's
economic situation and its tackling of the plague of
youth unemployment, which undermines social
stability. It is also true that the weak economic
performance is compounded by a limited capacity to
attract foreign investment in areas other than the
energy sector. To that end, we believe that greater
resources from the international community should be
directed towards infrastructure, which is needed to
launch future development strategies in areas such as
industry and agriculture.

Regional cooperation and the full inclusion of
Timor-Leste in the ongoing integration of South-East
Asia could help consolidate the country's institutions.
Timor-Leste would benefit from regional mechanisms
that would raise the Government's external and internal
profiles. We look forward with interest to the
possibility of Timor-Leste's joining the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations, and we hope that that goal
can be achieved by 2012.

