Ms. Goolab (South Africa): Allow me to begin
by thanking Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo and Mr. Ramesh
Rajasingham for their briefings on the political and
humanitarian situations in Syria.

South Africa remains committed to protecting the
fundamental interests of all Syrian people, maintaining
peace and stability in the Middle East region, upholding
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and preserving the basic norms governing
international relations.

My delegation commends the efforts of Special
Envoy Geir Pedersen, through his extensive
consultations with all parties, to create a conducive
environment for a Syrian-led, Syrian-owned and United
Nations-facilitated process to establish credible and
inclusive negotiations. As stated by the Special Envoy
in his previous statement to the Security Council (see S/PV.8475), resolution 2254 (2015) is a comprehensive
road map for ensuring a political settlement in Syria.
We call for its full implementation.

South Africa believes that the only sustainable
solution to the Syrian question remains the achievement
of a political solution through an inclusive Syrian-led
dialogue. In that regard, we welcome the Special Envoy's
engagements with the Syrian Women's Advisory Board
and other stakeholders to ensure that all Syrian voices
be given the opportunity to be heard and to contribute
to the Syrian peace process. We also welcome the
Special Envoy's continued efforts towards finalizing
the establishment of the constitutional committee and
its rules of procedure.

Turning to the dire humanitarian situation in
Syria, South Africa is deeply concerned about the large
numbers of civilians requiring assistance in various
parts of Syria. The escalation of violence in recent
weeks has only exacerbated that crisis. The situation in
Al-Hol camp in northern Syria is of particular concern.
In recent weeks, there has been a massive influx of
people, mainly women and children, in various degrees
of ill health, to the camp. We call on the international
community to fully support the United Nations efforts
in providing assistance to all those who require it.

My delegation believes that many Syrians would
prefer to return to their homes and cities in due course.
However, it is essential to ensure that the necessary
conditions for their safe return be met. We support the
Special Envoy in his belief that the return of Syrians
to their homes must be voluntary, safe, dignified and
well informed.

South Africa wishes to commend the United Nations
and its implementing partners for the humanitarian and
life-saving assistance that they continue to provide to
millions of people throughout Syria. We mourn the
deaths of hundreds of humanitarian workers who have
been killed in this devastating war and call for the
protection of all humanitarian personnel, in line with
international humanitarian law.

In that regard, it is noted with concern that many
Syrians do not receive the aid that they so desperately
need. We therefore call for the full implementation of
resolution 2449 (2018), which renewed the authorization
for cross-border and cross-line humanitarian access to
Syria. The recent convey to Rukban provided some
relief to the people who remain isolated within the area.
We call on the relevant stakeholders to ensure that the
necessary approvals be granted for additional convoys
of humanitarian aid.
It is essential that the international community
support a political solution to the situation in Syria as
a matter of priority and the United Nations as the main
channel for mediation. South Africa reiterates that in a
complex and diverse society such as Syria there can be
no military solution to the conflict.

In conclusion, in 1967 the Security Council adopted
resolution 242 (1967), which calls for the withdrawal of
all troops from the occupied territories, including the
Syrian Golan Heights. However, 40 years later, Israel
continues to occupy the Golan Heights in violation ofthe
Council's decisions. The annexation of territory seized
through the use of force is a violation of international
law and must be condemned. For long-term peace and
security in the Middle East region, it is vital to ensure
that international law be upheld.

