Mr. Wisnumurti (Indonesia): At the outset, my
delegation would like to express its appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report of 23 May
1996 pursuant to Security Council resolution 1046 (1996),
the latest in a series of progress reports on the United
Nations Preventive Deployment Force (UNPREDEP). As
a troop contributor to UNPREDEP, Indonesia is pleased
to be associated with a unique mission that represents the
first United Nations preventive deployment operation of
its kind and that has come to reflect the international
community's resolve to promote stability in this troubled
area.

The Indonesian delegation fully endorses the
Secretary-General's recommendation that the mandate of
UNPREDEP, in its present configuration, be extended for
a further period of six months, to 30 November 1996.
This is reflected in the draft resolution now before us. It
is also consistent with the request by the Government of
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia to extend the
mandate of UNPREDEP. We share the view that there is
a continued need for the presence of UNPREDEP in order
to maintain stability, preserve the gains already achieved,
help in the process of establishing democratic structures
and avoid undermining the still fragile structures of peace
in the Balkans.

UNPREDEP is playing an innovative role as the first
preventive force deployed by the United Nations. Indeed,
it constitutes a continuing success for the United Nations,
for the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and for
the region as a whole. At the national level, we must not
underestimate the role of UNPREDEP in facilitating the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia's consolidation
of its security. My delegation notes the role UNPREDEP
is playing in maintaining an active dialogue with all
political factions and ethnic groups in order to promote
peace and stability. Thus, UNPREDEP has been
recognized as a significant instrument in facilitating
dialogue, restraint and compromise between the various
segments of society. Moreover, it is gratifying to note that
the military component of UNPREDEP not only provides
a calming and stabilizing effect on the northern and
western borders of the country, but also interfaces with a
number of civilian agencies and offers various community
services and humanitarian assistance to the local
population.

At the regional level, the UNPREDEP mission has
had a positive impact in preventing the spread of the
conflict in the former Yugoslavia to the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia. The relative peace that the

 

former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia has enjoyed is not
fortuitous: it is an outcome of diligence and commitment on
the part of all the involved parties. Today there is a
remarkable transformation in the regional environment
within which UNPREDEP operates. The guns and mortars
are for the most part silent. We note as evidence of the
improving regional situation the signing on 8 April 1996 of
the Agreement between the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
regulating relations and promoting cooperation between
them, as well as the progress that has been achieved in
improving relations between the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia and Greece on the basis of the Interim
Accord of 13 September 1995. We also are pleased to see
the close cooperation between UNPREDEP and the mission
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
in promoting security in the region.

However, the peace process in the former Yugoslavia
remains at a very delicate stage, and its consequences for
the stability and security of the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia remain uncertain. It would indeed be unwise
to be overly confident that stability has been established in
the region. Hence, terminating UNPREDEP would be
premature. At the same time, the need to review the
composition, strength and mandate of UNPREDEP in the
light of future developments is one that has been well
recognized in the draft resolution. At this juncture, we
would like to reiterate that the continued success of the
UNPREDEP mission is contingent upon the political will of
the parties to do their utmost in refraining from all
activities that are detrimental to the peace and stability of
the country.

In view of these considerations, my delegation will
vote in favour of the draft resolution.

Finally, we wish to acknowledge the untiring efforts
of Mr. Henryk Sokalski, formerly Chief of Mission and
now redesignated as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia. We should further like to extend our
recognition to Brigadier-General Juha Engstrom, former
sector Commander of UNPREDEP, and to welcome the
recently appointed Force Commander, Brigadier-General
Bo Wranker. We should also like to pay tribute to the men
and women of UNPREDEP for their dedication in
contributing to the maintenance of peace and stability in the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.

