Ms. Ahmed: I send greetings to all, or mambo, as
we say in Nairobi.

My name is Hafsa Ahmed. I am a 27-year-old young
peacebuilder from the neighbourhood of Eastleigh.
Allow me to introduce Eastleigh - the place where I
was born and bred; the place that made me who I am
today. Often referred to as little Mogadishu, the streets
are adorned with skyscrapers and in front of the malls
one can find colourful umbrellas with street vendors
selling their wares. It is also an area with high levels of
poverty and crime.

The community of Eastleigh lived largely in
harmony until late 2013, when the peace of this urban
centre was disrupted by frequent grenade attacks by
alleged extremists. During that period, many residents
were injured and others lost their lives. In response
to those attacks, the Government of Kenya launched
Operation Usalama Watch in the hopes of securing
the area. Around 6,000 police officers were tasked to
do the job. The officers started a vigorous operation,
going door to door to screen individuals. Bribes were
demanded, people were arrested indiscriminately
and many were rounded up for further screening or
deportation to Somalia.

As a community, we lived in fear and I was pushed
to the limit. I felt that we were forgotten, so I decided to
do something about it. Armed only with a smart phone
and a strong urge to tell the world of the abuses in my
community, I started to share the stories of victims
and pictures of uniformed police officers breaking the
law. Some of my friends gathered the courage to do the
same, and it became a movement. All of this was done
at great risk to our own safety. When the Government
halted the operation some months later, we felt that we
had made a contribution.

From then on I started actively engaging in our
area. I decided to train fellow youth on life skills and
I hosted talent shows to promote youth talents and
peace by bringing together the community. I wanted
to show that there was an urgent need to unite the
community because the operation caused divisions and
a lot of suspicion. I got fired up, recognizing the fact
that as young people in Eastleigh we had to do much
of the work ourselves. I decided to run for member of
the county assembly in 2017, but, unfortunately, I was
unsuccessful. Still, I was not deterred.

Last year I became a youth moderator for an
initiative pioneered by the Life and Peace Institute in
Kenya that focuses on sustained dialogue. It is called
Tubonge Mtaani, which in our local slang, Sheng,
means "Let's talk in our neighbourhoods". Sustained
dialogue aims to build relationships among divided
communities. Through these youth-led efforts, we
share our stories and become empowered to actively
address issues together in our neighbourhoods. There
is little trust between communities and the police in my
area, so spaces are also offered to bring community and
police together in order to begin to better understand
one another and to discuss challenges in our areas and
what we need to do to address them. The work is both
simple and complex, but very effective in building
bridges. Through dialogue we are able to overcome
our stereotypes of one another and use non-violent
approaches to reduce and prevent urban violence.
During my time engaging in that process I have
seen a lot of changes in my community. I will share
some examples.

First, young men, and especially young women,
who previously lacked confidence to speak in public
found a safe space to speak up, articulate issues and
lead community dialogues.

Secondly, stereotypes and perceptions among
youth are changing. Before the dialogues, we did not
know each other and had all kinds of negative ideas
and perceptions. Now we have become friends and
recognize that stereotypes unnecessarily disconnect
human beings and put up huge walls between us.

Thirdly, many youth have discovered an alternative
to crime and been inspired to see their potential, start
businesses, go back to school and initiate community
projects. Others, like me and my friend Ken, have
launched a community initiative called Naweza, which
means "I can". The relationship between the police
and the community has tremendously improved. For
instance, I can now freely call the head of police in my
area and share critical information on matters related
to community safety. In the past the police were always
seen as enemies.

Let me now share two major challenges for us
young peacebuilders seeking to advance peace in
places like Eastleigh. One major challenge that I see
is how the world understands what constitutes a peace
and security challenge. Urban violence is often not
prioritized as a peacebuilding challenge; where I come
from, it is seen more as an issue of crime and gangs that
can be tackled only through a hard security approach.
If we are to truly silence the guns in Africa by 2020, we
need to really catch up with the reality that 82 per cent
of lethal violence actually occurs outside of conflict
zones, with much of it concentrated in urban settings,
including the area where I am from. As more than half
of the global population now lives in urban areas and
the African continent is regarded as the world's fastest
urbanizing region, we will need to better understand
the changing face of conflict and the interlinked forms
and expressions of violence. We need to invest in more
youth-led urban peacebuilding going forward.

A second challenge we need to address is the fact
that engagement in peace processes and peace work
have largely been the exclusive domain of older, male
generations. When young people are involved and
brought to the table, it is often tokenistic, and our needs
and interests are often reduced to issues of education
and employment, when, actually, we have diverse needs
as young people, as well as the capacity to contribute to
the biggest challenges facing our community and world,
not just to so-called youth issues. While we face these
deep-rooted obstacles to our meaningful inclusion,
many of us persist and continue to make the most of the
resources we possess to make positive contributions.

As I conclude my remarks, let me share three
recommendations that I believe would help me and
fellow young peacebuilders to better advance the
objectives of resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018),
as well as the Vision outlined in the African Union
Master Roadmap of Practical Steps for Silencing the
Guns in Africa by 2020.

First, the United Nations should create further
opportunities for additional and more diverse young
people to engage in higher-level United Nations
processes involving key decision-makers, including
the Security Council. Having youth briefers here
today is a testament to how the Council is living up to
the intention in resolution 2419 (2018) to have youth
representatives brief the Council. Having said that, I
would like to urge the Council, and the United Nations
system in general, to explore more innovative ways
of engaging with young people. I would, for instance,
welcome a Visit from the Council to Eastleigh for it to
see first-hand the work of the many young people who
are not a threat or a problem but part of the solutions
that the Council is seeking.

Secondly, given that African Union flagship
projects are also at the centre of today's debate, I would
like to urge the African Union to continue to strengthen
its recent efforts on the Youth4Peace programme. We
are encouraged by the continental leadership on that
agenda, but the outreach must be intensified so that
more young people across Africa can be engaged,
including youth who are most marginalized from policy
conversations yet most need to know about and employ
that agenda. I also see a critical role for the African
Union in supporting member States to integrate the
youth, peace and security agenda in national youth
policies and development plans and to create spaces for
member States and a range of young people to exchange
on best practices on how to best operationalize
resolution 2250 (2015) in a way that genuinely has the
potential to reach places like Eastleigh.

Thirdly, I would like to urge United Nations States
Members to develop proactive, forward-looking youth
policies that catalyse young people's positive leadership
for peace rather than seek to contain them. We, as
young people, can contribute to positive change in our
communities, and many of us already are. Recognize
that and provide us with the space to define and shape
the agenda, and then work with us to implement policies
in ways that build trust among Governments, security
actors and young people, which the Council is meant to
serve and protect.

In conclusion, I would like to underline that we
young people are not just the leaders of tomorrow,
we are already leaders now. We are ready and able to
shoulder our responsibilities for a more prosperous,
peaceful and just world.

