Mr. Von der Schulenburg: First of all, let me
thank you, Mr. President, for inviting me to this very
important discussion. It will have a great impact not
only on Member States but also on how we in the
field- your field commanders, so to speak - will
work. I am therefore glad that the Council has taken
this laudable initiative to listen to what we have to say.

As I am the last speaker here, I thought I would
only make one clarification and three suggestions. First
is the clarification.

Sierra Leone is probably the first example in the
United Nations of a full transition from a once very
large peacekeeping operation to a now small, fully
civilian, integrated peacebuilding mission. There is a
similar example in Burundi, but it is somewhat
different, so I think that we are the first example. For
this reason, I would like to limit my recommendations
on this experience.

Therefore, in the recommendations I will use the
term "peacebuilding" or "peacebuilding mission" not
in the general sense of State-building and that type of
activity, but simply as a next phase, a successor
arrangement to a peacekeeping operation. This is of
course a limited use of the term, but I think it is useful
for this purpose.

Let me now come to the suggestions I have to
make. The first point is that, if we can prove that
integrated peacebuilding missions work, that may
facilitate the decision to withdraw peacekeepers earlier.
I am very much aware that this is a very touchy
suggestion. I am also fully aware that the Council's
decision to exit or close a peacekeeping mission will
depend on many other factors. I nonetheless would like
to maintain that knowing that one have a less risky and
less abrupt exit strategy through an integrated
peacebuilding mission would make that decision much
easier. From my point of view, a peacebuilding mission
is basically an interim arrangement between a
peacekeeping operation and the normal system of
resident coordinators.

If one compares our mandate to the resident
coordinator system, the great advantage we have is that
we still have a political mandate, and that allows us to
make political interventions and promote conflict
prevention measures. That is not the case with resident
coordinators. I would suggest that, for instance, the
way we handled the conflict we had in March of last
year would not have been possible had we not had a
political mandate. In a situation where there are no
more peacekeepers, having a political mandate allows
one to act.

If that is possible, such a thing would have
considerable financial benefits for Member States.
Here again, I want to use the example of Sierra Leone.
At the peacekeeping mission's peak, in 2004, we still
had about 20,000 staff, of which 17,500 were
peacekeepers. The total cost at the time was well over
$600 million. Four years later, with the new integrated
peacebuilding mission - and of course there is a slow
transition with these things - we had only 77 staff
members, of which half were actually national staff.
The total costs had sunk to $15 million in 2009, a mere
2.5 per cent of the previous cost.

That means that we can prove, with functioning
integrated peacebuilding missions, that if the Council
makes a decision even six months earlier - and I am
not saying that this is the core of the whole thing - we
could ensure considerable savings for Member States.
We could, basically, for the cost of six months of
operations, run 20 years of an integrated peacebuilding
mission. However, I am not suggesting that we stay
20 years.

In Sierra Leone there is also another aspect
related to early withdrawal. I think Sierra Leone is
probably one of the countries where we decided very
quickly to draw down - and that might be for
completely different reasons, of course. I think that the
conditions I see when I go through the country today
and the very positive image we still have in Sierra
Leone, despite having been engaged there since 1991,
have to a very large extent to do with the fact that we
did not keep soldiers for a longer time than they were
absolutely needed. We all know that large contingents
of soldiers also have negative effects, and those
negative effects were largely prevented in Sierra
Leone. So I think there is an additional advantage in
peacebuilding missions. They are less intrusive and
less Visible and hence more acceptable to the
population in host countries.

Let me come to the next point, which I think is
even more important. If we have integrated
peacebuilding missions, we must not see them as
simply smaller peacekeeping missions without
peacekeepers. They must develop their own character.
That is exactly what we have tried to do in Sierra
Leone. We are only one example and are not
necessarily the model case, but there are a number of
points I want to raise here.

The first issue one has to raise, once all the
soldiers have gone, is where is an Assistant Secretary-
General getting his political weight from? Suddenly all
the trappings of power that come with large
peacekeeping operations are gone. The many soldiers,
the helicopters, the cars and the huge chunk of
resources that go all around the country - where have
they gone? How does one maintain one's influence?

I have come to some conclusions about how we
should build an integrated mission. I want to mention
here some of the most important aspects of it.

We have to realize that the transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding is a change in focus
from peace and security to peace and development. The
shift is really therefore from security to development.
That is not to say that we do not have peacebuilding
operations already under peacekeeping operations, but
the focus has to change, and that change in focus is
fundamental for understanding the other points.

Peacebuilding missions will be successful only if
they are based on a national agenda. That is why I have
always been opposed to the peacebuilding frameworks
drawn up by the Peacebuilding Commission. It has to
be a national agenda. We cannot come from outside
and develop another agenda. In the case of Sierra
Leone, it is the Government's Agenda for Change. I
think it is something that will work. What we have
done is to build our strategy on top of that one, saying
how the United Nations system as a whole can support
it. That is what we call the Joint United Nations Vision.

Peacebuilding requires the full integration of the
political mandate of the mission with the various
development mandates. I do not want to dwell too
much on those, but the Council is aware that in Sierra
Leone we have agreed for quite some time now, and
with the help of the Peacebuilding Commission, that
we will only have one strategy, that is the joint United
Nations strategy. There is not a separate one for the
political mission, a separate one for the development
agencies and so forth. We have all agreed on this one.
It is a very simple strategy, only seven pages, so
everybody can read it, and 18 agencies have signed on
to it.

This is a very important thing. We are no longer
talking about negotiating conflicts; we are talking
about State-building. There is always a political and a
development aspect to this, and they are so intertwined
that we cannot separate them.

We have tried from the very beginning to
encompass all development partners in peacebuilding.
Peacebuilding is not an issue only for the United
Nations missions. For that reason, we have taken the
lead in donor coordination. It is also equally important
that we provide considerable logistics and other
services for Member States in order to make their work
in the field much easier. Our regional field offices, the
use of the helicopter, the use of our communication
infrastructure, the medical clinic and many other things
will help all the other countries in their work in Sierra
Leone. We are therefore really acting as a Member
States organization, on behalf of Member States.

Another point that I would like to make is that an
integrated peacebuilding mission, if it is properly
designed, makes an exit strategy actually relatively
easy. In fact, the exit strategy in Sierra Leone is the
Joint Vision. The Joint Vision is so geared towards
development that a gradual transition into the
development agenda, slowly leaving the political
arena, will almost go unnoticed. The transition from a
peacebuilding mission to the normal resident
coordinator system is therefore much easier than it is
when there are large military forces and a very visible
change must be made.

This is the conclusion I would like to make here:
that when you talk about exit strategies, it would
probably be better to always talk about transition
strategies. It is a transition from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding - if you want to put things in boxes -
and from peacebuilding to the resident coordinator
system. That would probably make some of the
Council's decisions much easier.

