Mr. Kimemia (Kenya): Let me begin,
Mr. President, by thanking you and the other members
of the Security Council for inviting Kenya to
participate in the proceedings of the Council today. By
way of introduction, I am Francis Kimemia, Permanent
Secretary for Provincial Administration and Internal
Security of the Republic of Kenya.

At the outset, I wish to reiterate that Kenya is a
strong supporter of and active player in the
international criminal justice system. It is also
important, in view of the context of this discussion, to
highlight the role historically played by Kenya in the
region, especially in providing a safe haven for
refugees from destabilized neighbour States, from the
1970s to date. Today, we host more than 600,000
refugees from Somalia, the Sudan and other lands who
have yet to return to their countries. However, we as a
Government have always demanded that the refugees
act within the rule of law - of course their human
rights are observed - and where criminal elements
have been discovered, we have responded within the
tenets of international law. That accounts for the arrest
of 14 persons who have already been handed over to
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
for prosecution. I would have expected Mr. Jallow to
have commended Kenya, at least for this initiative.

In this regard, we appreciate the work of the
Presidents of both the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the ICTR, and
we commend them for the manner in which they have
conducted the affairs of their respective Tribunals.
However, the Government of Kenya wishes to
comment with great concern on the persistent
allegations that the Rwandan fugitive Felicien Kabuga
is hiding in Kenya and that the Kenyan Government
has refused to fully discharge its obligations with
respect to his arrest. Kenya takes strong exception to
these baseless and persistent imputations of complicity
in this matter. No evidence has been adduced to the
effect that Kenya is harbouring Mr. Kabuga. In any
case, the Republic of Kenya has nothing to gain
morally, socio-politically or economically by
harbouring the said fugitive, especially when Kenya
and Rwanda are enjoying very excellent relations.

I have listened to the allegations of the Prosecutor
that Kenya has not provided evidence of the departure
of Kabuga. I assume that this would have been
expected, possibly, from the Department of
Immigration. However, I believe that, because Kabuga
has been declared a fugitive - and, as the Council
knows, the United States Government immediately
placed a reward of $5 million on Kabuga's head for
anybody who either arrested him personally or gave
evidence that led to his arrest - it would be almost
foolish for anybody to really expect that Kabuga would
walk up and present himself to an immigration officer,
saying "I am Mr. Kabuga, and I want to leave" and go
either to Brazil or to whichever country he might want
to go to. It is very likely that he would run away
through our porous borders and disappear like other
fugitives who are on the run.

In a similar vein, it also appears to be a figment
of the imagination to allege that Kabuga has been
sighted in Kenya and that there is copious evidence of
Kabuga's presence in Kenya. Again, it would be
impossible that Kenyans, the majority of whom are
poor people, would ignore the $5 million reward; that
is true also of outsiders and the joint international
security forces operating in Kenya.
In the search for Kabuga, the local and
international community and our own parliament have
been on our Ministry's back to make sure that this
matter with the ICTR is concluded. There is media
pressure too, as we have the largest concentration of
civil society media in the region: Nairobi has the
highest concentration. It is impossible that this man
could be walking around Nairobi and not be arrested
by anybody in spite of the $5 million reward on his
head, which is still active to date.

In fact, we have arrested several persons
purported to be Mr. Felicien Kabuga, only to find that
these allegations were premeditated hoaxes by con men
who imagined that they could get all or part of the
$5 million. Our security services, led by none other
than the Commissioner of Police himself, in
collaboration with other international security
agencies, the Federal Bureau of Investigation and other
forces that are working with us, have spent vast
resources going to distant districts of Kenya in search
of these fraudulent Felicien Kabuga, only to return,
having discovered that this was just phantom
information and that their searches had been wasted.
We have left no stone unturned. We have invited
international security organs to assist Kenya in the
search, and there have been no results to date. All we
get are allegations and accusations that we are
harbouring this fugitive, Kabuga, who, as I said, is of
no socio-economic, political or ideological value to the
country.

References by the Prosecutor in his report
presented this morning are similar in scope and content
to what has become a recurrent ritual of presentations
to the Security Council. It is mentioned in the report
that the last mission of the Prosecutor to Kenya was in
March 2009. As members know, Kenya is just about
100 kilometres away from where my colleague the
Prosecutor lives. I would encourage him to make more
visits to Kenya so that this matter can be disposed of
expeditiously. And, possibly, he could report to the
Security Council on his positive results so that we do
not engage in blame games that, ultimately, do not help
the region or the process of justice for our country. We
believe that impunity must be eliminated in its entirety.
Indeed, the Kenyan and Rwandan security services and
other security organs are collaborating and cooperating
on this matter, including through inspection of
premises and perusal of documents that are deemed to
be relevant.
A lot of work has been carried out by the
Government of Kenya in collaboration with other
relevant investigation agencies, including the ICTR
itself and Rwandan and United States security
agencies. The findings of these collaborative
investigations have regularly been communicated to
the ICTR. It is disappointing to note that the Prosecutor
has not updated his report on this matter accordingly.

I wish to reiterate our previous presentations to
the Council and wish further to state that Kenya has
given full support and assistance to the ICTR since its
inception on the issue of referrals, including in the
search for Felicien Kabuga. Kenya has always
cooperated and worked closely with the ICTR with a
view to tracing, arresting and surrendering genocide
suspects to the Tribunal to face justice. As I said,
indeed, 14 suspects have already been arrested and
handed over for prosecution. That is the largest number
of indictees to be apprehended and handed over to the
ICTR by any single jurisdiction.

The Government of Kenya has also played a key
role in the relocation, protection and facilitation of
movement of witnesses for the Tribunal in a bid to
ensure that the ends of justice are met expeditiously. In
doing so, the Government has utilized immense
resources in the form of material, equipment and
personnel. Indeed, we have a police wing that remains
dedicated to this issue.

In 2007, the Government of Kenya formed a joint
investigation team to search for and apprehend Felicien
Kabuga, as well as to trace his assets and bank
accounts, including those of his associates in Kenya.
This team has discharged its mandate and has
submitted periodic reports of its findings both to the
Kenya Government and the Tribunal. Among the
team's findings was that Felicien Kabuga's wife had
invested in real estate and that the rent collected was
being submitted to a local financial institution. Further
investigations revealed that these funds were
transferred and credited to the wife's bank account in
Belgium, where Kabuga's wife and children reside and
hold Belgian passports. Kenya's Attorney-General
promptly obtained orders from the High Court to freeze
the bank account in Kenya. And as we speak now, the
wife has disputed the freezing of the bank account; the
matter is still ongoing in court.

The Kenyan and ICTR investigators have jointly
continued to follow up information on alleged
sightings of the fugitive in various parts of Kenya.
Prompt investigations have been carried out and have
yielded no fruit. As I mentioned, the full particulars
related to the investigations and actions undertaken by
the Kenyan Government are within the full knowledge
of the Tribunal. The joint investigation team continues
to carry out its mandate with the full support of the
Kenyan Government.

In View of what I have said, Kenya finds the
incessant accusations of complacency in arresting
Felicien Kabuga misleading, malicious and lacking in
merit. In this regard, we urge the ICTR and the
international investigative agencies to widen the search
for Felicien Kabuga to other jurisdictions beyond
Kenya.

We also want to refute the assertion that requests
for the ICTR to visit Kenya have been made to us and
been denied. We have not denied any such requests.
The Prosecutor and his team are welcome to visit
Kenya on the shortest notice, including at the time we
leave this meeting or this place. If the Prosecutor
would like a date to visit us, he is welcome: he is free
to come and conduct his work in Kenya any time. I
want to assure him of the full cooperation of the
Government of Kenya so that this matter can be wiped
out of the process, so that justice can be seen to be
done, and so that there can be an end to these
allegations.

As part of its continued and unreserved support
for the work of the ICTR, Kenya concluded an
extradition treaty with the Republic of Rwanda in
September 2009, which provides, inter alia, for the
extradition of Rwandan genocide suspects. The treaty
has already been ratified and is fully operational. It
underscores Kenya's commitment to and seriousness in
the apprehension of all perpetrators of the various
crimes covered by the treaty and their extradition to
Rwanda to face justice.

The Kenyan investigators, together with the
Rwandan security agencies, the United States of
America, the ICTR and other partners continue to
collaborate in the search for Felicien Kabuga. It is
therefore premature for the Prosecutor to request the
President of the ICTR to notify the Security Council of
Kenya's alleged failure to cooperate with the Tribunal.

Let me conclude by reassuring the Council of
Kenya's unwavering commitment to fully cooperating
with the Tribunal and the Council in support of
international criminal justice.

