Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, let me thank you, Sir, for your leadership of
the Security Council and for convening this debate. I
also welcome the presence of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General in Haiti, Sandra Honore, and
thank her for introducing the report of the Secretary-
General on the situation in Haiti (S/2015/677).

Peru is committed to strengthening the security,
stability, sustainable development and institutional
strengthening of Haiti. My country has therefore
participated in the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) since 2004 and intends
to continue contributing to the operation, which is the
only United Nations peacekeeping mission deployed in
the Americas. My delegation endorses the statement
made by the representative of Uruguay on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Haiti, especially as regards
the recognition of the important work being done
by MINUSTAH in support of the stabilization and
security of Haiti and the strengthening of democratic
institutions and the rule of law in that country.

I shall make just a few additional comments in my
national capacity.

Peru welcomes the holding in August of the first
round of legislative elections in Haiti, and hopes
that it can adhere without problem to the electoral
timetable for the presidential, legislative, municipal
and local elections scheduled for the coming months.
These elections represent a milestone in the process of
democratic consolidation in Haiti. We therefore reiterate
our call on all Haitian political forces to cooperate with
the Government and the national electoral institutions
in the convening of the elections, and to actively
participate in them.

Peru reiterates its firm conviction that decisions on
the future of MINUSTAH should be made exclusively
on the basis of the conditions on the ground. While the
security situation in Haiti remains stable thanks to the
crucial support of MINUSTAH, the situation is still
fairly complex given the increase of protests, political
fragmentation, hightened economic crisis, the lack of
basic services and a rise in political tensions that are
typical of any electoral year.

While recognizing the important progress made
in the recruitment practices, professionalization and
training of the Haitian National Police, the Secretary-
General's report notes that the majority of the goals laid
out in the 2012-2016 development plan have yet to be
achieved, which is why that institution still lacks the
necessary capacity to maintain public order and security
of the population throughout the country. We therefore
think that the operational and strategic cooperation of
MINUSTAH in Haiti remains essential to helping the
Haitian authorities in maintaining security and order,
as part of the process of stabilization and democratic
consolidation in that country.

Peru therefore agrees with the Secretary-General
on the importance of maintaining for an additional
12 months the authorized troop strength of the military
component of MINUSTAH in order to give the Mission
the operational capacity necessary to help ensure
security in Haiti. We also welcome the Secretary-
General's intention to carry out a strategic assessment
of the level of stability in Haiti in order to define the
future configuration of the United Nations presence
in that country. My delegation agrees that such an
assessment should begin after the inauguration of the
new democratically elected Government.

My delegation has consistently subscribed to the
principle of national ownership, in the understanding
that peacebuilding must be an inherently national
process in which peacekeeping operations support
national authorities in implementing their priorities for
stabilization and development. To that end, we believe
that the new Government to be elected in Haiti must
have the opportunity to decide for itself, in a sovereign
manner, the nature of the support that it will require
in the future, as well how its partnership with the
United Nations and the international community is to
evolve. Peru therefore believes that it is vital for the
Council to take into consideration the position of Haiti
when it decides on time frames for the transition in the
MINUSTAH mandate, as well as on the nature of the
future presence of the United Nations in that country.

In conclusion, my delegation reiterates that the
significant achievements that MINUSTAH has realized
in stabilizing Haiti should not leave the impression
that the United Nations work in that country is done.
We must not repeat the mistakes of the past when the
Organization decided to withdraw its presence from
the ground prematurely. For that reason, my country
wants MINUSTAH to be able to successfully conclude
the mission that it has been carrying out so well free of
pressure and artificial deadlines.

