Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I warmly
thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria, Mr. Staffan De Mistura, for his particularly
important briefing. More broadly, on behalf of France
I would like to offer him our deep gratitude for his
exemplary engagement and intensive and tireless
efforts over the past four years to resolve one of the
gravest crises of our times. His efforts will leave an
indelible mark on the United Nations work on the
Syrian conflict.

I would like to start by addressing the situation in
north-eastern Syria, which requires our full attention
today. The fight against terrorism is indeed a priority
for France, in order to thoroughly eliminate Da'esh and
counter any resurgence of terrorism in the region. Our
assessment is that Da'esh continues to be a threat in the
Levant and that that terrorist organization can continue
to rely on smaller areas, particularly in Syria.

In that context, growing tensions on the ground
could provide opportunities for terrorist groups. There
is a very real risk of a new descent into violence and
a resumption of large-scale atrocities. The north-east
should not have to become yet another Syrian region
on the long list of those that have had to deal with a
humanitarian disaster. In the north-east - as in
Idlib, where the situation is deteriorating - renewed
hostilities would have dramatic consequences. With
regard to Idlib, it is essential to sustainably maintain
the cessation of hostilities, in line with the conclusions
of the Istanbul summit. We therefore call upon Russia
and Turkey to redouble their efforts and do everything
possible to preserve the calm on the ground, as they
committed themselves to doing.

We, alongside the partner States of the international
coalition, are also in close contact with Washington
regarding the timetable and conditions for the
implementation of the decision to withdraw United
States forces engaged against Da'esh in Syria, as was
announced by the President of the United States. In
the coming weeks, France will take care to ensure
the security of all United States partners, including
the Syrian Democratic Forces. It is important that the
United States take into account the protection of the
populations of north-east Syria and the stability of that
area in order to avoid any new humanitarian tragedy
or resurgence of terrorism. It is thanks to the action of
the international coalition since 2014, and of the local
forces - Iraqi on the one hand, Kurdish and Syrian
Arabs on the other - that Da'esh has been weakened
and has essentially lost its territorial gains. However,
the fight is not over.

I would also like to return to the intense efforts
deployed in recent weeks within the political sphere
of the Syrian conflict. The past few weeks have seen
exceptional diplomatic mobilization for the formation
of a balanced and inclusive constitutional committee
under the auspices of the United Nations. All of us
around this table have called for the first meeting of the
constitutional committee. The members of the small
group also requested the same on the sidelines of the
General Assembly, and Russia made a commitment to
achieve that. On 27 October in Istanbul, the Heads of
State and Government of France, Germany, Russia and
Turkey set a clear and realistic goal: to hold a meeting
of the committee before the end of year.

While we have achieved a united vision - which
is a rare occurrence with regard to the Syrian file - to
move forward on the constitutional aspect of the political
process, the latest discussions in Geneva have,
unfortunately, not enabled us to reach a favourable
outcome. Staffan de Mistura has worked tirelessly
throughout this process, devoting every effort to
establishing a balanced and inclusive constitutional
committee, which is the first essential contribution to
a legitimate and viable political process to settle the
Syrian crisis.

The situation in which we find ourselves today is,
without a doubt, due to the Syrian regime, which has
never sought to show the slightest sign of commitment.
We regret that Russia and Iran could not - or would
not - convince the regime that it was in its interest,
as well as that of the Syrian people. The Astana
guarantors have, in recent days, proposed a poorly
coordinated and unbalanced list of people whom they
know to be unacceptable and jeopardize the credibility
of the future committee. Throughout this process, these
countries have been under the impression that it was up
to them to determine the composition of the committee
and that the United Nations would accept it without
further discussion. What was presented in Geneva is
clearly unacceptable and clearly considered as such.

If there is any hope of creating a credible
constitutional committee, it is up to the regime and
its supporters to prove this by the end of the year.
We do not intend to close any doors on this matter.
A credible committee requires cohesion among a
number of parameters: a balanced and mutually agreed
membership must be accepted by both parties in
equal measure, not simply by the regime; it must not
undermine the political process from the outset; there
must be equally balanced rules of procedure, proposed
by the United Nations; and the membership must be
fully committed to the Geneva process, led by the
United Nations.

While the United Nations has spent months
redoubling its efforts in attempts to arrive at such an
agreement, the refusal we have been met with will lead
us - if this is confirmed - to explore all modalities
of implementation of resolution 2254 (2015) upon the
arrival of Geir Pedersen in January. That remains our
only road map for a political settlement of the Syrian
crisis. The constitutional dimension is but one aspect;
any lasting political solution in Syria would require the
introduction of several others, although it is clear that
there has been little progress with regard to those other
components.

To achieve this, we must reaffirm the centrality
of United Nations mediation. Resolution 2254 (2015),
unanimously adopted by the Council, must remain the
framework for all our efforts. More than ever, that is
the only common goal that should guide us. The only
possible way out of the conflict is through a credible
constitutional process and free and impartial elections,
under the supervision of the United Nations, and
ensuring the participation of all Syrians, whether inside
or outside Syria's borders.
Resolution 2254 (2015) provides for the adoption
of confidence-building measures, prioritizing the fate
of detainees; protection against political persecution
and arbitrary arrests; and guaranteeing the property
rights of displaced persons. Those confidence-building
measures will serve as the concrete actions needed to
establish a safe and neutral environment where each
and every Syrian citizen has a place. They are also
necessary to establish the political conditions for the
voluntary and safe return of refugees and displaced
persons. Syria must rebuild itself politically to regain
stability. It will also have to rebuild itself as a society;
hence why the fight against impunity is unavoidable.
The full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015) will
also mean achieving a lasting ceasefire and ensuring
the protection of the people through free and unimpeded
access to humanitarian aid throughout Syria.

The Syrian tragedy, due to its terrible human
dimension - but also because it reveals and revels
in our collective impotence - will remain one of the
markers of our generation. It is in that spirit that, in
this Chamber and with the French anthropologist
Laetitia Atlani-Duault, I call upon us all to ensure
that this tragedy does not become the downfall of the
United Nations. Today Syria stands at a crossroads,
while the risks in Idlib and elsewhere remain immense.
Our conviction is that today, perhaps for the first time
in the past seven years, we have a narrow window
of opportunity to foster real political momentum to
settle the Syrian conflict. However, this window of
opportunity is likely to disappear, given developments
in the situation in recent days.

It is therefore more crucial and more urgent than
ever for all of us to shoulder our responsibilities. The
Astana guarantors in particular must demonstrate
that they can live up to the commitments they have
undertaken and ensure their full implementation. For
its part, France intends to remain fully committed to
contribute to a solution to the Syrian conflict. We hope
that this will be the same for everyone, because in the
absence of such a solution, now is not the time to allow
engagement with Syria to dwindle.

Like Mr. De Mistura, whose exemplary
commitment will continue to inspire us, we must remain
fully mobilized to achieve a political outcome to the
Syrian conflict. The Syrian crisis still poses a serious
threat to regional stability and our collective security,
and therefore, only a political outcome can enable the
country to regain lasting stability. France will not give
up and will not disregard, over the course of the coming
weeks, any of the possible paths to peace.

