Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Iwould like
to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Afghanistan, Mr. Nicholas Haysom, for his
briefing. I also wish to thank the staff of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan for their
commitment and devotion. I also thank the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, Mr. Yury Fedotov, and the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, His Excellency
Mr. Zahir Tanin, for their statements.

The Afghan people are witnessing their first
democratic transition in modern history. Political
leaders have moved beyond the impasse. That shows
the people's willingness to work tirelessly for peace
and stability on the path of democracy. We hope that
these positive developments will be followed up by
the creation of a Government that is in a position to
tackle the political, economic and security challenges
that Afghanistan has always faced - a Government
that allows for an acceleration of the reform agenda,
ensures the electoral timetables and promotes the rule
of law, as well as human rights, in particular the rights
of women and the fight against violence against women
and crimes against women in general.

Afghanistan's efforts should be supported by the
active and sustained engagement of the international
community, in particular by the donor nations. Jordan
commends the holding of the London Conference on
Afghanistan, in which the Afghan leaders presented
their new reform agenda, which is a very responsible
plan in the area of development.

The security situation in Afghanistan remains
difficult. We are concerned about the ongoing
terrorism that the people of Afghanistan suffer. Jordan
condemns in the strongest terms all terrorist attacks
against civilians, the Afghan National Security Forces
and international workers in Afghanistan. I note the
terrorist attack against the French Institute and the
attack on a British vehicle, as well as other cowardly
terrorist acts, not to mention the killing of Afghanis,
including children. We reiterate the importance of
providing lasting support to the Afghan National
Security Forces, especially in the light of the reduction
in the international presence in Afghanistan. We
welcome the support provided by NATO, which will
provide training, advice and assistance to the Afghan
defence forces.

We are pleased with the Afghan Government's
commitment to improve its relations with its neighbours.
We hope that regional cooperation will be improved and
that a climate of understanding will reign between and
among the countries of the region. We also hope that
the security situation and the tensions that exist will be
responsibly addressed. We support the regional forums
aimed at strengthening peace and security and regional
stability and at increasing economic opportunities.
We commend the holding of the Asia-Istanbul
Process Ministerial Conference, and we support the
commitment of the United Nations and other partners
to promote dialogue and confidence-building.

Regional cooperation plays a key role in the fight
against the production, trafficking and sale of illicit
narcotics, which threaten the socioeconomic future of
the country as well as international peace and security.
It would be advisable to also bear in mind the worrisome
indicators that opium production has increased this
year, which will fuel terrorism and extremism. Jordan
welcomes all regional initiatives aimed at combatting
narcotics, controlling the borders and promoting
cooperation between and among law enforcement
agencies and legal institutions. We also welcome the
Afghan Government's efforts in the fight against drug
trafficking and support its efforts to launch its plan to
fight this scourge.

Jordan reaffirms the importance of the role
played by the United Nations and of the need for the
Security Council to stay informed of the most recent
developments in such matters.

