Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
countries of Central and Eastern Europe associated
with the European Union - Bulgaria, Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia, Slovenia - the associated countries Malta
and Turkey, and the European Free Trade Association
(EFTA) countries belonging to the European Economic
Area, Iceland and Liechtenstein, align themselves with
this statement.

First of all, may I express the sorrow of the
European Union at the consequences of the terrible
earthquake that occurred in northern Afghanistan. This
is one more hardship for the Afghan people, which has
already suffered untold troubles. The European Union
has already sent initial humanitarian assistance in this
connection.

The past months have witnessed very important
events on the path towards the establishment of peace
and stability in Afghanistan through reconciliation and
a representative government, as well as in eliminating
the use of Afghan territory by terrorists and curbing
narcotics production and trafficking.

First, an agreement was reached by the Afghan
parties in Bonn on 5 December 2001, which constitutes
the basic road map for the political future of
Afghanistan. Secondly, there is the creation and full
deployment of the International Security Assistance
Force, known as ISAF, to which European Union
members are currently the major contributors. Last,
though not least, there was the Tokyo International
Conference on Reconstruction Assistance to
Afghanistan, co-chaired by the European Union.

In spite of these very positive events, enormous
challenges remain before the Afghan people can regain
a measure of normalcy. To name but a few, we can
mention the timely and full implementation of the
Bonn Agreement, the lack of security in wide areas of
the country, the dire humanitarian situation, the dismal
state of health and education, the situation of women
and children, and the very serious and extensive risk
arising from landmines. The European Union is
committed to helping the Afghan people to surmount
these problems and is ready to carry its share in
cooperation with neighbouring countries and the rest of
the international community.

The European Union has played and continues to
play a very important role in the current Afghan
process. Given that the United Nations has been
entrusted with the central coordinating role, the
European Union seeks to support and promote the
United Nations-led process and the efforts of the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative, Mr.
Lakhdar Brahimi. The European Union Special
Representative for Afghanistan, Mr. Klaus Peter
Klaiber, has a primary role in the coordination of
European Union efforts.

The European Union commends the Secretary-
General for the excellent report, which summarizes the
most significant developments for Afghanistan since
the signing of the Bonn Agreement and proposes a
structure for a United Nations presence in that country.
We appreciate the effort made in recent months by the
United Nations system under the guidance of the
Special Representative to bring together their efforts
and capacities so as to create a really integrated United
Nations mission in Afghanistan.

The European Union supports the proposed
mandate and basic operating principles for the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
which provide for an integrated structure under the
authority of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and which will support the
implementation of the Bonn Agreement by the Afghans
themselves with the assistance of the international
community. The proposed overall structure seems to be
well thought out and focuses on two main goals:
building a strongly coordinated United Nations
presence and avoiding dependency on international
staff, so as to encourage development of domestic
capacities.

However, in order to meet the objective of a light
international footprint, UNAMA structures should take
into account already existing initiatives in order to
avoid duplication of work. The European Union
welcomes the proposed structure of lead sectoral
agencies for the implementation of humanitarian and
reconstruction activities by the United Nations family
in Afghanistan. We appeal for a strong and effective
coordination and collaboration in the field. In this
respect, the European Union would welcome a
memorandum of understanding to be signed between
the lead agency and the Deputy Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, in which the roles and
responsibilities of the lead agency concept would be
spelled out more in detail. The European Union is
ready to support and assist UNAMA.

I will now turn to the most pressing issue in
Afghanistan today, which is security. Thanks to the
efforts of the international community, Afghanistan is
no longer a safe haven for terrorists, and we have been
able to avoid a humanitarian disaster. However, these
developments achieved thus far with enormous effort
are not guaranteed.

Security across Afghanistan is an essential
element for achieving the goals set forth in Bonn. We
support the early extension of ISAF beyond its current
six-month mandate. Aside from their participation in
ISAF, European Union's member States are
contributing and will continue to contribute to the
creation of Afghan security institutions, including the
development of a national army and an independent
police force. In this regard, the European Union
profoundly regrets the tragic loss of five young
nationals of two of its member States whose lives were
given in the effort to improve the security situation in
Afghanistan.

The European Union underlines the importance of
an effective disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme for reducing the risks that
stem from the existence of numerous informal armed
groups and bringing their members into civil society.
Furthermore, the European Union considers the
formation of a national army of the utmost importance.
We welcome the work ISAF has initiated to train the
first battalion of the Afghan National Guard. The
development of national and local police and an
effective justice system are also essential components
in creating a stable and secure environment.
Concerning the political situation, the main goal
should be the punctual implementation of the measures
agreed to in Bonn. The emergency Loya Jirga will
inaugurate the next major phase of the path towards a
fully representative, multi-ethnic and democratic
Afghan political system. It is essential that the
selection process take place in a secure and neutral
political environment. The European Union will
continue to support this process and will seek to ensure
that it is free from intimidation or any other form of
pressure or manipulation. Through important
contributions of several of its member States and of the
European Commission, the European Union is helping
to finance the emergency Loya Jirga.

The European Union reiterates its firm support to
the Interim Authority of Afghanistan. We call upon the
current Interim Authority, future administrations and
Afghan leaders to support and fully implement the
Bonn Agreement in order to ensure respect for the rule
of law, democracy, pluralism and the human rights of
all, including those of women, children and all ethnic
groups. The commitment entered into in Bonn to hold
free and fair elections within two years of the
convening of the Loya Jirga should be strictly adhered
to.

The European Union believes that Afghanistan
should be guided by the following generally accepted
principles enshrined in international instruments to
which Afghanistan is party: responsible and
representative Government with a mandate periodically
renewed by the Afghan people; commitment to
political pluralism; respect for human rights and the
rights of minorities, without discrimination on the basis
of ethnicity, religion, gender or any other distinction;
commitment to maintaining friendly relations with
neighbouring countries and to the prevention of the use
of Afghan territory for subversive or terrorist purposes
or activities; and commitment to poppy eradication and
to the prevention of drug trafficking.

All of those principles should be properly
reflected in the future constitution to be adopted within
the time frame agreed in Bonn. The European Union is
ready to maintain an active dialogue with the Interim
Administration and successor Governments in order to
assist in attaining the political objectives laid down in
Bonn and to ensure Afghan ownership of the political
process and the reconstruction of the country.

The reconstruction of Afghanistan is essential to
attaining the objectives set out in Bonn. The European
Union is committed to that goal and, through the
assistance provided by its member States and by the
European Community, is one of the leading partners in
both humanitarian and reconstruction assistance to
Afghanistan. The European Union co-hosted a
successful Afghan Reconstruction Steering Group
meeting in Brussels in December 2001, which paved
the way for the Tokyo Conference. It is pertinent to
recall that the co-chairs' summary of conclusions of the
Tokyo Conference stressed the idea that reconstruction
assistance will be conditional upon all Afghan parties
positively contributing to the process and goals agreed
in Bonn.

Through contributions announced at Tokyo and
thereafter, the European Union will provide 600
million euros, which represents 30 per cent of the total
announced pledges for the year 2002. Similarly, the
European Union has pledged 2.3 billion euros for the
period 2002-2006, covering 23 per cent of the needs
identified by the joint assessment by the United
Nations Development Programme and the World Bank.
This, in turn, represents about 45 per cent of the total
announced commitment of the international
community.

An accountable Afghan administration and
effective donor coordination are imperative for the
reconstruction process to succeed. Afghanistan needs
accountable, transparent and efficient authorities.
Donors can support them through coordination that
follows the procedures agreed to in Tokyo. The
Presidency of the European Commission, in its
capacity as co-chair of the Steering Group, will
endeavour to achieve close coordination with other
major donors, international financial institutions and
United Nations agencies. In that regard, the
Afghanistan reconstruction Implementation Group can
play a coordinating role in the reconstruction of
Afghanistan until a consultative group is established.

There is an acute need for continued humanitarian
assistance to Afghanistan under effective United
Nations coordination. The European Union will
support the efforts of the humanitarian agencies on the
ground. As regards donor coordination, the Afghan
Support Group could contribute to bridging the gap
between humanitarian assistance and the beginning of
assistance for the country's reconstruction. Given that
the chairman of the Support Group also holds a vice-
chairmanship of the Implementation Group, the risk of
problematic transition gaps is reduced even further.

Respect for human rights is essential for
reconciliation and peaceful coexistence among ethnic
groups. The European Union will assist in establishing
national and local structures to ensure respect for
human rights without discrimination. The European
Union believes that Afghan women must enjoy equal
access to education and employment, have the
opportunity to participate without discrimination in the
political and social life of their country and be able to
play a central role in the reconstruction of Afghanistan.
The European Union calls on the United Nations and
on all of Afghanistan's partners to support relevant
national initiatives and to fully integrate gender
considerations in their political dialogue and
reconstruction programming.

Successful reconstruction of Afghanistan and the
implementation of the Bonn Agreement will depend to
a large extent on the cooperation and commitment of
neighbouring countries. In that regard, the European
Union is ready to take into account this regional
dimension.

In closing, I would like to reiterate that peace,
security, stability and reconstruction in Afghanistan are
interdependent issues. They should be addressed first
and foremost by the Afghan people, but the
international community should not falter in its
support. The European Union stands ready to make its
contribution to that common task.

