Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I too
would like to welcome Prosecutor Moreno-Ocampo
back to the Security Council today and to thank him
for his briefing. We are very pleased to hear about the
progress that is being made - that is, that one case is
proceeding and that some States and organizations are
providing excellent cooperation.

But the Prosecutor's briefing and report make
clear that the Government of Sudan has not fulfilled its
obligation to cooperate with the International Criminal
Court (ICC) under resolution 1593 (2005), a binding
Chapter VII resolution whose importance was
reiterated by the Council in our 16 June 2008
presidential statement (S/PRST/2008/21).

The United Sates believes that those responsible
for the atrocities in Darfur must be held accountable.
Actions in Darfur affect the stability of Sudan as a
whole. Despite the creation of a special court for
Darfur and numerous committees established in 2005
to pursue justice for Darfuri victims, the ICC arrest
warrants are still outstanding.

We continue to call on the Government of Sudan
to cooperate fully with the ICC, as required by
resolution 1593 (2005). Continued violence in Darfur
is undermining an already fragile humanitarian
situation. During the past six months, the conflict
continued to claim the lives of more civilians. The
United Nations Panel of Experts on the Sudan
confirmed that the Government of Sudan violated the
ban on military flights over Darfur.

Both the Prosecutor's report and the Secretary-
General's report (S/2009/592), describe Sudanese
armed forces and militia ground offences supported by
air bombardments in the Jebel Marra region and in
North Darfur. Those reports note that the Government
operations around Korma, Ain Siro and Melitt all
resulted in civilian casualties, the displacement of more
civilians and the destruction of public infrastructure.
The Government's recent actions are the very type of
actions that led the Council to refer the conflict in
Darfur to the ICC in the first place.

On top of this continuing violence, the
Government of Sudan has contributed to the
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in Darfur.
We were able to temporarily narrow serious gaps in
life-saving sectors when the Government of Sudan
expelled humanitarian non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) on 5 March.

09-6333]

But those efforts cannot necessarily be sustained
over the long term. The African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) reports that the
international NGO presence in Darfur has been cut in
half. That has dramatically reduced those groups'
ability to provide assistance to those in need. The
Council must be vigilant in holding the Government of
Sudan responsible for fully meeting the humanitarian
needs of its population.

Those responsible for these atrocities must be
held accountable. We urge all States, including those
not party to the Rome Statute, to refrain from
providing political or financial support to Sudanese
suspects indicted by the ICC.

Although the United States is not party to the
Rome Statute, it was pleased to participate last week
for the first time as an observer in the Assembly of
States Parties to the Rome Statute. That decision
reflected the United States commitment to engage with
the international community on issues that affect our
foreign policy interests. Ending impunity for crimes
against humanity, including crimes on the staggering
scale of those committed in Darfur, ranks high among
our commitments. The United States will therefore
continue to be supportive of the ICC's prosecution of
these cases to the extent consistent with United States
domestic law.

Let me say a word on the African Union High-
level Panel on Darfur, chaired by former South African
President Thabo Mbeki. On 29 October, the Panel made
several recommendations to combat impunity and
advance the cause of accountability, peace, healing and
reconciliation. We welcome efforts to strengthen
Sudan's national legal system to let it deal appropriately
with those who committed atrocities in Darfur. But
efforts to strengthen Sudan's legal system will not
succeed unless they are backed by the political will to
bring perpetuators to justice. The recommendations of
the Mbeki report (S/2009/599, annex I) about a hybrid
tribunal are worth further study, but we believe that the
ICC's prosecution of the key architects of the conflict in
Darfur remains critical.

In conclusion, let me reiterate my Government's
unequivocal support for the pursuit of justice and
accountability for those who have committed atrocities
in Darfur. We once again call upon the Government of
Sudan to fully implement resolution 1593 (2005).
