The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Ireland.

I welcome Mr. Vieira de Mello here today and
express my deep appreciation for his personal
commitment, and that of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET),
to assisting in the transition of East Timor and to
developing detailed plans for the future United Nations
presence there. I thank Mr. Karlsson of the World Bank
and Mr. Diabre of the United Nations Development
Programme for their useful and informative
interventions. I welcome in particular Mr. Alkatiri, Mr.
Borges and Mr. de Araujo. Like them and the brave
people they represent, Ireland warmly anticipates the
day when, instead of being visitors in the Security
Council, East Timor will take its rightful place in the
General Assembly of this world Organization.

The Permanent Representative of Belgium will
later make a statement on behalf of the European
Union; Ireland agrees fully with that statement.

Ireland applauds the dignity and integrity with
which the Timorese people performed their most recent
collective act of self-determination: the national
elections in August. They have drawn strength from
international support to create their own new political
dispensation. Next 20 May, they will join together in
formally declaring and celebrating their independence.
We will all wish to share in the joy and hope for the
future which will be born on that occasion.

The United Nations has helped a nation to rise to
its feet, but we must walk with it a bit longer before
returning home. This Organization will have a vital
role in maintaining progress in East Timor towards an
effective administration and full independence for the
first time after four centuries of external rule. At this
critical time, we cannot be seen to diminish our
responsibility and commitment to this capacity-
building process.

The Irish Government supports the recent report
of the Secretary-General and agrees with his
assessment that a premature withdrawal of the
international presence could have a destabilizing effect
in a number of crucial areas. We agree that the United
Nations must remain engaged in East Timor in order to
protect the major achievements so far realized, and we
believe that a substantial international presence will be
necessary up to and after independence.

To underpin this commitment, we endorse fully
the Secretary-General's recommendations for an
integrated mission mandated by the Security Council.
This should comprise military, civilian police and
civilian components, and include provision for vital
human rights and justice elements. The downsizing of
UNTAET and the international presence should be
phased only in line with the development of local
capacity. I am pleased that an Irish troop contingent
will continue to serve with UNTAET and its successor
mission.

Support for East Timor in its post-independence
phase should be by the United Nations membership as
a whole, and we believe strongly, therefore, that a
successor mission should be funded from assessed
contributions. Even with political progress, East
Timor's economic prospects are such that it will be
essential to maintain significant aid flows to its fiscal
base. We commend the enormous advances already
made by East Timor in key sectors, with the support of
the United Nations and World Bank trust funds, the
development banks and other members of the
international donor community.

The development of East Timor must be driven
by the wishes of its people and not by donor priorities.
Close coordination will be necessary between the
United Nations development bodies, principally UNDP,
the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and
bilateral donors to ensure that resources are used
effectively and coherently in support of local capacity-
building. Bilaterally, Ireland has planned to double its
aid allocation to East Timor next year.

Our task for the next few years will be to
facilitate the emergence of a strong and vibrant
nation - one that has been built by the people and for
the people. East Timor needs our commitment, during
the critical period of transition to independence, to its
achieving full political, economic and social freedom.
We should rise to the challenge and engage with the
people of East Timor in delivering their future.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The next speaker is the representative of
Belgium. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
