Mr. AlJarallah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council
during the first month of your membership. Despite the
tremendous responsibility on your shoulders, we are
confident that you will have a successful presidency.
We also thank you, Sir, for preparing the concept note
(S/20l7/6, annex) on the subject of conflict prevention
and sustaining peace.

We would also like to congratulate the other
new members, namely, Bolivia, Ethiopia, Italy and
Kazakhstan. We wish them luck. We would also like
to thank His Excellency Secretary-General Guterres
for his valuable briefing, which outlined his vision for
conflict prevention. We hope that, during his mandate as
Secretary-General, we will be able to achieve tangible
progress in activating preventive diplomacy. Kuwait
stands ready to work with the Secretary-General to
achieve his vision on peace and security in the Middle
East and around the world.

Our world today faces profound humanitarian
tragedies and suffering that have worsened alarmingly
over the past several years. The number of civil wars
has increased from four in 2008 to 11 in 2015, which
has resulted in more than 128 million persons who
have been affected by conflicts, displacement and
natural catastrophes, and more than 60 million persons
have been displaced or become refugees as a result of
wars and conflict. The humanitarian appeal for 2017
launched by the United Nations to raise $22 billion - a
record amount - illustrates the dangerous crisis that
we are facing. Today's topic could not therefore be
more timely. With the beginning of the new year and
the mandate of the new Secretary-General, we have an
opportunity to work together towards achieving that
goal and make 2017 a year of peace.

Over the past several years, the Security Council
and the international community have faced numerous
challenges and conflicts. We need to deal with those
conflicts in a creative way. We need to work in
accordance with the principle of preventive diplomacy
to address the root causes of those conflicts, especially
economic causes, such as poverty and unemployment,
and social causes, such as the absence of justice and
the existence of human rights violations. We must
also draw constructive lessons from past experience.
We must focus on preventing conflict instead of
addressing its political, humanitarian, economic and
social implications. I am speaking specifically about
the work of the Security Council, which must shoulder
its responsibility to maintain international peace and
security in dealing with conflicts after they break
out. That exacts a large cost from the international
community. I must point out that, over the past several
years, the Security Council has been unable to deal
with many of the issues before it, chief among them
being the Palestinian question, which has been an
agenda item for more than 70 years, and the Syrian
crisis, which has entered its sixth year and has claimed
the lives of more than 400,000 people. That shows the
inability of the Council to address the consequences of
many conflicts and to ensure that they are contained
and do not worsen.

Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations
addresses the peaceful settlement of conflicts and the
benefits that we can derive from peaceful negotiations
and mediation aimed at reaching peaceful settlements.
Article 99 of the Charter ensures that the Secretary-
General has the right to alert the Council to any matter
that he believes might endanger international peace and
security. We believe that it is important to remove all
obstacles to that function and to enhance the resources
available to the Secretary-General and the Secretariat
so that they can warn us of any potential conflict.
We must strengthen partnerships with regional and
subregional organizations, which play a pivotal role in
bolstering international peace and security.

The road towards the achievement of permanent
peace is full of dangers. We cannot walk down that road
if we do not walk together and if we lack a common
vision. The United Nations, and the Security Council
in particular, has a historical and moral responsibility
to meet the needs of the millions of people affected
by conflicts throughout the world. We agree with the
Secretary-General that we must improve our efforts to
prevent conflicts before they emerge, and not merely
address those conflicts by trying to contain them,
because we know that such an approach has a high
financial, political and human cost.

It seems appropriate to me, during the Swedish
presidency of the Security Council, to conclude my
statement with a quotation from the late Secretary-
General Dag Hammarskjold on how the quest for peace
must be an ongoing process:

"The pursuit of peace and progress cannot end in
a few years in either victory or defeat. The pursuit
of peace and progress, with its trials and its errors,
its successes and its setbacks, can never be relaxed
and never abandoned."

