Mr. Al-Kadhe (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): We
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
responded so quickly by holding this meeting to
consider the terrorist and criminal actions committed
by the Zionist entity against the Palestinian people. We
believe that your swift reaction was prompted by the
circumstances of this horrible crime two days ago by
the Zionist entity in Gaza, which targeted a civilian
area. It was a crime in which an F-16 warplane dropped
a SOC-kilogram bomb.

We have already said, on earlier occasions related
to the same agenda item, that Iraq is a little perplexed
when the Security Council does not do anything to
address the terrorist actions by the Zionist entity. These
actions are clearly a flagrant violation of the Charter
and a threat to international peace and security. It is
only when the Arab countries and other well-meaning
groups request it that the Council considers such
issues.

Today, we ask the same question and we draw
attention to this discriminatory approach by the
Council towards the Palestinian issue. We know, like
others, the reasons that lead the Council to take this
unjust approach. We also know why the Council has
double standards in this respect. It goes without saying,
today, that everybody knows that this all goes back to a
policy of child-spoiling followed by the United States
with regard to the actions of the Zionist entity. This is
the case because of well-known internal American
reasons.

This spoiled child was encouraged to increase its
aggressive and terrorist activities in order to terrorize
the Palestinian people, so that the latter will accept
humiliating and defeatist policies. In this instance, we
mention that the reaction of the major Powers to the
recent crime in Gaza was inadequate, and rather weak.

Everybody witnessed the crime committed by the
Zionist military forces in Gaza on Monday 23 July
2002, on a direct order by the war criminal Sharon.
This was designed to cause the largest possible number
of civilian casualties. The first indications show that
there were over 190 dead and wounded, including a
large number of children and women.

Do the Palestinian people not have the right to
defend themselves by all possible means against this
barbarous crime, in order to survive? How can the
Security Council describe legitimate fedayee actions,
carried out in accordance with international law and
many resolutions of the United Nations, as terrorist
acts? Palestinian fedayee acts are a legitimate right, a
way to achieve liberation, independence and legitimate
self-defence against the Zionist military machine.

The United States is the paramount military
power in the world today and accordingly has a historic
responsibility with regard to official terrorism,
anarchism and war. The United States also has a
historic responsibility towards international law and a
significant historic responsibility with regard to
falsification and distortion of political and legal
situations and facts.

The United States is using its military and media
powers for its own narrow ends. We are all aware that
falsification and distortion of the facts and attempts to
mislead derive from the worldwide Zionist movement,
which is characterized by racism and egotism that
surpass nazism. In fact, the movement is interested
only in its own aims and has no consideration for other
people. It is a movement that grows and prospers under
conditions of terrorism, war and instability.

This policy in force in the world today, a policy
of falsification and distortion of facts and inaccurate
description of legal principles, has led to the following
situation.

First, the United States is using international
terrorism to cause the Security Council to adopt
resolutions suiting its own political interests, under the
pretext of preserving international peace and security.
Secondly, peoples are being deprived of their right to
self-determination by characterizing their legitimate
actions as terrorist acts. This is what is happening
today in Palestine. Indeed, although the Zionist entity
is occupying Palestinian territory, the United States
Government and the Zionist entity are trying to distort
the facts, trying to show the victim as the aggressor and
the aggressor as the victim.

Thirdly, acts of aggression by certain States are
legitimized under the pretext of self-defence and
preventive deterrent policies. Fourthly, many fixed
rules of international law and international
humanitarian law are being questioned. An attempt is
being made to create new international legal rules that
have no objective basis, and there is an attempt to
impose them on international relations by using
military and media powers to that end.

Fifthly, the United States invokes the pretext of
international terrorism to carry out its own strategic
goals in the world by using force, threatening force,
stating explicitly that it will intervene in the internal
affairs of States and that it wishes to change the
political, social and economic regimes of States. Proof
of this is the continually reiterated intentions of the
United States Administration to change the legitimate
regime in Iraq and to launch military aggression
against it. It has also stated its intention of changing
the legitimate leaders of Palestine.

Sixthly, under the pretext of maintaining
international peace and security and combating
terrorism, there have been violations of the fourth
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, and of the third
Geneva Convention on the Treatment of Prisoners of
War.

Since the Zionist entity was established it has
continually committed crimes of war and crimes
against humanity in Palestine. Today the Council is
called upon to act under Chapter VII of the United
Nations Charter, to take coercive action against that
entity and to protect the Palestinian people. If it fails to
do so, it means that the Council is unable to maintain
international peace and security, unable to discharge
the mandate entrusted to it under the Charter. If the
Council is unable to act appropriately, then the entire
United Nations would lose credibility and the Council
would have confirmed that the United Nations is
simply an instrument of American and Zionist policy.

