Mr. Gutierrez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation associates itself with the statement made by
the Uruguayan representative on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti, and congratulates the Security
Council for the timely organization of this open debate
on the situation in Haiti, especially as we prepare to
debate the need to renew the mandate of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
We also welcome the report of the Secretary-General in
document S/2010/446 and the very comprehensive
briefing of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Haiti, Mr. Edmond Mulet, whom we
welcome and thank for his magnificent work in Haiti.

As noted by the Uruguayan delegation, this
debate demonstrates the commitment of the Council
and the international community to the reconstruction
process in Haiti, and gives us an opportunity to
exchange opinions on the report and on how to
evaluate the Mission and our participation in it.

In the light of the observations of the Secretary-
General in his report, my delegation would like to
stress two aspects of the report in particular that we
consider essential. Despite the progress made in Haiti's
reconstruction through the efforts of MINUSTAH, the
Government of Haiti and other United Nations
agencies, serious challenges and difficulties remain
that could threaten the progress made so far in the
political, socio-economic and security sectors. We are
facing an extremely fragile situation that must be
addressed comprehensively through development and
the strengthening of national capacities and security.

The Secretary-General has stressed the problem
of resettling displaced persons and those living in
camps, highlighting underlying social and economic
problems that cannot and must not be underestimated.
Any effort to address the various problems should be
coordinated and aligned with national strategies and
national priorities, as established in the Action Plan for
National Recovery and Development of Haiti. In that
context and without neglecting security concerns,
complementary efforts to establish a solid basis for
Haiti's economic recovery and growth and sustainable
development must be increased.

Accordingly, the work undertaken to engage and
include all local public and private stakeholders is
highly important, and we congratulate the Government
of Haiti for its efforts. My delegation has expressed its
conviction of the importance of establishing a strategic
alliance between the public and private sectors in Haiti
that could contribute to strengthening institutions in
that sister nation while guaranteeing its stability,
security and sustainable development.

It is also clear from the report of the Secretary-
General that it is crucial that cooperation be continued
if the institutional capacity of the Government of Haiti
is to be restored, improved and strengthened
throughout the country. It is therefore essential to
encourage and support constitutional reform and the
electoral process as indispensable bases for solid
governability.

In order to respond to these challenges in the best
way possible, it is necessary for MINUSTAH to pursue
its work. We thus consider that its mandate should be
renewed and that the greatest support possible given
for its activities by the international community. Along
these lines, Peru, aware of the need to strengthen the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, has
increased its troop contribution by another 150 soldiers
to cooperate in MINUSTAH's work.

Finally, I would like to reiterate that Peru is
firmly and steadfastly committed to strengthening the
recovery, stability and development of Haiti.

