Mr. Salam (Lebanon): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, for your wise
stewardship of the Council during this month of March
and to extend my deepest appreciation to the
Permanent Representative of Panama for his skilful
leadership of the Council during the previous month. I
also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
important introductory remarks and Mr. Lynn Pascoe,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his
statement. Once again, it underscored the tremendous
challenges that lie ahead.

At the Annapolis Conference, all parties
committed themselves anew to the Road Map, with the
goal of reaching an agreement on statehood for the
Palestinian people before the end of the current year.
And what does Phase 1 of the Road Map, which was
endorsed by this Council, call for? All present here
know that it calls upon Israel to "immediately
dismantle settlement outposts erected since March
2001" and "to freeze all settlement activity (including natural growth ...)".

But what has happened since Annapolis?

In December 2007, Israel disclosed a plan to
build 307 houses in the occupied territories, in Abu
Ghuneim Mountain, a vicinity of East Jerusalem which
it calls Har Homa. That decision came only a few days
after the resumption of peace talks with the Palestinian
President, Mahmoud Abbas, at Annapolis. On
12 February 2008, Israel announced plans to build
more than 1100 apartments in occupied East Jerusalem.
On 17 March the Israeli Prime Minister, Ehud Olmert,
left no room for doubt about his Government's
intentions, stating that Israel would not stop building
on occupied land in and around Jerusalem.
On this matter, we cannot but commend
Mr. Robert Serry, the United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, who, in
his briefing to this body on 26 February, reiterated the
principle that continued settlement activity is illegal
anywhere in the occupied territory and is an obstacle to
peace. He underlined the fact that settlement activity is
"among the biggest factors undermining confidence in
the Annapolis process and prospects for a viable
Palestinian State". (S/PV.5846, p. 3)

We do not intend to disregard the fact that the
Road Map in its same Phase 1 calls upon the
Palestinians "for an immediate and unconditional
ceasefire to end armed activity and all acts of violence
against Israelis anywhere". However, could anyone, in
good faith, reasonably imagine that the Palestinians
could fully conform to such expectations while Israel
continues to subject Gaza to an immoral siege and its
civilian population to a deliberate policy of collective
punishment? This is not to mention the daily raids and
incursions it carries out in both Gaza and the West
Bank.

These realities, no matter how painful, should not
allow despair to prevail. The process initiated by the
United States at Annapolis must not be left to erode.
Hence, we cannot but support the efforts to hold a
second international meeting in Moscow to help
achieve a comprehensive and just peace based on
United Nations resolutions, the terms of reference of
the Madri Peace Conference, the principle of land for
peace and the provisions of the Arab Peace Initiative.

Turning to Lebanon, in particular to its south, it is
essential to move from the precarious situation of the
cessation of hostilities to that of a permanent ceasefire.
The United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) recently observed the thirtieth anniversary of
its presence in Lebanon, a presence initially caused by
the massive Israeli invasion of 1978 and which has
continued because of repeated Israeli aggressions that
culminated in the summer 2006 war leading to Security
Council resolution 1701 (2006).

While we express our deep gratitude to UNIFIL
and praise its remarkable performance and close
cooperation with the Lebanese armed forces, we
reiterate on this occasion that Lebanon remains entirely
committed to the full implementation of resolution
1701 (2006) and abides by its obligations under it.
08-28224
Israel, however, has yet to abide by its own obligations
under that resolution.

As a matter of fact, the Secretary-General in his
latest report on the implementation of resolution 1701
(2006), noted that

"UNIFIL has observed and reported a significant
number of Israeli air violations of Lebanese
airspace by aircraft and unmanned aerial vehicles
on an almost daily basis. On 17 February
UNIFIL recorded 36 air violations"

And he rightly concluded that "All Israeli overflights
of Lebanon's territory constitute violations of Lebanese
sovereignty and of resolution 1701 (2006)."
(S/2008/135, para. 17)

As to cluster bombs - the deadly legacy of Israel
in the south, which kill and maim children, civilians
mine-clearance experts, in addition to contaminating
agricultural fields - the situation regrettably remains
unchanged in spite of repeated calls on behalf of the
international community. Israel claims to have
submitted information on strike data, but the Secretary-
General in his report qualified them as being "of very
limited value". (Ibid., para. 74)

Regarding the northern part of Ghajar, the
Secretary-General considered that its continued
occupation by Israel "constitutes a continuing violation
of Lebanon's sovereignty, resolution 1701 (2006) and
the Blue Line" (ibid., para. 70). We reiterate here our
support of the proposal that UNIFIL take over, on an
interim basis, the administrative and humanitarian
responsibilities on the Lebanese side of Ghajar, once
the Israeli army has fully withdrawn.

The continued Israeli occupation of the Shab'a
Farms remains a major threat to the security and
stability of south Lebanon and constitutes a violation
of Security Council resolution 425 (1978). On this
issue, we urge the Secretary-General to start a long-due
diplomatic process, based on our suggestion in the
seven-point plan, that this area be placed under
provisional United Nations custodianship after the
withdrawal of the Israeli occupying forces and until the
border demarcation between Lebanon and Syria
become possible.

On the question of Lebanese detainees in Israeli
prisons, we reiterate that those detentions are a breach
of the basic rules of international law and that the
prisoners should be released immediately and
08-28224
unconditionally. As for the Israeli soldiers abducted on
12 July 2006, the Lebanese Government reiterates that
it has no knowledge of their status or whereabouts and
remains ready to cooperate with the Secretary-General.

We also reaffirm that the internationally
recognized borders of Lebanon in the south are as
referred to in the 1949 Armistice Agreement, and as
reiterated in operative paragraph 5 of resolution 1701
(2006). We continue to welcome UNIFIL assistance in
marking the Blue Line.

I would also like to inform the Council that
Lebanese authorities are maintaining a high level of
vigilance against illegal movements of arms and
material. In this context, my Government reiterates that
the control of Lebanon's northern and eastern borders
remains a shared responsibility with Syria, as per
resolution 1701 (2006).

As to the Special Tribunal for Lebanon regarding
the assassination of former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri
and the terrorist acts related to it, we would like to
express our appreciation for the sustained efforts of the
Secretary-General for its establishment. We also
acknowledge the generous contributions made by
Member States towards its funding, and we reiterate
our strong conviction that this Tribunal will be a key
judicial instrument in putting an end to impunity.

Finally, today, 25 March, a new President for
Lebanon should have been elected. While the
presidential elections have once more been postponed,
we cannot but stress the importance for the stability
and security of my country of these elections being
held as soon as possible in accordance with the terms
of the Constitution and pursuant to the Arab Initiative.

