The last few weeks have changed the world. We are all struggling with the current coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. That also applies to the countries of the Western Balkans. We are encouraged by the way Kosovo's caretaker Government is managing the current pandemic. They have taken swift and successful action to limit the spread of the coronavirus and mitigate the effects of the crisis on the country. We call on all actors and decision-makers in the country to work together in that regard. What Kosovo requires now is stability and for all actors to act responsibly and in the interest of Kosovo's citizens. We commend the cross-border cooperation between the caretaker Government of Kosovo and the Government of Serbia to fight the health crisis together. It is encouraging proof that progress is possible when all work towards the same goal. That spirit of collaboration should be a positive example of resolving differences. The unresolved relationship between Kosovo and Serbia remains a source of bilateral tensions, an obstacle in the everyday lives of the citizens of both countries and a stumbling block on both Kosovo's and Serbia's paths to the European Union (EU). It is clear that progress in Kosovo-Serbia relations is urgently needed. The goal must be a comprehensive, legally binding agreement that is sustainable, enables both countries to become members of the EU and contributes to regional stability. That, in turn, will require well-structured negotiations with significant input from the European Union as the facilitator of the dialogue. In that context, we very much welcome the recent appointment of the new EU Special Representative for the Belgrade-Pristina Dialogue, Mr. Miroslav Lajeak, and look forward to closely working with him. We also welcome the Kosovo Government's lifting of tariffs on goods from Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina as of | April. In the first three weeks since the lifting, trade has been flowing freely across the border. It was the necessary step by the Kosovar side to resume the EU-facilitated dialogue. Existing grievances concerning, for example, non-tariff trade barriers should be settled in the framework of the dialogue between Kosovo and Serbia. The EU has offered its support. We call on both sides to further build confidence, which includes halting Serbia's de-recognition campaign. It also includes adopting conciliatory rhetoric towards one another, as well as transparent communication towards constituencies on why finding a comprehensive agreement is in their mutual interest. We continue to support the efforts in Kosovo to adopt and implement a survivor-centred approach to addressing conflict-related sexual violence, in line with resolution 2467 (2019). In that regard, we welcome the ongoing work of the Kosovar Government commission responsible for the verification and recognition of the status of survivors of conflict-related sexual violence, which has so far granted survivor status to 785 applicants, including 758 women and 27 men. We call on the Kosovo institutions to further intensify their work on empowering women survivors of conflict-related sexual violence from different communities to overcome isolation, contribute to the well-being of their families and elevate their status and role within their community. At the same time, it is essential that women participate meaningfully and equally in the political process. We call upon the EU Special Representative to include women and civil society in the Dialogue and on the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo to mainstream gender issues across all their work and policies. 11/31 12/31 Let me conclude with a practical example for the need and benefit of closer regional cooperation. Together with our French partners, we have initiated a regional road map for the Western Balkans to strengthen the control of small arms that are all too readily available in the region. We are encouraged by the progress achieved both at the national level in building new capacities and at the regional level in strengthening cross-border cooperation and coordination. The ministerial conference chaired by the German and French Ministers for Foreign Affairs on 31 January reaffirmed the strong commitment of the entire region to making that advance a success and to solving the problem of illicitly circulating weapons in the Western Balkans in a lasting way.
