Mr. Hunter (United States of America): We thank
all of the briefers today for their presentations and
for their work to advance peace and development in
the Sahel.

We share the Special Adviser's assessment that the
Sahel is an important and culturally diverse region filled
with potential, but that its people today face a daunting
set of challenges. We also agree that competition
over natural resources in the region, exacerbated by
natural disasters including desertification and drought,
contribute to the instability that we see today. We are
particularly concerned by the increasing unrest in the
central Sahel, driven by the scarcity ofresources. Those
communities are increasingly seeing those disputes
through an ethnic lens, and each side brands the other
as the enemy.

In the face of all of those challenges, the United
States continues its multisectoral partnerships with the
Governments and societies of the countries of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) to bolster stability
and security by providing them humanitarian, health,
agriculture, governance and development assistance.
The United States provided more than $460 million in
the 2017 fiscal year in development and humanitarian
assistance to programmes in the G-5 Sahel countries.
All of our support seeks to complement the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and the
creative partnerships envisioned in its Support Plan.
We particularly appreciate the emphasis on unlocking
the potential of the private sector in the Sahel as an
additional way to harness the power of youth in a
positive way.

The efforts of the United Nations to attract and
align international support for priority challenges in
the Sahel is crucial. In particular, we should continue to
support priorities and activities that are Africa-driven.
We therefore commend the recent success of the G-5
Sahel donor and partner coordination conference in
Nouakchott on 6 December, with its focus on each of the
four pillars of the G-5 Sahel - security, governance,
resilience and infrastructure - and towards the projects
of highest priority, greatest cross-border impact and
maximum chance of success.

A key component of American efforts to support
resilience in the Sahel is to provide women and youth
with access to economic and civic empowerment.
Women are the world's safest borrowers, as they pay
back microloans at a rate of 97 per cent. In addition,
women business owners create a multiplier effect
in their communities. They are more likely to hire
other women and to reinvest in their communities
and their families. Women and youth often face high
barriers to accessing commercial activities, including
finance - such as legal and regulatory environments,
educational gaps and social and cultural norms.

The United States is actively engaged in addressing
those issues in the Sahel. For instance, the United
States Agency for International Development (USAID)
is working to build stronger connections in the Sahel
between the programmes it funds in food security,
health, micro-enterprise and community development.
By way of example, in the Niger, USAID is engaging
women and young people in community dialogues and
local decision-making to prevent violent extremism
from taking root in vulnerable communities. By
engaging women across their many roles as mothers,
teachers, civil society actors and business leaders we
can focus resources more constructively to address the
drivers of violent extremism, combat radicalization and
keep our communities safe.

On security, the United States commends the G-5
Sahel member States for operationalizing the G-5
Sahel Joint Force to combat terrorism and transnational
organized crime - a primary contributor to regional
instability. The United States strongly supports the Joint
Force in its efforts to establish lasting security. We will
continue to work closely with all partners to coordinate
our contributions of much-needed equipment, training
and technical advice to G-5 Sahel member States to fill
the prioritized capability gaps of the Joint Force.

Nevertheless, security responses alone will
not solve the problem if there is no progress in
addressing the political, environmental, development
and humanitarian challenges in the region. Only by
promoting good governance, addressing the root
causes of instability, creating economic opportunity,
respecting human rights and enhancing security can the
States in the region make sustainable progress towards
addressing those challenges. Their progress, combined
with the support efforts of bilateral and multilateral
partners - all working in a complementary fashion
with the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the
Sahel - will be critical to realizing the vast potential
of the region and its peoples.

