President Bush: Thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting of the Security Council. I
appreciate the opportunity to join you, and I appreciate
your focus on the challenges to peace and security in
Africa, particularly in Sudan and Darfur. The reason I
say that is that my nation has labelled what is taking
place in Darfur as genocide. When we find genocide, it
is time to do something about it. Time is of the
essence. So, Mr. President, you are focusing our
attention on this crucial matter.

I want to thank the Secretary-General as well for
his support of the people of Darfur. I appreciate his
determination to make relieving their suffering a
priority of the United Nations.

I also want to thank Chairperson Konare' for the
leadership of the African Union. After all, it deployed
7,000 troops. But 7,000 troops are not enough if you
believe what is taking place on the ground is
genocide - and maybe some do not think it is
genocide. But if you have been raped, you think your
human rights have been violated. If you are mercilessly
killed by roaming bands, you know it is genocide. The
fundamental question is, are we, the free world, willing
to do more? You made a strong effort, Chairperson
Konare', and we appreciate you. But you know better
than I do that the area of Darfur is bigger than
France - or Texas. And both are plenty big for 7,000
troops.

The fighting in Darfur between the rebels and the
Government continues. Two hundred thousand people
have lost their lives. Two hundred thousand innocents
are no longer with us. More than 2 million people have
been forced from their homes. They are fleeing the
violence and they are going to refugee camps and they
hide in neighbouring countries such as Chad and the
Central African Republic. That is why I appreciate
your leadership, Mr. President, to help these countries
help these refugees. Resolution 1778 (2007), adopted
today, addresses the plight of the refugees in Chad and
the Central African Republic. In other words, it is a
step in the right direction. It is a practical solution to a
big problem. It is part of a grand solution,
Mr. President. That is why your leadership is
appreciated.

The resolution authorizes the deployment to these
two nations of a robust European peacekeeping force
and several hundred police and military advisers. This
United Nations mission is going to help national and
local governments exercise sovereignty over their
territory. It is going to allow workers to deliver
humanitarian aid. That makes us feel good. We are
spending $2 billion so far on providing aid, and we
want to make sure our aid gets to the people who need
help. That is why the United States strongly supports
the resolution and the mission.

We continue to support swift implementation of
existing resolutions of the Council. We want the words
of the Council to mean something. We want it to be
said, when the Council speaks on behalf of suffering
people: Those words will be followed by action. So we
call on the Government in Khartoum to facilitate the
deployment of a robust United Nations peacekeeping
force to save lives. We call on all parties to cease arms
sales to the combatants. We expect people gathered
around this table to send a focused message: that
innocent life matters. We expect President Al-Bashir to
observe a ceasefire during next month's peace talks,
and we want the rebels to do the same. The message
has got to be: We are tired of people trying to escape
the noose of pressure. We want the pressure to be
uniform. Why? Because we believe in universal
freedom and peace.

The conflict in Darfur has claimed too many
lives, and there is too much suffering. The innocent
victims of this conflict want only to return to their
homes. They want to live in peace. And it is our duty to
help them realize that dream.

