Mr. Zarif: It is a pleasure to be here today to present
the Secretary-General's latest report on Liberia, dated
16 June (S/2017/510).

As the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL)
enters the final phase of its mandate, Liberia has
remained stable. No major threats are envisaged
beyond possible isolated and sporadic incidents of a
public-order nature in the context of the presidential
and legislative elections in October, and the subsequent
transition of Government in January. It will be crucial
for Liberia's law-enforcement agencies to be adequately
prepared to respond to potential low-level civil unrest
and mob violence during this delicate period. Current
limitations in manpower, equipment and mobility
may restrict the ability of these agencies to respond to
multiple simultaneous security incidents.

UNMIL is supporting the Liberia National Police in
elaborating an integrated election-security plan to ensure
the most effective utilization of available resources to
protect civilians. The Liberia National Police has also
conducted community-policing activities across the
country aimed at building trust and communication
with the population ahead of the elections. UNMIL,
in collaboration with the Government and local actors,
including Liberian traditional communicators, has
undertaken public-awareness campaigns country-
wide to mitigate the risk of mob justice and encourage
adherence to the rule of law.

UNMIL stands ready to respond to any situation
amounting to a risk of strategic reversal of peace
and stability. Yet the extent of this response will be
restricted by the reduced Mission capacity, the low
number of uniformed personnel and the potentially
competing mandated task of protecting United Nations
personnel. At present, UNMIL has 260 personnel in
its two formed police units and 230 personnel of the
Nigerian infantry company.

We presently maintain only two field offices, in the
north-east and the north-west. Formed police units and
force personnel are deployed only in Monrovia, which
significantly limits our capacity to intervene. This
is a significant change from the last two presidential
elections, when UNMIL had a country-wide presence.
Other factors could also have an impact on our ability
to perform our mandate. Any substantial reduction,
therefore, in the modest and lean budget we submitted
to the General Assembly would significantly affect the
ability of UNMIL to deliver on the mandate given by
the Council.

While UNMIL is preparing for the transition of
residual mandated activities to the Government of
Liberia, the United Nations country team and other
partners, it remains fully engaged in all aspects of its
mandate, with a particular emphasis on good offices
and political facilitation. As the elections draw closer,
the Mission has further intensified its engagement with
the National Elections Commission, political party
leaders, presidential candidates, the Government and
civil society to prevent and defuse tensions, help resolve
disputes and advocate for inclusive, transparent, credible
and peaceful elections. The country's future as a stable
democracy will hinge on the successful conduct of the
October elections and broad agreement that they were
free and fair, followed by a smooth transfer of power
from the current Government to a new Administration.
There are many presidential candidates, including
the incumbent Vice-President and several formidable
opposition-party candidates, who will almost certainly
have to form coalitions to enhance their chances in a
possible run-off.

At the initiative of the Government, the
Interreligious Council of Liberia organized, on 31 May
and 1 June 2017, a national forum of all political party
leaders, culminating in the parties' commitment to a
violence-free electoral process and transfer of power.
The commitment, referred to as the Farmington River
Declaration, built on a combination of agreements
previously reached among the parties. The Declaration
also endorsed the establishment ofa peace and mediation
committee to help guide relations among and between
the political parties and State institutions for a peaceful
transition. The Declaration was formalized on 4 June
2017 during the summit conference of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) Heads
of State. UNMIL, the African Union and ECOWAS
collectively engaged with the parties to ensure their
support for this significant initiative.

The Government also submitted a draft bill on
arrangements for the smooth transition of authority to
a new Government. The Government has established
a transition team that will attend to asset transfers,
handover notes and other matters, so as to ensure that
the incoming Government assumes its functions as
seamlessly as possible.

On 8 June, the Senate proposed to amend part XII
of the Code of Conduct law, with which the House of
Representatives concurred on 13 June. The amendment,
inter alia, seeks to provide a governing framework for
the operations of the Office of the Ombudsman. The
amendment also requires that electoral matters be
adjudicated by the National Elections Commission in
the first instance, with appeals to the Supreme Court,
which has caused additional uncertainty about the
eligibility of candidates for nomination, which process
started on 19 June.

Meanwhile, the exhibition of the provisional
registration roll, which took place from 12 to 17 June,
encountered technical issues, including, reportedly,
missing names and photographs of several individuals,
although the Commission has claimed that all registered
individuals will be allowed to vote in October. It
will be important that the Commission address these
challenges so as to prevent uncertainty in connection
with the process and its results, which could lead to
distrust and amplify existing problems.

Despite the important gains made over the
years of post-conflict recovery, Liberia continues to
face considerable challenges, which weigh heavily
on efforts to sustain peace and advance national
reconciliation. Critical legislative reforms, widely
accepted as minimum requirements to address the
underlying causes of conflict, most notably the land
rights bill and the local governance bill, are yet to be
enacted. The decisive steps needed to help bring more
security to the lives of women have yet to be taken,
including the passage of the domestic violence bill. I
continue to engage vigorously with the Government,
particularly the Legislature, to help advance these
transformational reforms.

I am encouraged by the gradual strengthening
of Liberia's human rights capacity, illustrated, for
example, by the recent international accreditation
of the Independent National Commission on Human
Rights following several years of UNMIL's technical
support in capacity-building. The Commission must
intensify its efforts to address the serious human
rights challenges, including sexual and gender-based
violence, harmful traditional practices and challenges
with respect to freedom of speech, which continue to
plague Liberia. For instance, over the past two weeks,
from late May to early June, UNMIL counted seven
reported cases of rape, both by individuals and gang
rape, of minors, including children of both sexes. The
Government should implement as a matter of urgency
the salient recommendations of the 2016 UNMIL-
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner on
Human Rights report on addressing impunity for rape
in Liberia. In this regard, UNMIL has stepped up
media activities and interactive programming on the
themes of sexual and gender-based violence, sexual
exploitation and abuse, national reconciliation and the
promotion of human rights.

On 4 April, the Secretary-General transmitted to
the Security Council the Liberia peacebuilding plan,
which was developed in consultation with national
and international stakeholders by the United Nations
system and the Government of Liberia. The plan
identifies key actions set to take place before 30 March
2018, when UNMIL's substantive mandate ends, and
outlines the level of necessary political engagement.
The peacebuilding plan provides the basis for the
United Nations system's integrated transition plan,
which is currently being finalized in consultation with
the Government and civil-society actors.

Sustaining peace in Liberia must look to horizons
beyond the immediate needs of the transition process,
requiring long-term investment in national institutions
that are inclusive, accountable and responsive, providing
opportunities and services to all Liberians. To that end,
the Government has started developing specific actions
for the implementation of each of its commitments
under the plan, and the Mission is assisting with this
process to, hopefully, ensure that it is done in a timely
and successful manner. In that context, I would like to
express my appreciation for the helpful assistance from
the Peacebuilding Commission's configuration for
Liberia, chaired by Ambassador Skoog, who has just
completed a very useful visit to the country.

The UnitedNations country team recently completed
a capacity mapping exercise to assess its readiness to
provide strategic and programmatic support to Liberia
after UNMIL's departure. The findings showed that it
will need significant assistance to increase its capacity,
resources and expertise. Efforts are currently under
way to mobilize support so that the transition from
UNMIL to the country team is conducted seamlessly
and responsibly and can effectively support Liberia's
efforts to achieve sustainable peace.

One programmatic aspect is the establishment of
an independent presence for the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, which
is essential for monitoring and capacity-building. With
regard to financing, a Liberia transition multipartner
trust fund, aimed at making the country team's funding
and operations more predictable, is being discussed.
Given that most of the priorities outlined in the Liberia
peacebuilding plan require the country team's medium-
to-long-term engagement, it will be essential to
ensure that Liberia has the international community's
sustained political and financial support. In that regard,
we are also discussing an international conference that
will enable the new Liberian Government to share its
national priorities. It could be organized for April 2018,
when there will be a review of the statement of mutual
commitments, which, together with the peacebuilding
plan, could form the basis for a framework of mutual
accountability between the new Government and
the international community, as represented by the
United Nations.

It is therefore a concern that the most recent draft
of the national budget for 2017-2018 has little room
for investment in social and economic intervention,
which is essential if the key drivers of conflict are to
be addressed. Currently, 94 per cent of the estimated
$526.5 million budget is committed to recurring costs,
including payrolls, leavingjust $27.3 million - I repeat,
just $27.3 million f for public-sector investment plans.
At the same time, the budget is 12.3 per cent lower than
the 2016-2017 budget of $600.2 million. The continuing
shortfalls in national resources for supporting Liberia's
transition and consolidating peace will be felt even
more acutely as international donor assistance declines.

Liberia has made remarkable progress since the
signing of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement in
Accra in 2003. However, challenges that pose a risk
of reversal still remain. The Government of Liberia,
the United Nations system and the wider international
community must continue to address them with all
the energy and innovation available to them if we
are to preserve and reinforce the gains made in the
intervening years. I appeal to all concerned to increase
and consolidate their investment in Liberia and support
the country at this crucial time, through its transition to
a new Government and beyond.

