Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Shearer and Ms. Jial for their
briefings about the latest developments on the ground
in South Sudan.

Today, International Women's Day, reminds us of a
key reason that our conversation on the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) is so important. We
must do everything possible to promote a better future
for the millions of women in South Sudan who face
staggering and unrelenting levels of sexual violence.

Five months into the Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan, the United States remains watchful of the
parties' implementation and their commitment to finally
putting an end to the horrific violence and instability
that have plagued South Sudan for far too long.

On the one hand, we are encouraged by reports
that the ceasefire appears to be holding in most parts
of South Sudan. At the local level, formerly warring
military commanders have engaged with one another
in peace celebrations. We are similarly encouraged
to see a rapprochement between the Government and
opposition parties in communities throughout South
Sudan, including a variety of confidence-building
measures that have sparked increased economic activity.

On the other hand, the United States is deeply
concerned by the apparent lack of political commitment
from all parties at the national level to fully implement
all tenants of the agreement. The assault, detention
and abuse of members of a Ceasefire and Transitional
Security Arrangements Monitoring and Verification
Mechanism team by Government officials in December
is one glaring example that calls into question the
Government's commitment to the peace process. Such
actions against individuals and institutions working
to assist in the implementation of the agreement
are appalling.

We are also alarmed by continuing violence by
all sides in the vicinity of Yei, which has led to mass
displacement, the killings ofcivilians and an urgent need
for humanitarian assistance. The violence represents a
flagrant breach of the cessation of hostilities agreement
and the Revitalized Agreement. Those military actions
must stop now. The United States is disturbed by
reports that the Government of South Sudan continues
to unlawfully recruit young people from military
service. That too must stop. Having seen previous peace
agreements in South Sudan fail to hold and the country
fall back into conflict and instability, the United States,
the rest of the Council and the South Sudanese people
all expect South Sudan's leaders to demonstrate a clear
commitment to the implementation of the agreement in
words and in action.

One fundamental, yet powerful, step the
Government should take is to use its own resources
to support peace rather than war and corruption.
The Government should make use of its increased
oil revenues in a transparent manner to support the
agreement's implementation and provide services
to South Sudan's people, many of whom are on the
brink of famine yet again. Absent such transparency,
South Sudan's leaders cannot expect the international
community to provide substantial financial support to
implement the peace agreement.

The commitment to the agreement is not solely a
matter of money. There are clear and immediate steps
that the Government and opposition parties can take to
underscore their commitment to the South Sudanese
people and the agreement. Those steps include full
adherence to the ceasefire, taking action against gender-
based violence, ceasing the obstruction of ceasefire
monitors, permitting unhindered humanitarian access
and ending the inappropriate taxes and fees imposed
on aid workers, releasing all political prisoners,
establishing the Africa Union hybrid court and opening
up political space for peaceful dissent.

As South Sudan saw during the 2016 outbreak
of violence, a peaceful and secure Juba is paramount
for any peace agreement to hold. To that end, the
Government must allow UNMISS to fulfil its mandate
to provide a secure environment in and around Juba and
other parts of South Sudan. The Government's frequent
violations of the status-of-forces agreement through
unreasonable clearance processes and impromptu road
barricades cannot continue. The United States calls
on the Government to allow UNMISS to undertake its
roles and responsibilities in support of stability in Juba.

There is no bigger supporter of the people of South
Sudan than the United States. We want to see this
peace process lead to long-term stability and security
in the country. In 2018, the United States provided
$845 million for South Sudan, the vast majority of
it in support of the most vulnerable South Sudanese,
who have borne the terrible brunt of this conflict.
We have contributed more than $3.7 billion to South
Sudan since it gained independence in 2011, but as we
announced last year, our assistance is not infinite. Our
expected return on current and any future assistance is
that the Government and opposition parties will take
primary responsibility for the implementation of the
peace Agreement in South Sudan and for the welfare
of its people. This will help restore the confidence
of the South Sudanese people and the international
community in the future of South Sudan.

