Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to thank the Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, for his briefing. The State of Kuwait renews
its full support for his role in bringing about the
resumption of the stalled peace process and improving
the daily lives of Palestinians, who have been
languishing under occupation for more than 50 years.
We look forward to the Secretary-General presenting
at least two written reports per year on the status of the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), in line with
its provisions and the note by the President contained in
document S/20l7/507, and similar to other items on the
Council's agenda.

We would also like to thank Assistant Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Ursula Mueller,
who reminded us of the deteriorating humanitarian
situation of Palestinians. If we compare her briefing to
the last briefing to the Council by Mr. Stephen O'Brien,
the previous Under Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, in November 2016, we can clearly see that the
situation has deteriorated, raising the threat of the onset
of a grave humanitarian situation (see S/PV.7820). A
case in point is the decision by the Israeli authorities
taken last Monday, which Ms. Mueller just mentioned,
to evict a Palestinian family of 10, including three
children, from their house in East Jerusalem where they
had lived since 1951.

The Security Council discusses the Palestinian
question every month, while there are growing calls
from the international community for the Council to
assume its responsibilities under the Charter of the
United Nations. At the same time, Israel continues to take
advantage of the Council's inaction by persisting in its
illegal policies and practices in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. We have seen
growing Israeli hate speech and inflammatory rhetoric,
including on the part of Israeli authorities and members
of the Knesset, thereby contributing to instability and
undermining the hope for a peaceful solution.

The most recent example is the decision by the Israel
to terminate the Temporary International Presence in
Hebron, which is a unilateral and unjustified decision
that ends a neutral two-decades-long international
presence in one of the most sensitive areas. That is
why, along with Indonesia, we called for the convening
of Council consultations on 6 February to discuss the
consequences of that decision under the item "Any other
business". We have also seen increasing frequency in
Israeli acts of hostilities and stepped-up Violence from
settlers against Palestinian civilians in the Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem.

That decision serves to underscore the need
to provide Palestinian civilians with international
protection, in line with the recommendations set
forth in the report of the Secretary-General entitled
"Protection of the Palestinian civilian population"
(A/ES-10/794). Their humanitarian and security
situation is untenable and might lead to further tension
and instability, especially since the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs noted that settler
violence increased by 57 per cent in 2018 over 2017, and
by 175 per cent over 2016.

The Council must not stand idly by while the
occupying Power continues its practices. We must call
on Israel, the occupying Power, to renew the mandate
of the Temporary International Presence in Hebron in
order to protect Palestinian civilians and to commit to
fulfilling its international obligations, including those
set forth in resolution 2334 (2016), resolution 904 (1994),
the second Oslo Accord, international humanitarian
law and international human rights law.

In addition, Israel continues to raid the Al-Aqsa
Mosque, while allowing settlers to enter the courtyards
of the Mosque under the protection of Israeli security
forces. The Israeli Agriculture Minister, accompanied
by a number of settlers, repeatedly entered the Mosque
courtyards under the protection of Israeli forces, most
recently at the beginning of this month. We condemn
that act, as we consider it to be a provocative action that
would lead to fuelling sentiments, disturbances and acts
of violence. We call on the occupying Israeli authorities
to ensure safe access to Muslim and Christian places of
worship in Jerusalem, as a human right.

There are continued attempts to undermine
Palestinian authority over the city of Jerusalem. We
renew our rejection of any attempts to violate the legal
status of Jerusalem. It is a violation ofinternational law
and the relevant international resolutions, especially
resolutions 476 (1980) and 478 (1980), as well as
General Assembly resolution 72/15, adopted in 2017.
That resolution considers that any decision or measure
to change the status or demographic structure of
Jerusalem has no legal effect and is null and void. We
call on all States to refrain from taking any stances
or decisions that might undermine the legal status of
Jerusalem. We also call on them not to establish any
diplomatic missions in Jerusalem, as we stress that
Jerusalem is one of the final-status issues.

We condemn any attacks on innocent civilians by
any party, anywhere and at any time. We hold Israel, the
occupying Power, accountable for any acts of violence
or escalation. Israel would not have been able to carry
out its acts as we have seen in recent years, including
provocative actions against the Palestinian people, if the
Council had been able to take a serious position against
such acts, including during the peaceful Great March
of Return in 2018, which resulted in 263 Palestinian
martyrs, including scores of children, and left nearly
28,000 injured. Such acts amount to war crimes and
crimes against humanity, according to international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.

Given its imminent financial challenges, we renew
our full support to the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA). The Agency provides basic services to more
than 5 million registered Palestinian refugees. We stress
the need to provide sustained financial support for the
Agency's programmes and activities. Funding UNRWA
is the responsibility of the international community. It is
not the responsibility of specific Member States. Kuwait
has voluntarily contributed $113 million to UNRWA
over the past four years. We renew our rejection of any
attempts to end or limit its role and mandate through
systematic campaigns. We call on the international
community to commit to the mandate of the Agency
and provide it with the necessary sustainable funding
in order for the Agency to continue its role and provide
the necessary services to the victims of the Nakba. It is
a right, and the international community must uphold

that right, according to General Assembly resolution
194 (III) of 1948.
In conclusion, the realities and facts we mentioned
today are not new. Regrettably, they have been present
for the past five decades. They clearly reflect what
Mr. Mladenov has been saying, namely, that the
situation on the ground undermines the possibility of
establishing the Palestinian State, thereby undermining
the two-State solution. We call on the international
community to honour its obligations and take the
necessary measures to revive the peace process in
order to achieve the two-State solution, end the Israeli
occupation of all Arab territories occupied since 1967
and attain lasting and just peace, according to the
relevant United Nations resolutions, including the
principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Quartet road map.

