Mr. Lacroix (spoke in French): I should at the
outset like to express my gratitude to you, Sir, and
the Peruvian presidency for having convened today's
meeting on Haiti.

I also take this opportunity to welcome the presence
of the Permanent Representative of the Republic
of Haiti.

This is the first time that I have the honour
of addressing the Council on Haiti and our first
opportunity to discuss the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) since the
launch of its operations on 16 October 2017, as called
for in resolution 2350 (2017).

I visited Haiti on 14 and 15 March, and I am
pleased to inform the Council that the Mission is fully
operational and actively implementing its mandate. Its
civilian presence is concentrated in the metropolitan
area of Port-au-Prince, with multidisciplinary mobile
teams that monitor political and rule of law developments
and engage with local communities and stakeholders
on a regular basis across Haiti's 10 departments. This
model of deployment is linked to the Mission's light
and non-intrusive footprint, while creating a channel
of regular communication with the Haitian population
throughout the country.

(spoke in English)

At the same time, in order to maintain a close
relationship with the Haitian institutions it supports,
the Mission has co-located 135 individual police
officers with the Haitian National Police (HNP) in
Haiti's 10 departments, and 23 Government-provided
corrections personnel in 9 of Haiti's 18 prisons. The
presence of seven formed police units (FPUs) in 5 of the
10 regions ensures the provision of operational support
to the HNP and a security presence across the country.
The Mission works closely with the 19 United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes engaged in Haiti, as
well as with the Office of the Special Envoy for Haiti,
Ms. Josette Sheeran, to fulfil its mandate and enable
a seamless transition towards inclusive, sustainable
development through a coherent, comprehensive and
integrated approach, in line with the ongoing United
Nations reforms and the Secretary-General's Vision
on prevention.

MINUJUSTH'S main objective is to build on the
achievements of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti and is tied to the overarching goal of the
United Nations in consolidating stability and security
in the country to facilitate Haiti's path to longer-term
development, of which a stronger rule of law and the
enjoyment of human rights remain critical foundations.
As the Council acknowledged when mandating
MINUJUSTH, the political and good offices role of
the Mission remain the cornerstone of our strategy to
achieve these objectives.

In the past months, MINUJUSTH, in partnership
with the United Nations country team, has implemented
targeted activities in support ofits objectives, preparing
the ground for more systemic change. Operating within
an overall stable environment, notwithstanding the
withdrawal of United Nations military troops last year,
the Mission has been fully engaged in assisting the HNP
in implementing its 2017-2021 strategic development
plan, notably through its mentoring and advisory
programme for the HNP senior management. Likewise,
it has started supporting the two regulatory bodies of
the judiciary, the Superior Council of the Judiciary
and the Ministry of Justice and Public Security, in
strengthening accountability and oversight capacity
through assistance to their respective inspection units,
as well as to theirjoint technical vetting commissions.

Other key areas of support of the Mission
are dedicated to helping curb prolonged pretrial
detention and prison overcrowding, notably through
on-site monitoring of activities at the justice of the
peace tribunal of Port-au-Prince to ensure caseload
management procedures are applied and through
provision of assistance to the penal chain committee
of that court. Closely related to this assistance is the
Mission's work with the Bar Association of Port-au-
Prince, funded through community violence-reduction
projects, to put in place two legal aid offices dedicated
to providing counsel to over 50 per cent of detainees in
pretrial detention at the national penitentiary, as well as
to newly detained defendants. Discussions are currently
ongoing to establish legal aid offices dedicated to
women and minors in detention.

The Mission's human rights monitoring and
reporting provides early warning and structural
analysis to adjust and tailor its advocacy and
specialized support. Nevertheless, the weaknesses
of the rule of law institutions continue to generate
multiple human rights challenges and encourage a
culture of impunity. Therefore, priorities in this domain
include the need to strengthen national human rights
institutions - particularly the Office of the National
Human Rights Ombudsperson and the Inter-Ministerial
Committee on Human Rights, as well as national
human rights civil-society organizations, to ensure due
process and access to justice, enhance the protection of
women and children, and the fight against sexual and
gender-based violence.

As a peacekeeping operation, MINUJUSTH can
be effective only if it has a sound relationship with the
Government and the people of Haiti based on solidarity
and mutual trust. A frank, open and respectful dialogue
with key national stakeholders is necessary to allow
for positive collaboration at all levels in order to bring
about effective change. I am strongly encouraged by the
willingness and the continuing efforts demonstrated
by President Moise and his Government to create a
climate for change, which I witnessed during my recent
visit to Haiti. I reiterate the support I expressed to the
President for his determination to improve the daily
lives of all Haitians, in particular through his Caravane
du changement programme.

While acknowledging that there could have been
a misunderstanding between MINUJUSTH and the
Government of Haiti, I am also encouraged by recent
indications of a closer, substantive convergence of
national and MINUJUSTH priorities. In this regard.
I welcome the most recent announcement of President
Moise's priorities on State reform and the maintenance
of political and social stability, which include the
strengthening of the justice system and the Haitian
National Police, the fight against impunity and
prolonged pretrial detention, combating and preventing
corruption, the establishment of the Permanent Electoral
Council, and the launching of a national dialogue, the
so-called Etats generaux sectoriels.

The 11 benchmarks presented in the Secretary-
General's report (S/2018/241) echo this vision and
include the areas of focus that MINUJUSTH supports
for closer, more fruitful and strategic collaboration with
national institutions and civil society. It is therefore
a unique opportunity for the Haitian Government,
MINUJUSTH, the United Nations country team and
the international community to jointly implement
common priorities indicated by resolution 2350 (2017)
and Haiti's Vision 2030, in line with the Agenda for
Sustainable Development. Building on the Secretary-
General messages of solidarity and partnership with
Haiti, which I also conveyed to my Haitian interlocutors
in March, I would like to reiterate the readiness of the
United Nations to support the Government in devising
a clear road map for the achievement of its State
reform agenda, taking into account the capacities of
MINUJUSTH on the ground.

Alongside these opportunities, we need to keep
in mind that challenges and risks remain, especially
as we prepare for a transition from peacekeeping to
development. Haiti has come a long way to achieve
the relative political and security stability it is now
enjoying, but persistent economic uncertainties, which
can result in social exclusion, particularly of youth and
the most vulnerable, may undermine this progress.
The work of the legislature has recently slowed down,
characterized by disagreements over procedural issues,
thereby affecting the pace of adoption of key legislation.
The anticipated holding of elections in the last quarter
of 2019 to possibly renew the legislature could lead
to a more polarized political landscape, creating an
environment less conducive to addressing systemic
challenges to the rule of law.

While achieving results should remain our
common priority, we have already started to prepare
for a transition to a non-peacekeeping presence, based
on lessons learned in Haiti and in other contexts. Under
the guidance of the Secretary-General's Executive
Committee, the full United Nations system on the
ground and at Headquarters is engaged in a transition
strategy that will build on existing, United Nations-wide
instruments, such as the United Nations Development
Assistance Framework, as a tool for transition, including
on rule-of-law issues. The strategy will also seek to
anticipate and mitigate any gaps that may arise from
the withdrawal of the peacekeeping operation within
the time frame stipulated by the Security Council. We
look forward to a close collaboration with the Haitian
Government and other partners to ensure the success
of this transition, as we do for the implementation of
MINUJUSTH's mandate.

The benchmarks for an exit strategy presented to
the Council weave together an ambitious but flexible
framework based on the criteria under which the
current United Nations configuration can confidently
be transformed into a non-peacekeeping presence in
the country. In the coming months, we will provide
the Security Council with qualitative and quantitative
assessments of progress and trends in these areas, in
close collaboration with Haitian institutions, in order
to allow members of the Council to take well-informed
decisions for the drawdown and eventual withdrawal
of MINUJUSTH. A broadly consulted and owned,
benchmarks-based exit, remains the right approach to
preserving the stabilization and peacebuilding gains
achieved over a decade in Haiti. We are determined
to ensure, within the overall time frame already
indicated by the Council in its resolution 2350 (2017),
that MINUJUSTH be the last peacekeeping operation
deployed in Haiti.

The unanimous vote by the Security Council nearly
one year ago, on 13 April 2017, which established
MINUJUSTH (see S/ PV.7 924), was a vote of confidence
in Haiti, in recognition of the progress the country has
made. We have many reasons to be optimistic that this
path to progress is irreversible, while we - Haiti,
the United Nations and international and regional
partners - need to jointly continue investing in the
success of the country and United Nations engagement
in it. As was mentioned by the Secretary-General last
week in his statement on his Action for Peacekeeping
initiative (see S/PV.8218), the exercise of the Council's
responsibility to support peacekeeping missions is a
critical component in this case as well, namely, for the
success of MINUJUSTH and the future of Haiti.

