Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia thanks the briefers
for their statements, above all Mr. Feltman, Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs. In particular,
I would like to single out not just the statement, but
also the leadership shown by Ms. Irina Bokova,
Director-General of UNESCO. I also thank Mr. Yuri
Fedotov, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, and Brigadier General
Fabrizio Parrulli, Commander ofthe Italian Carabinieri
Command for the Protection of Cultural Heritage, for
their briefings.

Bolivia also welcomes the initiative presented
today by the delegations of Italy and France. Resolution
2347 (2017), adopted today, is a call to the international
community and to the various United Nations agencies
to effectively protect cultural artefacts and heritage
in places where there is armed conflict, especially
where terrorist groups are operating, who not just seek
to undermine the rights of millions of people but are
also trying to obliterate the shared culturalheritage of
humankind to finance their vile acts.

We categorically condemn the looting, trafficking,
smuggling and the like of cultural property carried out
by non-State actors and terrorist groups, particularly
Da'esh and Al-Qaida, to the detriment of sovereign
nations and peoples. We urge the international
community to collaborate closely and make all
necessary efforts to prevent acts of that nature. We
also emphatically condemn the destruction of historic
sites and assets as a strategy for denying the cultural
and historic roots of nations and peoples through terror
and intimidation. We once again reject all terrorist
acts as unjustifiable crimes, regardless of motivation,
place, time or perpetrators. We reaffirm the need for
all States to combat that phenomenon by all means, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and
other obligations under international law.

We also believe it is essential to keep in mind
that one of the reasons we are facing the smuggling,
trafficking, looting and destruction of valuable historic
cultural property today, not only in the Middle East
but also in other parts of the world is due, in part, to
the destruction of State infrastructure and inadequate
security forces or authorities to prevent the commission
of such acts. It is important, in our view, to identify the
causes of that phenomenon, which has been occurring
primarily in the Middle East. We would probably not
be gathered here to tackle this difficult matter had it
not been for the interventionist policies and invasions
of recent years that led to the emergence and rise of
terrorist groups that the international community is
now facing.

We note that the Council has already expressed its
concern over resolution 2347 (2017), adopted today,
noting that the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS)
and other individuals, groups, businesses and entities
associated with Al-Qaida, are generating income by
participating directly or indirectly in the looting and
smuggling of cultural property from archaeological
sites, museums, libraries, archives and other locations
in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic - which is
being used to finance their recruitment and to bolster
their operational capability to plan and carry out
terrorist attacks.

The adoption of measures to combat that
phenomenon notwithstanding, the general lack of
effective control mechanisms in the international
community has allowed ISIS and Al-Qaida to continue
financing their murky operations via the looting,
smuggling and sale of cultural property. That generated
vast economic benefits, without which terrorist groups
would not have been able to finance their criminal
activities. The reduction or evasion of controls through
tax havens, used by organized crime to legitimize its
finances, only serves to undermine our efforts. We must
rigorously investigate whether those terrorist groups
have access to or are actually utilizing tax havens for
those ends.

We wish to stress that the enforcement of today's
resolution should focus on restoring historic sites and
cultural property to the state they were in before the
conflicts. It should also seek to neutralize explosive
ordnances and demine those areas, as in the case of
Palmyra, Syria.

We also note that General Assembly resolution
69/196 strongly urges Member States to apply
international guidelines on crime prevention and
criminal justice responses to the trafficking of cultural
property and related crimes. In that connection, we
call on all Member States to strengthen international
cooperation and adopt joint measures to recover
trafficked, looted, stolen or smuggled cultural property
and, critically, to ensure its restoration and return to its
place of origin.

While every case is different, many of the museums
that now exhibit historic cultural property from other
countries in their galleries, were also acquired through
invasion, looting and other illegal means. Consequently,
we are calling for enhanced policies for the restoration
and return of that property, in a way that is consistent
with instruments that have been approved by the
United Nations.

Finally, we wish to express the special and specific
importance of protecting cultural property in areas
under foreign occupation, and stress UNESCO's key
role in that crucial matter.

