Mr. Waxman (Israel): As we are meeting at the
end of the month, please allow me, Mr. President, to
commend you for your able stewardship of the Security
Council this month.
10-49885

Israel welcomes the adoption of resolution 1937
(2010) and the renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). I would
like to convey Israel's appreciation to UNIFIL troops
and their commanders, troop-contributing countries
and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO).

Israel remains committed to the full
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) and looks
forward to cooperating with the Security Council, the
Secretary-General, DPKO and UNIFIL in that regard.
However, in Lebanon, serious challenges to peace and
security threaten the full realization of resolution 1701
(2006). In fact, some of those challenges are
highlighted in the resolution that the Council has just
adopted.

The most serious of these remains the military
build-up of the Hizbullah terrorist organization. With
Iranian and Syrian support through arms, training and
financing - all of which are flagrant violations of
resolution 1701 (2006) and of today's resolution -
Hizbullah is building a deadly arsenal throughout
Lebanon, including south of the Litani River and in the
area of UNIFIL's operation. The incidents in Khirbat
Silim, Tayr Filsi and Mazraat Sarda represent just the
tip of the iceberg of this larger phenomenon. This
military build-up is made possible by widespread
weapons transfers to Lebanon, which violate the
existing arms embargo. The arms embargo is a key
issue addressed in resolution 1701 (2006). The
reference to the embargo in today's resolution is
certainly important and should be accompanied by
concrete measures on the ground.

Hizbullah's deadly rearmament endangers
Lebanon itself and the wider Middle East as Hizbullah
deploys those weapons and builds its military
infrastructure throughout civilian villages of southern
Lebanon, adjacent to schools, hospitals, houses of
worship and residential buildings. Hence, more
concerted efforts must be made in order to establish, in
the words of paragraph 8 of today's resolution,
"between the Blue Line and the Litani River an area
free of any armed personnel, assets and weapons other
than those of the Government of Lebanon and
UNIFIL".

The freedom of movement of UNIFIL is
increasingly impeded by Hizbullah operatives who use
civilians to disrupt the work of peacekeepers. In that
10-49885

regard, UNIFIL must remain vigilant and use the
necessary and appropriate means to carry out the
mandate that the Council has renewed today.

While Israel welcomes the deployment of the
Lebanese Army in southern Lebanon, its forces must
act responsibly to ensure peace and stability. The
Lebanese Armed Forces must clearly differentiate itself
from radical elements that seek to undermine
resolution 1701 (2006). In that regard, on 3 August we
witnessed a grave incident. During routine Israeli work
south of the Blue Line - more than 90 metres within
Israeli territory - Lebanese forces fired direct fire
across the Blue Line, killing Battalion Commander
Lieutenant Colonel Dov Harari and critically wounding
another senior company commander, both of whom
were standing some 140 metres south of the Blue Line
and 250 metres west of the location of the Israel
Defense Forces (IDF) works.

The preliminary findings concerning this incident
were discussed in the Secretary-General's letter to the
Security Council regarding the renewal of UNIFIL's
mandate (S/2010/430). UNIFIL's investigation was
shared with the parties last week, and the main finding
of the report states that

"the LAF [Lebanese Armed Forces] opening fire,
which triggered the exchange, constitutes a
serious violation of resolution 1701 (2006) and a
flagrant breach of the cessation of hostilities. At
the time of the initial LAF fire, the IDF troops
were positioned on the Israeli side, south of the
Blue Line".

The parties plan to discuss the results of this
investigation in their next tripartite meeting. However,
Israel hopes that the Council will receive a full briefing
on the matter in a timely manner. This type of incident
must not happen again. Israel reiterates its call upon
the LAF to respect the Blue Line in its entirety.

While the situation in southern Lebanon remains
complex, the presence of UNIFIL plays an
indispensable role in promoting calm in the area,
including along Israel's northern border. In conclusion,
I wish to reiterate our support for today's resolution,
and to emphasize our gratitude to the men and women
of UNIFIL, who are performing a difficult task in a
difficult environment in order to promote peace and
security for all in the region.
3

