Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I join others in thanking
the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
Mr. Mark Lowcock, for his clear and comprehensive
update. We convey our readiness to extend our support
to his activities. We also express our deep appreciation

to him and the staff of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs for working tirelessly in one of
the worst humanitarian crises in the world. Kazakhstan
is closely following recent developments and would
like to make the following observations.

First, we voice our support for the repeated
calls of the United Nations on all parties to save
civilian lives, prevent deaths and injuries and allow
for freedom of movement. We therefore note and
welcome the coordinated efforts of the stakeholder
arrangement - namely, the United Nations
agencies, non-governmental organizations and Gulf
countries 4 to provide humanitarian assistance to the
people of Yemen.

Kazakhstan salutes the selfless work of the
humanitarian partners who have been providing food,
water, emergency kits, cash and health care. We regret
that two-thirds of the Yemeni population still require
protection from malnutrition, cholera and other
diseases, which have killed or afflicted thousands of
civilians, especially after the very hot summer season.
My delegation expresses hope that critical health
infrastructure and water stations will be thoroughly
protected to serve the local populations.

Secondly, we fully agree with Mr. Lowcock's
call to boost commercial imports of food, fuel and
humanitarian supplies through all of Yemen's ports. We
also appeal for the mobilization of emergency services
and adequate funding to relieve the population from
famine. At the same time, it is critical to seek new and
support all existing confidence-building measures in
the humanitarian sphere.

Finally, Kazakhstan welcomes the decision of the
coalition to keep open all Yemeni ports, including
Al-Hudaydah and Saleef, to allow humanitarian
and commercial cargo to enter without restriction.
Maintaining the flow of imports is essential for
humanitarian cases, especially in the light of the rise in
unemployment, the non-payment of salaries to public
sector employees for over two years and the devaluation
of the Yemeni rial, as well as rocketing food and
fuel prices.

We emphasize that all obligations under international
humanitarian law must be respected by all parties,
who must also take responsibility to mitigate the
humanitarian situation by cooperating fully with the
United Nations and the relevant humanitarian agencies.

