Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): First of all, our
delegation expresses its deep condolences to the
delegation of Egypt on the terrorists attacks, which
took place last Sunday, and its sympathy with the
people of that country. Kazakhstan stands with Egypt
in combating terrorism.

I thank Special Representative Honore for her
detailed presentation of the Secretary-General's report
(S/2017/223). My delegationjoins other members of the
Security Council in welcoming the progress achieved
in strengthening stability and democracy, as well as
the results of the peaceful elections, the restoration
of constitutional order in Haiti and its successful
conduct, despite the challenges that the country and its
citizens face.

Kazakhstan is encouraged by the comprehensive
and ambitious policy statement of Prime Minister
Lafontant. The strong engagement of the international
community is an obvious necessity for Haiti's
sustainable development, while paying attention to
improving housing, water, education, gender equality,
prison conditions and the struggle against transnational
crime. Furthermore, we welcome Prime Minister
Lafontant's announcement for courageous reforms
to reinvigorate public administration, combat waste
and direct resources to top-priority programmes.
Establishing a responsible State, in which citizens are
educated and guided by a sense of collective solidarity,
sends a strong message to Haitians as they follow the
path of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Establishing the proposed truth and reconciliation
commissions will positively generate a sense of social

justice and stability.

Kazakhstan acknowledges the valuable role of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) and other United Nations institutions in
Haiti, especially with regard to stabilizing the security
environment and to capacity-building for the Haitian
National Police. We support the Secretary-General
and the Group of Friends for Haiti's recommendations
to establish a new, integrated stabilization mission
focusing on inclusive political mechanisms, the rule of
law, criminal justice and institutional and human rights
related reforms.

Humanitarian assistance is critical to a country that
has been devastated by numerous natural disasters and
the cholera epidemic. We should design the new mandate
in close dialogue with the Haitian Government and civil
society. That is especially necessary as we elaborate on
the future role of the United Nations presence based
on the findings of the strategic assessment mission,
while further considering the possibility of transferring
some powers from MINUSTAH to the United Nations
country team. In our View, the revised mandate should
cover a wide range of issues, including human and
drug trafficking, disaster management and human
rights monitoring. With the continued support from
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the
United Nations Development Programme, the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States,
we see a positive track for Haiti with the hope and
resilience that its people have demonstrated.
Special attention should also be given to
implementing resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, and the subsequent relevant
resolutions so as to enhance gender equality and
empowerment. The support of the United Nations,
especially UN-Women, UNICEF and the World
Health Organization, as well as regional organizations
like the Organization of American States and the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM), among others,
will lay the foundations for future conflict prevention,
peacebuilding and mediation to establish a stable Haiti.
The participation of civil society will be indispensable
in that process.

Kazakhstan believes that it is important to be a
part of the international support for Haiti, and with
others it has worked for the progress that we see today.
My Government contributed humanitarian support in
response to the devastating earthquake that occurred
in 2010. Last year, Kazakhstan supported the initiative,
entitled "Innovation pole of the greater north-the City
of knowledge". It is aimed at establishing infrastructure
for a knowledge-based economy in Haiti and will carry
out the same functions that the biggest global research
centres for technology, innovations, new ideas and
development also fill.

In 2016, my country joined CARICOM. as an
observer and remains committed to promoting a
partnership with Caribbean countries. As the only
Central Asian country with observer status in the
Community, Kazakhstan has supported two high-
priority regional CARICOM. projects. The first
involves developing and implementing water-resource
management through a policy and action programme,
and the second concerns lending institutional support
for the Ministries for Foreign Affairs of CARICOM
member States, of which Haiti is one.

Finally, capacity-building is imperative to taking
bold steps towards democracy and sustainable
development for Haiti, and we support the Government
of Haiti in its efforts to meet the challenges that it faces.

