Mr. Hetesy (Hungary): Hungary aligns itself with
the statement delivered on behalf of the European Union.
As a member of the Anti-Corruption and Transparency
Working Group, seeking improvements in the working
methods of the Security Council, Hungary warmly
welcomes today's open debate, organized by Argentina.

Hungary, which is committed to the full
implementation of international humanitarian law, is
party to all relevant major treaties as well as to the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court. Hungary
sees the Kampala amendments to the Rome Statute and
the Arms Trade Treaty as important building blocks,
solidifying and supplementing the international legal
regime on the protection of civilians.

For the last two decades, the protection of civilians
in armed conflict has become a priority issue for the
Security Council. Yet civilians not only account for the
vast majority of casualties in conflict situations, but the
numbers are reaching appalling record highs even as
we speak.

As has been repeatedly emphasized today, States
bear the primary responsibility to protect civilians in
times of armed conflict and to bring to justice those
who violate related international norms, including
international humanitarian law. Besides States, all
parties to a conflict have an obligation to comply with
the relevant norms of international law. Yet we see
States failing to provide protection and other actors
behaving as if they were under no obligations at all.
While there is a clear-cut role for the international
community in situations where States are unwilling or
unable to live up to their responsibilities, it has not been
able to do enough. As the Secretary-General himself
mentioned, commitments still have to be translated into
concrete improvements.

There are different reasons for the setbacks
encountered. Hungary, together with other speakers
and briefers today, continues to stress that, among
other things, lack of accountability, and therefore the
possibility of impunity, is an overall source of blame.
Lack of accountability means no justice. Human history
tells us that there is no lasting peace without justice.
Lack of accountability not only kills in the present but
becomes an incentive and a breeding ground for future
atrocities.

Where civilians are targeted, the Security Council
should take all measures at its disposal to protect
the civilian population. Such measures must include
ensuring that the perpetrators of serious crimes
are held accountable, even in cases where national
authorities fail to prosecute them. In order to do so, the
Council should develop its own general and coherent
accountability strategy and apply it in a consistent
manner. Hungary welcomes the Council's presidential
statement contained in document S/PRST/2013/2, on
the protection of civilians, and the commitments made
towards strengthening accountability. Hungary looks
forward to hearing about further practical steps to be
taken by the Council, as proposed today by several
Council members, including Australia, the United
Kingdom and France.

