Mr. Yelchencko (Ukraine): I join other members of
the Council in thanking the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Zahir Tanin, for his briefing.
Ukraine highly appreciates the work conducted by
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo under the leadership of Mr. Tanin on the
implementation of the relevant Security Council
mandate. I also welcome the First Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Ivica
Dacie, as well as Ms. Vlora Citaku back to the Council
and thank them for their statements.

Ukraine supports the political dialogue between
the two sides, under European Union facilitation. In
our view, that dialogue continues to be the cornerstone
on the road to reconciliation. It is a driver of reform
and an important prerequisite for the region's further
European integration. We are also convinced that there
is no alternative to dialogue and cooperation within the
Brussels process. It is crucial that the political leaders
ofthe two sides demonstrate courage and farsightedness
and continue searching for solutions that will bring
peace, stability and prosperity to all people in Kosovo.

We witnessed some positive developments during
the reporting period that give us cautious optimism
for the future of Kosovo. In particular, we welcome
the recent agreement reached between Belgrade and
Pristina on telecommunications, which envisages the
unimpeded work of Telekom Srbija in Kosovo and a
dialing code for Kosovo. We hope that that progress will
pave the way for resolving other outstanding issues.

We also welcome a new understanding reached
on implementing the agreement on the reconstruciton
of the main bridge in Mitrovica, as well as improved
cooperation between the municipalities in northern
Kosovo and the relevant Kosovo ministries, particularly
concerning municipal finance. My delegation joins the
Secretary-General in commending the efforts made at
the municipal level to employ members of non-majority
communities in local governance institutions.

That progress proves that the parties are able
to put aside existing differences and concentrate on
the dialogue in order to achieve the normalization of
relations. Unfortunately, that is not always the case. We
take note of the assessment that the implementation of
the Brussels Agreement continues to be relatively slow.
To our regret, we observe serious delays on many issues
in the implementation of outstanding commitments,
dangerous divisive rhetoric and even violence.

While we praise the declared commitment of
both parties to move forward with the establishment
of the Community of Serb-majority municipalities in
Kosovo and the implementation of the agreements on
the freedom of movement and the integration of the
judiciary, that commitment should be translated into
more specific and effective actions, since those issues
constitute vital prerequisites for further enhanced
relations between Belgrade and Pristina.

Political tensions concerning the issue of territorial
delineation with Montenegro are negatively affecting
Kosovo's European integration path, as the ratification
of the demarcation agreement with Montenegro remains
one of the requirements for visa liberalization with the
European Union.
Another divisive issue that has a negative impact on
the situation on the ground and undermines the efforts
to establish confidence and trust between the sides is
the ownership and structure of the Trepsca industrial
complex. We are concerned about the dangerous
inflammatory rhetoric that we have witnessed over the
past month on that issue. We urge the parties to engage
in more close consultations to find a way out of that
situation. It is important to negotiate a solution and
avoid further possible provocations and violence.

I would like to underscore that Ukraine commends
the expressed commitment of both sides to intensify
dialogue. That is what we need to focus on in the near
future. That is what we need to adhere to in order to
assure further stabilization of the situation, promote a
better atmosphere for talks and, at the end of the day,
ensure the prosperity of the whole region. I therefore
wish to express Ukraine's full support for the Secretary-
General's call on political leaders in Belgrade and
Pristina to demonstrate courage and political will and to
resume the high-level dialogue without delay. Belgrade
and Pristina need to move full speed ahead with the
implementation of the 19 April 2013 Brussels First
Agreement on Principles Governing the Normalization
of Relations by building trust among communities and
finding compromise on the most difficult issues.

A certain role in that process is still played by the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo. However, we need to look to the future. It is
high time to seriously consider our next steps of how
to rationalize the Mission in terms of restructuring or
downsizing, as well as to review the Council's timetable
of consideration of the situation in Kosovo and its
relevant reporting cycle, given the progress already
achieved. We join the United Kingdom, New Zealand,
Japan and others on that issue.

