Mr. Melescanu (Romania): At the outset, allow me
to express our appreciation to the Kuwaiti presidency
for convening this timely and important debate on the
working methods of the Security Council, as well as
to Ms. Karin Landgren, Executive Director of Security
Council Report, and to Mr. James Cockayne, Director of
United Nations University Centre for Policy Research,
for their excellent presentations and briefings.

I would also like to personally thank you,
Mr. President, in your capacity as Chair of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, for your consistent contribution
to the development and improvement of the working
methods of the Security Council.

Romania approaches this debate as a strong
supporter of multilateralism. We believe there is an
intrinsic link between discussing the working methods
of the Council and reinforcing multilateralism. As
a country that has had the privilege of serving in the
Security Council before and is running for re-election
tomorrow for the 2020-2021 mandate, Romania has
worked to strengthen the capacity of the Security
Council to increase its effectiveness in achieving
its mandate.

Please allow me to showcase three instances in
which Romania has done so.

First, during our most recent mandate from 2004 to
2005, we promoted resolution 1631 (2005) - the very
first United Nations resolution on cooperation with
regional organizations - which was adopted by the
Security Council under the Romanian presidency of the
Council. In that context, we restate our strong support
for the systematic practice of the Council in briefing
different regional organizations and mechanisms, such
as the European Union or the African Union.

Secondly, Romania has significantly contributed
to advancing cooperation with non-Council bodies,
most notably with the Peacebuilding Commission.
A significant number of delegations have asked for
closer cooperation between the Security Council and
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). We are proud to
say that during our presidency of the PBC, the practice
of holding regular consultations within the Security
Council was institutionalized.

Last but not least, Romania formally contributed
to advancing the discussions on the working methods
of the Council at the seventy-first session of the
General Assembly, when the Permanent Representative
of Romania, together with his Tunisian colleague,
co-chaired the intergovernmental negotiations on the
question of equitable representation on and increase
in the membership of the Security Council and other
matters related to the Security Council.

We commend the progress that has been achieved in
the past couple of years in adapting the methods of work
to address emerging security challenges. In that regard,
we reiterate our support for the regular updating of the
note by the President (S/2017/507, annex), known as
note 507, and we will continue to support its provisions
and invite newly elected members of the Council to
observe Council meetings, perhaps as early as three
months prior to their membership of the Council.
Please allow me to recall also the essential role
that the 10 non-permanent members play in the good
functioning of the Council. Romania welcomes the
unity of the non-permanent members of the Security
Council on that issue, which stands as an example for
the activity of the Council. If elected tomorrow as a
non-permanent member of the Council, we will work
assiduously so that the momentum of that collaboration
will not be lost.

Yet more can be done on certain topics. For
example, we would like to have more time to hear from
people on the ground, especially representatives of civil
society or representatives of affected populations, such
as women and youth affected by conflict.

In a world that is constantly changing and faced with
emerging security threats and challenges, the Council
needs to have the ability to adapt to those changes.
We reiterate our strong conviction that holding these
debates and improving the transparency, accountability,
efficiency and predictability of the Council, is without
a doubt one of the key ways to do so.

