Mr. El Hadj Ali (Algeria) (spoke in French): My
delegation is delighted to have you here among us,
Mr. Minister. I would like to thank Mr. Soren Jessen-
Petersen for his dynamic work at the head of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), for the initiatives that he has taken,
in particular regarding the organization of a forum of
Kosovo political leaders, and for his fine introduction
of the report of the Secretary-General (S/2005/335) on
the situation in Kosovo. I also welcome Mr. Nebojsa
Covic, President of the Coordination Centre of Serbia
and Montenegro and of the Republic of Serbia for
Kosovo.

Today's debate has enabled us to assess the
progress made in the process of stabilization and
normalization of the overall situation in Kosovo.
Significant progress has been made in a variety of
fields, notably as regards the implementation of
reforms and the strengthening of local institutions. In
that connection, we welcome the actions undertaken by
the coalition Government and the local authorities in
the framework of the process of detente and of
improvement in the socio-economic situation of the
inhabitants of Kosovo.

We have noted with interest the encouraging
results regarding freedom of movement and the return
of displaced populations. To be sure, progress in this
area remains limited, but its impact is significant in
confidence-building and in promoting reconciliation
among Kosovans. It is also of utmost importance to
recall the need for all Kosovans both to support the
democratic process and to participate in the
management of local institutions. In that regard, we
believe that the resumption of dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina constitutes a positive step in
developing closer links among Kosovans and in
improving relations between the parties concerned.

The noteworthy progress made in the overall
situation in Kosovo deserves the full attention and
support of all. Nonetheless, it remains insufficient vis-
a-vis the standards established by the international
community. The international community must
therefore create the conditions for the comprehensive
implementation and success of those standards, and
proceed, as soon as possible, to a review of the basic
question of Kosovo's final status. In that regard, we
support the idea of the Secretary-General to appoint a
Special Envoy.

