Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): We would
first like to thank you, Madam President, for convening
this important meeting. We also thank General Maqsood
Ahmed, General Kazura, General Singha and General
Dos Santos Cruz for their thorough briefings, as well
as Mr. Herve Ladsous for all his efforts in working to
maintain peace.

Jordan is proud of its essential contributions to
United Nations peacekeeping operations, which show
our clear commitment to the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and the Organization's
noble goals. Based on our experience in the various
peacekeeping operations we have taken part in, we
reaffirm the importance, for our Force Commanders
in peacekeeping operations, of transparency, integrity
and neutrality in our peacekeeping forces as they carry
out their work. It is important that all peacekeeping
operations whose mandate includes the protection
of civilians develop comprehensive protection
strategies, which must be included in each mission's
implementation and emergency plans. They should be
regularly and efficiently evaluated; it is important that
clear and adequate assessments be done of missions'
resources and human and logistical capacities and that
they take into account the requirements for mandates
to protect civilians and missions' capacities to fully
implement their mandates.

The United Nations has established rapid-reaction
structures to help missions achieve more with limited
forces, but the dangers facing peacekeepers have
increased, as have the Organization's costs, particularly
in View of the fact that many missions are conducting
extremely complex operations, particularly in fragile
States and those involved in serious conflicts. Regarding
the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
is dealing with a number of obstacles to its fulfilment of
its mandate, particularly its limited resources. Despite
MONUSCO's progress in halting serious violations of
human rights and consolidating State authority in the
eastern part of the country, we are concerned about the
continuing crimes being perpetrated on civilians there
and about the continuing attacks on Mission personnel.
We call on the Congolese Government and MONUSCO
itself to improve cooperation in implementing their
mechanisms for justice and accountability in order
to achieve concrete results. We urge the Mission to
continue its efforts to make more progress with the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
every faction, particularly the Forces democratiques
de liberation du Rwanda, and especially since the
ongoing armed activities of the armed groups affects
the Congolese Government's implementation of its
disarmament plans, which has now gone on for six
months.

Regarding the recent events in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in June and August, and
MONUSCO's investigation and its support for the
deployment of the investigative team, made up
of officials from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo's legal and military sectors, such attacks
affect the Mission's capacity to ensure the necessary
protection of civilians and reveal the weak points in
the implementation of its mandate. In that regard, we
would like to ask the Force Commander the following
questions. Does the Force Commander believe that
such events show that the rules of engagement should
be clarified in order to ensure the implementation of
the Force's broad mandate, including underscoring the
protection of civilians and strengthening the Mission's
legitimacy in the eyes of the local civilian population.

Peacekeeping operations face challenges not only
in terms of the lack of resources to meet the needs on
the ground. The United Nations capacity to address
challenges that jeopardize the safety and security of
peacekeeping personnel must also be strengthened.
That must be an absolute priority. The ongoing clashes,
the tragic consequences and the current security
situation as a result of the presence of armed groups
in northern Mali all demonstate the need to undertake
greater efforts to achieve lasting stability.

We would like to ask a question with regard to the
most recent developments in Mali. What can we do to
help the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali to impose the rule of
law in the northern part of the country, in particular
given the delicate security situation and the ongoing
attacks against Mission personnel? The credibility of
peacekeeping operations depends upon the effective
implementation of the mandate. The Security
Council must continue to ensure that the mandates of
peacekeeping operations are clear, credible, realistic
and subject to review.

We reiterate our support for the Secretary-General's
recommendation to reconfigure the Mission's political
role so that it can undertake a good offices role. We call
on the international community to increase its support
to the Mission so that it can execute its mandates and
strengthen its capacity to restore stability.

Finally, we would like to share our concerns about
the deteriorating situation in the Golan, the area of
operations of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force, and its inability to implement its
mandate, since the presence of United Nations troops is
limited to certain bases. That reflects the deteriorating
situation and growing instability. We underscore the
need for the Mission to ensure the security of the
UNDOF staff and to faciliate their return to their
original positions in the Golan.

