Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Like others have
done, I too would like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Pascoe for his comprehensive briefing, as well
as the Permanent Observer of Palestine for his
contribution to today's debate.

The situation in the Middle East remains unstable
and very fragile. The protracted lack of progress on
almost every front is disconcerting, to say the least. As
has so often been stated in the Chamber, time is of the
essence.

The conflict has continued for more than 60
years. With the increasing problems faced by the
region, the sense of urgency has never been so acute.
We need strong political motivation and a spirit of
compromise from all sides, as well as the robust
involvement of the international community and its
main players to ensure the conditions and support
necessary for political solutions that will bring about
peace, stability, security and economic and social
progress to all parties in the region.

Portugal is deeply concerned about the situation
and, as a member of the European Union (EU), shares
the position that will be expressed by the EU's
representative during this debate.

The situation in the occupied Palestinian territory
remains one of great concern, as does the impasse on
any serious and fruitful negotiations. We support
United States commitments and efforts to relaunch a
credible peace process that brings the parties to direct
negotiations. But we must recognize that an agreement
on all final status issues remains elusive. We know
what the basic ingredients for such an agreement are,
as well as the core issues that have to be negotiated.
What is lacking is the political will to address them.

On the other hand, developments on the ground
continue to seriously undermine confidence in the
process, to thwart attempts at moving negotiations
forward and to erode the prerequisites of the two-State
solution, advocated not only by the international
community but by the parties themselves.

Building on occupied territory proceeds unabated,
as do demolitions and evictions, in violation of
international law and undermining the viability of the
Palestinian State. The recent partial demolition of the
Shepherd Hotel and the extension of Gilo are
particularly worrying in this context. Portugal deeply
regrets Israel's decision not to extend the moratorium,
as requested by the international community, as well as
the resumption of settlement activity as soon as the
moratorium ended.

It is in that context that we must look at the draft
resolution submitted yesterday by Lebanon, with the
wide support of the Members of the United Nations.
Indeed settlements, including in East Jerusalem, are
illegal under international law and are an obstacle to
peace. We therefore once again call upon the
Government of Israel to reconsider its decision and to
abide by its international obligations and its
commitments under the Road Map, including
dismantling all outposts erected since March 2001. I
recall that the Fourth Geneva Convention applies to the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem.

Portugal condemns all actions that undermine
trust and opposes all unilateral actions that prejudge
the outcome of negotiations on permanent status
issues, including Jerusalem, which is called to be the
capital of two States. We recall that the annexation of
East Jerusalem is not recognized by the international
community.

Notwithstanding the easing of movement in
certain areas, of which we take positive note, many
obstacles continue to restrict or impede free movement
and access throughout the West Bank. In addition to
the difficulties they impose on daily life and the
unwarranted humiliations they often entail, they also
hamper the economic development of the West Bank.

Portugal also unequivocally condemns the
indiscriminate firing of mortars and rockets by
extremist groups in Gaza against civilian populations
in Israel, in direct contravention of international law,
and calls for their immediate halt. We are deeply
concerned about the escalation of these terrorist attacks
during the past month.

We also note with concern, and condemn, the

continued captivity of Staff Sergeant Shalit. We call for

his release. It is unacceptable that he continues to be

detained and denied humanitarian access. Portugal

fully supports the ongoing efforts to secure his
peaceful release.

Portugal takes note of some progress in the
situation in Gaza. The measures undertaken by Israel
are a step in the right direction. However, much more
needs to be done to enable the full economic recovery
of the Gaza strip, ensure the reconstruction of homes,
infrastructure and businesses and meet the
humanitarian needs of the people of Gaza. Exports,
which are a key component of Gaza's recovery, remain
limited to a few shipments of agricultural goods.
Portugal therefore calls upon Israel to allow the
immediate and sustained opening of crossings for the
flow of humanitarian aid, commercial goods and
persons to and from Gaza, in accordance with
resolution 1860 (2009).

For the past 60 years, the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) has played, and continues to play, an
essential role in lessening the suffering of Palestinian
refugees. Portugal fully supports UNRWA and greatly
appreciates the dedication and commitment of its staff,
who work in circumstances that are most challenging.

Palestinian reconciliation is another issue that
sadly remains at an impasse. We commend and fully
support Egypt's tireless efforts in this regard and call
upon our Arab partners and other parties in the region
to contribute positively to these endeavours.

Prime Minister Fayyad and his Government are
progressing steadily in preparing Palestinian
institutions for Statehood. We commend them for their
efforts and results. We recall the World Bank's recent
assessment of the Palestinian Authority's current
performance in institution-building and delivery of
public services.

But achievements on the institution-building
track need to be consolidated with solid advances on
the negotiation track if Palestinians are to continue to
have faith in the peaceful pursuit of their Statehood.
We therefore call upon Palestinian and Israeli leaders
to respond positively to efforts seeking the resumption
of meaningful negotiations on all core issues. We
encourage them to engage actively and constructively
in such an endeavour. The time has come for them to
show leadership, vision and courage.

As I said, the general outlines of a final
negotiated solution are well known. The relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Madrid terms of
reference, including land for peace, the Road Map, the
agreements previously reached by the parties and the
Arab Peace Initiative remain the basis of such a
settlement.

None of us can afford another missed
opportunity, adding to the list that goes from Oslo to
Annapolis, through Camp David and Taba. We urge the
parties not to waste any more time and encourage them
to build upon past negotiations during which a number
of concrete final status proposals were discussed.

The international community must remain
committed to assisting the parties in proceeding with
the bold and difficult decisions that await them.
Portugal looks forward to the active involvement of the
Quartet and to a fruitful and forward-looking discussion
at its next meeting, bearing mind the 12-month period it
set to reach a framework agreement.

Twenty years after Madrid, the peace we all
envision for the Middle East is a lasting and
comprehensive one that leads to the creation of a viable
Palestinian State and to the full integration of Israel in
its regional environment, along the lines set out in the
Arab Peace Initiative. Portugal therefore supports close
cooperation between the Quartet and its Arab partners.
It is time for the international community to fully
assume its responsibilities.

Allow me two words on the situation in Lebanon.
Recent developments in that country have once again
brought to the fore fears of renewed instability. The
Secretary-General has rightly emphasized the
importance of maintaining calm. Stability in Lebanon
is crucial to the whole of the region. We call upon all
Lebanese political forces to refrain from actions that
may escalate tensions and to seek a negotiated political
solution to the current situation.

We further reiterate our full support for the work
of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon, established at the
request of the Government of Lebanon with a clear
mandate from the Security Council. Its work proceeds
in accordance with the legal principles and standards
applied by all international tribunals.

Portugal also reiterates its commitment to
Lebanon's sovereignty and independence. We fully
support the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon,
in which we participate, and the active role it plays in
ensuring the full implementation of resolution 1701
(2006) and maintaining the calm along the Blue Line.
We call upon all parties to put an end to all violations
of that resolution.

