Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I
thank High Representative Inzko for his work and his
briefing today. We reiterate our support for him and his
Office, as well as for the Council's mandate and the
European Union (EU) military mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and we commend his continued efforts in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

On behalf of my Government, I want to congratulate
the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina on some of the
very positive progress that has been made since the
Council met in November (see S/PV.7308), most notably
the formation of a new Government following general
elections in October 2014. Although the process has
not been without some rough patches, this is a major
achievement that must be acknowledged. With elections
completed and Governments formed, we encourage
elected officials to take seriously the promises they
have made to pursue an ambitious and necessary set of
political and economic reforms, focusing on investment
and economic growth as a priority. In that regard,
statements by the respective Prime Ministers have been
encouraging, and we are now looking for actions to back
those statements, particularly in the implementation of
badly needed socioeconomic reform.

We congratulate the Bosnian Government's formal
decision to commit to the EU integration process, and
we commit to supporting Bosnia and Herzegovina's
express goal of Euro-Atlantic integration. The country's
14 political leaders, its Presidency and its Parliamentary
Assembly have endorsed a commitment to pursuing
reforms necessary for Bosnia and Herzegovina to
advance on the EU track, and the United States welcomes
the EU Foreign Affair Council's decision of 21 April
concluding the EU Stabilization and Association
Agreement with Bosnia and Herzegovina. When it
comes into force on 1 June, Bosnia and Herzegovina
will have an opportunity to make real progress on its
integration into the EU.

On the specific issue of defence property
registration, one of the conditions for ending
international supervision of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
we were pleased to see that authorities have made some
progress through the registration of three properties
in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We will
continue to work with Bosnia and Herzegovina's leaders
to ensure the registration of the remaining properties
so that the country will be able to activate its NATO
membership action plan.

We also welcome Bosnia and Herzegovina's efforts
to address the issue of foreign fighters heading into
Syria. Bosnia and Herzegovina is an integral member
of the counter-Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
coalition and has provided needed ammunition to
the Iraq security forces. We are also grateful for the
country's active participation in our efforts to counter
violent extremism.

Bosnia and Herzegovina's armed forces have
benefited greatly from the presence of the European
Union military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(EUFOR). As we reiterated to the Council last
November, the United States fully supports the efforts
of EUFOR to mentor the country's armed forces to
ensure that Bosnia and Herzegovina has the tools
needed to respond to crises. We welcome Bosnia and
Herzegovina's active contribution to United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

The United States also shares the concerns of
High Representative Inzko about a number of issues
he referred to today, which he wrote about more fully
in his report (S/2015/300, annex). One of our greatest
concerns has been the continuing actions by Republika
Srpska President Dodik that undermine Bosnia and
Herzegovina's sovereignty and territorial integrity.
In March, Dodik's Alliance of Independent Social
Democrats party decided to boycott the State-level
Parliament. And he recently made statements calling
into question the authority of Bosnia and Herzegovina's
federal Government. He promised to put forward a
resolution for Republika Srpska independence unless
the entity was able to strengthen its autonomy by the end
of 2017. That is an unfortunate about-face for a leader
who, less than two months ago, committed to pursue
reforms that would bring the entire country of Bosnia
and Herzegovina closer to Europe. Those reforms
focus on improving the country's socioeconomic
and political conditions, with the goal of attracting
investment and creating jobs. The reforms also address
the needs on the ground and, once implemented, will
provide tangible benefits to all the peoples of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Nationalistic rhetoric not only runs
counter to the commitment that leaders have made,
it also threatens the integrity of the country and the
potential for much-needed economic assistance. The
Dayton Peace Agreement guarantees the existence of
both the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
Republika Srpska. We strongly condemn any action
that seeks to undermine the territorial integrity of the
Bosnian State.

Moreover, we are also concerned about democratic
backsliding in the Republika Srpska, whose law on
public order is a big and unfortunate step backward.
The law seeks to control digital media and social
networks by determining that the Internet is a "public
space" and leaves individuals subject to prosecution if
the Government determines that public order has been
threatened as a result of their online activities. Efforts
by the Republika Srpska to control online activities
through the threat of prosecution is a dangerous and
worrisome attempt to curb the freedom of speech.
That kind of censorship stunts democratic growth
and runs contrary to the values required for European
integration.

The Republika Srpska's lack of compliance with
its obligations to provide the High Representative with
timely access to officials, institutions and documents
is also of concern. In that regard, we reiterate call for
all authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina to cooperate
with the High Representative's request for information
and documents.

As the twentieth anniversary of Srebrenica
approaches, on 11 July, we are reminded that, while the
war in Bosnia and Herzegovina is over, much remains
to be done. All of us have a responsibility to remember
the horrors and atrocities, but we have an obligation
to do more than remember. We have an obligation to
vigorously and steadfastly oppose policies of hate and
discrimination. We continue to call for all ofBosnia and
Herzegovina's citizens and its leaders to work together
to pursue a common Vision for a secure and prosperous
future - or, in Mr. Inzko's words, a better tomorrow.

