Mr. Bolton (United States of America): We meet
in the aftermath of a vicious and despicable act of
terrorism in Tel Aviv. We should first express our
condolences to the families of the victims and to the
Government and the people of Israel, and also express
our outrage.
The burden of responsibility for preventing
terrorist attacks such as this one rests with the
Palestinian Authority. The United States has noted
reactions by several terrorist groups, including Hamas,
that defend and even applaud the act of terror in Tel
Aviv today, as we have noted President Abbas's quick
denunciation of it. Defence or sponsorship of terrorist
acts by officials of the Palestinian Cabinet will have
the gravest effect on relations between the Palestinian
Authority and all States seeking peace in the Middle
East.

The Quartet noted in its 30 March statement its
grave concern that the new Palestinian Government has
not committed to the principles of non-violence,
recognition of Israel and respect for previous
agreements and obligations between the parties,
including the road map.

The Palestinian Authority must be held
responsible for enforcing law and order and taking
immediate action to dismantle the infrastructure of
terrorism. We meet in the aftermath of a terrorist attack
in Tel Aviv that the Palestinian Government has,
despicably enough, actually supported. Not only is
there no action to prevent the launching of Qassam
rockets into Israel or to prevent terrorist attacks such as
that launched today, but such murderous and barbarous
attacks are actually defended.

We regret the loss of innocent life, including in
Gaza. The United Nations must play an even-handed
role in the Israel-Palestinian conflict, encouraging both
parties to take the necessary steps to make progress
along the road map. The United Nations cannot be seen
to favour one side over the other. But the United
Nations has repeatedly denounced terrorism and should
do so again now.

Unbalanced resolutions or statements undermine
the credibility of the United Nations and its ability to
be an honest broker. In last week's consultations aimed
at adopting a presidential statement, the United States
was willing to support a balanced statement calling on
both sides to refrain from taking any steps that could
escalate the situation. Unfortunately, we were unable to
achieve a balanced statement that acknowledged the
critical roles that both sides must play in fostering the
environment needed for progress along the road map.

Israel has a right to defend itself. To condemn
Israel for defending itself while failing to acknowledge
either the provocation of persistent Qassam rocket
attacks or the Palestinian Authority's responsibility for
taking action to stop the Qassam attacks is unworthy of
the Security Council.

In light of today's terrorist attack in Tel Aviv, it is
especially important to stress the responsibility of the
Palestinian Authority to take action to stop terrorism.
The Security Council cannot remain silent when
Hamas, the ruling party in the Palestinian Authority, is
supporting such attacks.

We also remain concerned about the humanitarian
needs of the Palestinian people. The United States has
long been a supporter of the Palestinian people through
substantial contributions of our foreign assistance
funds. On 7 April, the United States announced that it
would increase humanitarian aid to help Palestinians in
need. Basic human assistance - including health, food
and education - will increase by 57 percent, to a total
of $245 million. The United States will also provide
$42 million to strengthen civil society and independent
institutions. Assistance will be administered through
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East and other non-
Palestinian Authority actors, including local and
international non-governmental organizations.

The United States remains firmly committed to
the road map and to the vision of two democratic
States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace
and security. But to see progress along the road map,
there must be two partners. A Palestinian Authority
Government which refuses to accept its responsibility
to prevent acts of terror and punish the perpetrators of
such violence, and which by its unwillingness to
condemn such attacks gives at least tacit approval and
encouragement to terrorism, cannot be considered a
partner in peace.

In closing, I would note that Security Council
meetings such as this one today contribute very little to
improving the situation on the ground. These meetings
consume considerable time and resources but
ultimately produce nothing concrete. In fact, by
diverting our attention from the real issues we are not
advancing the cause of peace.

