Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I thank the United States for
having organized this open debate. I also express our
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his briefing.

The wide range of problems related to illicit
cross-border trafficking and movement has a grave
impact on people throughout the world, in developing
and developed countries alike. Their consequences are
widespread and cross-cutting, affecting human rights,
public security and sustainable development. It is not
clear, however, that the most appropriate and effective
way of addressing all the different manifestations of
illicit cross-border activities is by putting them into the
same category, as they may have different root causes
and implications for peace and security, and thus may
require different remedies.

We would argue, therefore, that the diverse
problems related to cross-border flows require a case-
by-case approach, taking due account of the specific
nature of each situation. We may well find that not
every incidence of illicit cross-border trafficking poses
a threat to international peace and security. It follows
that not every kind of trafficking is best dealt with
within the Council's purview. Human trafficking, in
particular, does not seem to belong there. The same
may apply to other forms, such as drug trafficking,
which may or may not pose such a threat.

In those cases where trafficking does constitute a
threat to peace and security, the Council may have a

role to play, in accordance with the Charter. Even then,
it must take into account the specific characteristics of
each situation and the need to cooperate with other
relevant bodies. More often than not, the Council's role
should be to focus on encouraging greater coordination
of existing initiatives on the ground, as well as on
strengthening the capacity of national authorities so
that they may better fulfil their responsibilities.

International efforts to curb trafficking depend
greatly on enhancing domestic capacities to fight the
problem. Coordinating action within the United
Nations family is especially important for finding the
best ways to help States tackle these challenges. The
multiplicity of cooperation tools available should allow
assistance to be effectively tailored to the problems
faced by each country. Regional and South-South
cooperation are also important in helping States
improve border protection, as they allow for an
exchange of information among countries with similar
experiences.

Sustained attention to underlying causes is also
critical to addressing illicit cross-border trafficking.
Such causes often include weak State institutions, lack
of development and social and economic exclusion.
The latter is usually a key factor in creating conditions
conducive to illicit border trafficking and movement.
Reducing poverty and generating opportunity,
especially for young people, must therefore be part of
any strategy against trafficking.

On the normative side, we must ensure that each
form of illicit trafficking is addressed in the context of
its own specificity. In the area of cooperation, we must
strengthen the capacity, coherence and coordination of
the United Nations system to assist States according to
their specific needs. By combining efforts on those two
fronts, the international community can address current
challenges more effectively and prevent them from
becoming actual threats to international peace and
security.

