Mr. Jaime Calderon (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish): El Salvador is grateful to France, as President
of the Security Council, for organizing this important
debate focused on children and armed conflict. We
express our commitment to the Council's work on
this agenda item. We also take note of the report of
the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict
(S/2017/821).

As a country that overcame an armed conflict
through negotiation, El Salvador is a faithful defender
of the commitment to peace and development. The
major progress achieved since that historic milestone
in 1992 in terms of democracy, the promotion of, and
respect for, human rights, and the consolidation of
State institutions have contributed to building stable
and lasting peace for the people of El Salvador. That
is why we recognize and underscore the importance
of protecting children in armed conflict, especially
through compliance with the international framework
of human rights, international humanitarian law and
international standards for child protection.

The promotion, protection and full enjoyment
by children and adolescents of their rights are a
priority to El Salvador. We have therefore made major
achievements in terms of the rights of the child and
adolescents, especially in the areas of education,
health and protection. We commend the work of the
Organization to facilitate and encourage dialogue on
child protection through various campaigns that have
included, in specific cases of negotiation, the issue of
child protection as an important point to be included in
peace agreements.

El Salvador has made a commitment those who
suffered as children during the internal armed conflict
in the 1980s. As a result, we have made progress
in developing legislation and institutions to protect
children, including signing and ratifying the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict. El
Salvador also recognizes that respecting and ensuring
human rights are essential pillars to establish a true rule
oflaw. As a result, we have made a serious commitment
to prevent, locate and identify disappeared persons,
especially boys and girls, as well as to support the
families of disappeared persons, investigate cases,
punish those responsible and provide comprehensive
reparations to the victims and their families.

El Salvador has recognized the rights of families to
know the whereabouts of children that were disappeared
during the armed conflict. To that end, since 2010 El
Salvador has in place a national search commission for
children disappeared during the internal armed conflict.
That commission investigates, locates, contacts and
reunites disappeared children with their biological
families. They also provide psychosocial support to
families who are Victims of forced disappearances.
From its establishment through December 2016, the
commission has recorded 295 cases and concluded
34 per cent of the investigations.

Furthermore, in October 2013 we set up a
reparations programme for victims of grave human
rights Violations that took place in the context of
the internal armed conflict, including the enforced
disappearance ofindividuals. We also created a council
responsible for the registry of victims of grave human
rights violations that took place in the context of the
internal armed conflict. El Salvador is promoting the
establishment of a State database of genetic profiles
for the localization of disappeared girls in the internal
armed conflict. All of that is in line with El Salvador's
initiatives at the United Nations, such as declaring
the date of 24 March as the International Day for the
Right to the Truth concerning Gross Human Rights
Violations and for the Dignity of Victims, established
through General Assembly resolution 65/196.

Turning to the Secretary-General's report on
children in armed conflict, we urge the Security Council
to request that personnel specifically dedicated to child
protection be included in peacekeeping operations of
the United Nations, in accordance with the provisions
of the new version of the Organization's policy to
protect children in its peacekeeping operations, in order
to make child protection a cross-cutting issue, enable
a dialogue on action plans and free and reintegrate
children into society. Likewise, and since this is a topic
where the link between international humanitarian law
and implementing human rights is undeniable, we would
like to reiterate our support to the process facilitated
for some years now by the International Committee of
the Red Cross in Geneva for the swift establishment of
an effective follow-up mechanism when it comes to the
application of international humanitarian law. We call
on all countries to demonstrate a constructive attitude
for such a timely process.

Lastly, El Salvador has recorded major achievements
in terms of rights of the child in various areas, while at
the same time we continue to seek solutions to current
challenges. Those achievements not only respond to
the mandate of adapting our national legislation to
the principles and provisions of the Convention on
the Rights of the Child, but also include the taking
of specific steps to shift towards a paradigm for
comprehensively protectiing children and adolescents.

