Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to thank the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the Secretary-General of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) for their presence here and for their briefings. Regional cooperation is a cornerstone of Belgium's foreign policy. Regional organizations are often the best placed to understand and overcome the specific challenges of their respective regions. South-East Asia is a region of overall stability, and regional cooperation has much to do with that. I particularly commend ASEAN for its work in the area of preventive diplomacy. We can undoubtedly learn a great deal from the organization in terms of the promotion of dialogue, confidence-building and conflict prevention. We also highlight the contribution of ASEAN countries to peace and stability beyond their borders through the generous provision of peacekeepers to United Nations missions. The training work carried out at the regional level, in accordance with the ASEAN-United Nations plan of action for 2016-2020, is of paramount importance in that regard. We therefore look forward to the new ASEAN- United Nations plan of action. Among the many areas of activity envisaged, climate change, transnational organized crime and human rights are, in our view, of particular importance. We support the engagement of the United Nations with the ASEAN Intergovernmental Commission on Human Rights and its Commission on the Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Women and Children. Moreover, ASEAN countries are among the most vulnerable to the impacts of climate change, particularly sea level rise. Regional cooperation is crucial in that regard, particularly through risk and impact reduction strategies. I would also like to mention two specific issues where ASEAN can play a positive and decisive role. First, regarding the resolution of disputes concerning the South China Sea, it is my hope that the parties will be able to address the issue peacefully, through dialogue, and comply with the provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. The current efforts of ASEAN member States and China to conclude a code of conduct on the South China Sea demonstrate that that wish is within reach. All the parties should therefore refrain from any unilateral action contrary to international law. In addition, they should promote confidence-building measures. Maritime safety and security and freedom of navigation and overflight, as well as the effective fight against piracy and armed robbery at sea, are at stake. Secondly, I would like to underline ASEAN's involvement, through its Coordinating Centre for Humanitarian Assistance on Disaster Management, in resolving the crisis in Rakhine state in Myanmar. Humanitarian access is a major concern and a strengthened role of ASEAN, complementary to that of the United Nations, would be very helpful in that regard. We encourage the AHA Centre to work to facilitate the voluntary, dignified and safe return of the Rohingya refugees. Belgium also stresses the importance of addressing the root causes of the conflict and of fighting impunity. In that context, I refer to the unanimous order issued by the International Court of Justice last week and emphasize the need to fully implement the provisional measures provided for therein. In conclusion, Belgium will continue to support the strengthening and deepening of synergies between the United Nations and ASEAN. The organizations are highly complementary and share the objectives not only of stability and peace, but also of promoting multilateralism and a rules-based international order.
