Mr. Ja'afari (Syria) (spoke in Arabic): I apologize

for asking for the floor again. I will not take too much

time. I would just like to share with the members of the

Security Council some information that has not been
part of this meeting.

First, I regret that no one mentioned the fact that
terrorists in the Wadi Barada region - outside of
Damascus near Madaya, which, as some members
already know is under siege, or so it is said - have
bombed the only source that provides drinking water to
the city of Damascus. That means that the inhabitants
of Damascus, 7 million civilians, have been deprived of
drinking water because the moderate armed/genetically
modified armed opposition blew up the main source of
water for the city.

Secondly, I would also like to remind the Council
that terrorists of the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria
burned alive a family in a public square - father,
mother and a 2-year-old child - because they wanted
to escape Raqqa. No one mentioned what happened
with this family or what occurred with the Wadi Barad
water source, not even Mr. O'Brien.

With regard to bombing Aleppo, there are
airstrikes from east Aleppo and from west Aleppo.
However, Mr. O'Brien did not say who was striking
from those parts of the city. They are the terrorists we
are fighting - the terrorists that the Western alliance
claims to be fighting. They are the terrorists who cross
over from Turkey, who are financed by the corrupt
regimes of the Gulf - Saudi Arabia and Qatar, to name
them. Those are terrorists who are striking Aleppo
from the east and the west.

We genuinely hope that, when the Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs wants to
talk about events in Syria and says that there is shelling,
he mentions the party striking. More than 100 people
were killed or injured in Damascus alone. I will send
the Council official letters including the names of the
victims - scores ofthem, women and children - killed
in Damascus, in restaurants and public parks. The
same goes for Aleppo. We therefore ask: who are the
perpetrators? Why was that not mentioned?

