Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): At the outset, I
would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Fernandez-Taranco for his detailed and comprehensive
briefing, his first before the Council.

Over the past six months the situation in the
Middle East has remained worrisome. Almost no
progress has been made on the implementation of
Security Council resolutions 1850 (2008) and 1860
(2009). Despite an announced ceasefire, incursions by
the Israeli armed forces into the occupied Palestinian
territory continued; Israeli imposition of restrictions
and blockades continued to inflict untold
psychological, physical and humanitarian damage upon
the very fabric of the civilian population in Gaza and
adversely affected reconstruction efforts by United
Nations agencies and the international donor
community. Israel's increased construction of
settlements in the West Bank and its ongoing pursuit of
the separation wall threatened to alter the legal status,
demographic composition and character of the
Palestinian territories before final status negotiations
could resume. And Israeli civilians continued to fall
Victim to rocket attacks.

In the face of that situation, we welcome the
intensified diplomatic efforts and the broad consensus
among the Quartet, Arab League members, regional
countries and the international community at large on
the pressing need for early resumption of a fully
fledged peace process on all tracks. We also welcome
the undertakings of the Palestinian Government to
consolidate progress in revitalizing the socio-economic
infrastructure, developing an effective security
structure and establishing functional institutions for a
future State. Those positive developments give us a
sense of guarded optimism.

For more than six decades, the Middle East has
been suffering from protracted hostilities and has fallen

short of achieving a steady state of peace, stability and
prosperity. Violence and counter-violence will not
contribute to a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in
the region which could ensure Israel's security and
achievement of the Palestinians' ultimate goal of
setting up an independent and viable State of their
own. Peaceful settlement of disputes, constructive
dialogue and good-faith negotiations can and should be
the only option to help bridge the rift and cultivate
confidence between the parties, which is so essential
after years of disruptive mistrust and confrontation.

Viet Nam continues to support the Road Map, the
Madrid terms of reference, the Arab Peace Initiative,
and it calls for strict implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions. We urge the new Israeli
Government to stay the course towards settling the
crisis on the basis of a two-State solution, freeze illegal
settlement activity, dismantle outposts erected since
March 2001, allow unhindered access of humanitarian
assistance, open all border crossings and resolve the
fate of all Palestinian prisoners. We also urge the
Palestinian factions to promote national reconciliation
and to rally behind the Palestinian National Authority
in preparation for the establishment of a national unity
government and future statehood. We commend the
role played by the Arab countries in that regard.

To relieve the suffering of the people in Gaza, we
call upon the parties concerned to strictly abide by
international humanitarian and human rights law and
extend necessary cooperation to relief operations being
conducted by United Nations agencies and
humanitarian organizations.

While welcoming the successful conduct of the
parliamentary elections in Lebanon early last month,
we remain concerned, however, about the recent
security incidents in south Lebanon and support the
investigation process carried out by the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon and the Lebanese Armed
Forces. At this critical juncture, we underline the
importance of maximum restraint among the parties
and the assurance of safety and security for United
Nations peacekeepers, humanitarian workers and the
local population. We urge Israel to cease flights over
Lebanese territory and to withdraw from the northern
part of Ghajar village and an adjacent area north of the
Blue Line. We continue to support collective efforts
aimed at ensuring full implementation of resolution
1701 (2006).
