Mr. Sipaco Ribala (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation wishes at the outset to
thank Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI),
for her very detailed, clear and comprehensive report.

At our most recent meeting, held in February (see S/PV.8463), on the situation in Iraq, we expressed our
warm congratulations to the Iraqi people, Government
and political leaders, who, despite the setbacks, were
able to successfully navigate the major political events
of 2018, which led to the creation of a new Government,
a process that is about to be completed.

We believe that this is the right direction to take
and that the Iraqis should follow up as an important step
forward towards full democracy, political stability and
the creation of a sustainable and safe environment. We
welcome the role of UNAMI throughout this process,
as reflected in the continuing support it is providing
to the local authorities in the various aspects of the
process of the reconstruction of the Iraqi State.

However, in order to be more effective, before
anything else the process of forming the Government
must be finalized. To that end, all stakeholders must
overcome their internal differences and fill the vacant
Government department posts as quickly as possible.
Here we hope that the Government will consider
appointing women and minorities, who can also play an
important role throughout this process.
We are also concerned that the delay in completing
the formation of the Government could lead to neglecting
the regular implementation of the governmental
programme for 2018-2022, whose goal is to guide the
Government's activities in response to generalized
public concern regarding poor living conditions, the
lack of basic services, unemployment and requirements
for reconstruction.

We welcomed the announcement in March by
Prime Minister Adil Abd Al-Mahdi regarding his
Government's development of a comprehensive national
anti-corruption strategy. We hope that the discussions
in the Supreme Council for Combating Corruption on
the challenges and priority areas for achieving greater
transparency will produce results that can in practice
be a true success and will gain public trust.

As brothers, politicians in Baghdad and Erbil
must recognize and accept that dialogue is the normal
channel for dealing with matters that relate to them, and
that the commitments between them must be fulfilled
voluntarily in order to promote trust. In that regard, we
hope that the adoption of the 2019 federal budget law
will not be problematic for their relations.

We welcome the initiative of the current Iraqi
Government to strengthen relations with countries in
its region for the sake ofmutual political, economic and
security benefits, which would help to promote not only
the positioning ofIraq but also that ofthe other States. In
that regard, we encourage all countries in the region to
promote the development of good-neighbourly relations
based on the fundamental principles of respect for the
sovereign equality and territorial integrity of States.

The Government of Iraq now faces the problem
of taking in the large number of returning fighters
from the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and their
families, including women and children. They all have
different needs to be met. Obviously, the international
community must support the Government in that
arduous task. However, Member States must take
responsibility for their own nationals and attempt to
deal with them according to the law, such as through
prosecution, rehabilitation or reintegration.

Finally, my delegation would like to encourage
the Iraqi Government to strengthen cooperation with
Kuwait and other States on the issue of missing Kuwaiti
citizens and third-country nationals and the return of
Kuwaiti property, including the national archives.

