Mr. Salam (Lebanon): At the outset, I would like
to extend my congratulations to you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the current month. I would also like to recognize
your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of Viet
Nam, for his effective stewardship of the Council last
month.

First and foremost, my Government would like to
thank, through you, Mr. President, all members of the
Council for the decision taken today to renew for
another year the mandate of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). I am sure you are aware
how important today's Council decision is to my fellow
Lebanese citizens, who have been the victims of
repeated Israeli aggressions since the 1978 invasion,
which led to the adoption of Security Council
resolution 425 (1978) and to the creation of the first
UNIFIL. We would also like to take this opportunity to
commend UNIFIL for its remarkable work; to praise
the wise and courageous leadership of its Commander,
General Graziano; and to thank all troop-contributing
countries and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations.

In two days' time, it will be the second
anniversary of the adoption of Council resolution 1701
(2006). During those two years, the Lebanese
Government has reaffirmed time and again its
commitment to the full implementation of the
resolution in its entirety and to working closely with
UNIFIL in pursuit of security and stability in its area of
operations. What greater evidence of the seriousness of
that commitment could there be than the deployment of
the Lebanese army in the south promptly after the
adoption of resolution 1701 (2006)? Let me also
mention the appreciation of my Government for the
technical support provided by the two Lebanon
Independent Border Assessment Team (LIBAT)
missions and assure the Council that it will continue to
give due consideration to the LIBAT reports.
3

We need to acknowledge the fact that resolution
1701 (2006), two years after its adoption, has not been
fully implemented. What else can we conclude when
Israel continues to violate Lebanese airspace on a daily
basis, as stated by the Secretary-General in his seventh
report on the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006)
(S/2008/425); when Israel persists in its refusal to hand
over to the United Nations the maps of the deadly
cluster bombs it has planted in the fields and farms of
southern Lebanon; when Israel does not withdraw from
the northern part of Al-Ghajar village; and when a
solution to the Shabaa Farms issue, as proposed by the
Lebanese Government in its seven-point plan, has not
yet been reached?

Accordingly, can there still be any doubt about
the identity of the party that must be held responsible
for obstructing the full implementation of resolution
1701 (2006). Indeed, res ipsa loquitur - the thing
speaks for itself, says the legal adage.

Moreover, it is surprising that Mr. Ehud Barak,
Defence Minister of Israel, continues to refuse to meet
General Graziano, the Commander of UNIFIL, to
discuss the situation on the Lebanese border and the
implementation of United Nations Security Council
resolution 1701 (2006). "I've been asking for a
meeting with Barak for six months, but they keep
putting me off", Graziano is reported to have said,
according to the Israeli daily Haaretz. On 22 August
2008, Haaretz also reported that Graziano has been
complaining that he has not been able to meet Israeli
Chief-of-Staff Ashkenazi either.

More disturbing, however, is the fact that Israeli
officials, including Prime Minister Olmert, have
recently been launching a series of alarming threats
against Lebanon under various pretexts and allegations.
This prompted our Prime Minister, Mr. Fuad Siniora, to
write to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon on 22 August,
warning that the current ongoing violations by Israel of
Security Council resolution 1701 (2006), coupled with
recurring statements containing the threat of the use of
force and coercion against Lebanon, raised serious
concerns about Israeli intentions.

Mr. Siniora urged him to address firmly Israel's
defiance of its obligations to fully abide by the letter
and spirit of United Nations Security Council
resolution 1701 (2006).

Against this background, I am confident that the
Council will understand why I would like to thank it
for the important resolution adopted today. It carries an
unequivocal and renewed commitment to the territorial
integrity, independence and sovereignty of my country.

