Mr. Apakan: I thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
security situation in eastern Ukraine. I will also provide
an update on the challenges in the implementation of
the Minsk agreements, the impact on civilians and the
longer-term consequences of the ongoing fighting.

Since January the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring
Mission has recorded over 100,000 ceasefire violations.
Following a short pause in the level of violence during
Easter, fighting increased again. Most of the fighting
has remained concentrated in critical areas such as
those around Svitlodarsk and Avdiivka, in the Donetsk
region. Most of the kinetic activity recorded by the
Special Monitoring Mission this year took place in
those two hotspots. We also see that areas that have
remained relatively calm thus far are at risk of further
flare-ups, namely, Horlivka.

I am briefing from Minsk, where tomorrow, under
the auspices of the Trilateral Contact Group, we will
convene the Working Group on Security Issues. In
that context, let me emphasize that there is an urgent
need to agree on the additional measures that would
make the ceasefire sustainable and irreversible. The
disengagement of forces, which the sides agreed
to complete under the September 2016 framework
decision, has remained stalled. The lack of willingness
to take the process further may erode the trust and the
resolve of the sides.

Violence is indiscriminate. Since the beginning
of the year, the Special Monitoring Mission has
recorded the use of weapons and artillery, including
multiple-launch rocket systems, tanks and mortars, on
over 5,000 occasions. All those weapons should have
been withdrawn according to the Minsk agreements. A
renewed effort is needed in that regard. The withdrawal
of heavy weapons - including from specific
sectors - in phases and beginning with populated
areas, should be a priority. Such deadly weapons are
often placed in residential areas and cause destruction
and casualties among civilians. The Special Monitoring
Mission remains ready to monitor and verify the
withdrawal process.

With regard to the protection ofcivilians and civilian
infrastructure, I would like to highlight the situation of
the Donetsk filtration station. The functioning of this
critical civilian infrastructure, which ensures drinkable
water to the population of the area and beyond - over
300,000 people - is at risk. Ceasefire violations in
the area have increased in recent weeks. Recently,
employees of the station were wounded by gunfire.
Since then the Mission has increased its presence in the
area. New damage caused by shelling is exacerbating
the deteriorating infrastructure, which requires regular
maintenance and repair. Nevertheless, the Mission
continues to facilitate dialogue on the ground with a
view to establishing a window of silence that would
allow that much needed repair work to take place.

The Special Monitoring Mission also continues to
document the cost of the conflict and cases of casualties
among civilians. Since the beginning of the year, the
Special Monitoring Mission has corroborated the
cases of 107 casualties among civilians. Most of those
casualties were caused by either shelling incidents or
mines, unexploded ordnance and improvised explosive
devices. Most of them took place in April and May. In
the report of the Mission published today, we described
how a couple, an elderly man and two boys suffered as
a result of the current violence. Mines and unexploded
ordnance litter the areas close to the contact line. It will
take years, probably decades, to fully decontaminate
those areas. Yet, despite explicit agreements on mine
action, the Mission observes that new mines are still
being laid. As violence continues, the conflict is
reshaping peoples' lives, creating an artificial divide
between communities. Recently, representatives of a
local women's group living close to the contact line in
the Donetsk region shared their greatest sorrow with
the Mission: they could no longer regularly visit their
children living on the other side of the contact line. As
long as the components for armed violence are still in
place, the risk for escalation remains. We need political
will for a renewed impetus. The people of Ukraine in
and around the contact line are looking for a normal
life, peace and stabilization.

In conclusion, I would like to acknowledge the work
of the members of the Special Monitoring Mission,
the dedicated men and women with whom I have the
honour to work. Their safety is our priority, and I have
to note that, regretfully, threats to Mission personnel
and assets, as well as restrictions on freedom of
movement, continue, mostly in areas not controlled by
the Government. The Special Monitoring Mission, an
unarmed civilian mission, will continue to implement
its mandate with impartiality.
I wish to thank the Council once again for the
opportunity to share the observations of the OSCE
Special Monitoring Mission. I also wish to express
my gratitude for the close cooperation with the United
Nations agencies in Ukraine, both in Kyiv and in
the field.

