Mr. Pressman (United States of America): Earlier
this week, the outgoing head of the delegation of the
International Committee of the Red Cross in South
Sudan described the horrific attacks - including rape,
abduction and murder - that his teams have observed
in that country. Let me read some of what he told a
reporter:

"Civilians have been directly targeted, houses are
burned, properties destroyed and the people are
literally running for their lives."

"We went to one village to distribute aid and our
teams were told they had been attacked some days
earlier, and 90 women had been abducted. After
several days, only about 60 of them came back."

"Women have been attacked while they have been
seeking refuge. Those who are abducted may be
forcefully married, enslaved or killed."

Again, that is the account of the outgoing head
of the delegation of the International Committee
of the Red Cross, an institution that is known for
its neutrality. It aligns with similar reports from
multiple sources - journalists, human rights groups,
humanitarian workers, United Nations staff and
others - of widespread atrocities against civilians, and
in particular against women and girls.

We are here today to support the hard-earned
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan, and to respond to the fighting
that persists in spite of repeated pledges by both
sides to commit to peace. Resolution 2241 (2015) is
the beginning of a process to ensure that the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) has the
tools it needs to support the implementation of the
peace Agreement, which is essential to ending the cycle
of violence in South Sudan.

Let me briefly highlight what thie resolution
does. The resolution amends the UNMISS mandate to
undertake a series of immediate steps to support the
peace Agreement. No changes have been made to the
Mission's core tasks of protecting civilians, monitoring
and investigating human rights abuses and violations,
and creating conditions in which humanitarian
assistance can reach people in need. The resolution
asks the United Nations to provide, within 45 days, an
assessment and recommendations to improve UNMISS
civilian and force-structure capabilities so that the
Mission can help implement the peace Agreement
and the core tasks of its mandate. That review is
essential for the Mission to better address the growing
numbers of people in protection-of-civilian camps, the
hundreds of thousands of South Sudanese in need of
assistance, and the ongoing violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law, which must be
rigorously documented and whose perpetrators must be
held accountable.

This resolution reflects the consensus we witnessed
on 29 September at the high-level meeting on South
Sudan, convened during the General Assembly's high-
level week, when the international community spoke
in a single voice about the critical importance of the
signatories and other stakeholders fully supporting
the implementation of the peace Agreement. However,
while the resolution reflects that consensus and is
focused on ensuring that UNMISS can fulfil its role in
supporting the peace Agreement, some have attempted
to distract from its aims. Therefore let me briefly
respond to some of those criticisms.

The resolution expresses our continued commitment
to maintain pressure on both sides, neither of which has
fully complied with its ceasefire obligations. That is
fully consistent with the strong warning issued by the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union in its
communique of 26 September

"that it will not tolerate any further violations and,
in line with its previous pronouncements, expresses
its determination to impose measures against all
those who would impede the implementation of this
Agreement".

The resolution makes clear our shared responsibility
to ensure that the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan is adequately equipped to fulfil its mandate in
support of the peace Agreement.

Eight of the 15 countries represented on the
Council, including the United States, have troops
or police serving in UNMISS. If we are going to ask
peacekeepers to risk their lives to protect civilians,
monitor ceasefires and fulfil other duties under a
mandate the Council has adopted, then surely it is our
collective duty to ensure that they have the tools and
technological capabilities needed to fulfil their mission
and do so safely. The Department of Peacekeeping
Operations has told the Security Council precisely what
it needs in order to keep troop and police contributors
safe and empower them to do their job. It is incumbent
upon the Council to deliver, as we have. History has
repeatedly demonstrated how dangerous it is to deploy
peacekeepers who are not adequately equipped to do
what is asked of them.

Finally, the resolution affirms the Council's
unwavering commitment to advancing accountability
for the crimes that have been perpetrated against the
people of South Sudan, including by providing support
to the accountability mechanisms outlined in the peace
Agreement. In this respect, the resolution responds
directly to the 26 September request of the Peace and
Security Council ofthe African Union, which asked the
United Nations Security Council to support and assist
its efforts to promote justice.

In the context of this horrific conflict, justice is not
a choice - it is a necessity. Ensuring that perpetrators
are punished for their abuses and that victims have
access to justice is an essential part of building a
lasting peace, not an obstacle to it. The hybrid court
proposed by the Agreement could play an important
role in that effort, and the resolution reaffirms the
Security Council's commitment to staying involved in
the development of that institution.

In conclusion, we know the profound stakes of
securing peace in South Sudan. We have witnessed
the devastating consequences of the violence - in the
words of that Red Cross officer, of women and girls
being abducted and raped and of people "literally
running for their lives". It is the welfare of the South
Sudanese people - a people who have already endured
so much - that drove our collective efforts to support
a peace Agreement, to press the warring parties to
abide by their commitments, and to see that United
Nations peacekeepers are equipped to do their part
in its implementation. This resolution continues that
important effort.

