Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): I would like to thank
Kuwait, in its capacity as President of the Security
Council for the month of February, for convening today's
open debate on the working methods of the Council.

This debate is a testimony to the genuine interest
of all Member States in working to enhance the
transparency, inclusivity, and openness of the Council.
The Council deliberates and discusses the maintenance
of international peace and security in accordance
with Article 24 of the Charter of the United Nations. I
would like to recognize the work done by the Council's
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions and the updates to note by the
President S/2017/507.

The work of the Council is a collective responsibility.
It is undertaken on behalf of the whole membership and
for the common good of humankind8. It is unfortunate
that the work of the Council is often perceived to be
secretive, when decisions that impact many are taken
by a few. It is therefore important that information
about the deliberations of the Council on matters of
importance to the whole international community be
shared in a timely and inclusive manner. Addressing
those perceptions are important, too, for upholding
the Council's legitimacy and credibility. It is also
fundamental that every member of the Council able to
contribute meaningfully to the work of the Council. The
perceived gap between the five permanent members
and the elected 10 must be addressed and countered.

The Maldives applauds the improvements we have
seen in recent years in sharing information regarding
the work of the Council with the general membership
of the United Nations. Regular meetings between the
Presidents of the Council, the General Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council will go a long way
in enhancing coordination among the work of all the
principal organs of the United Nations. With regard
to the discussions and deliberations of such meetings,
we would also like to see the sharing of information,
through appropriate channels, with the general
membership. We call upon the current members of the
Council, as well as incoming members, to prioritize
improving transparency and inclusivity in their work.

The question of the veto deserves some
consideration in our deliberations on working methods.
While we recognize that it is a prerogative of the
Council's permanent members, wejoin others in calling
for refrain in the exercise of the veto in situations of
mass atrocities. We must not let the veto stand in the
way of taking timely action.

An area where the Maldives believes that more work
can be done is in enhancing the focus of the Council on
the emerging realities of conflict in the world. In that
regard, focusing on non-traditional threats to security,
in addition to armed conflict, is essential. Extreme
poverty, a shortage of resources, climate change and
violent extremism are increasingly determining and
exacerbating conflict.

Arria Formula meetings have been an important
way of bringing diversity and fresh perspectives
to the deliberations of the Council. We promote
the regular holding of such meetings in order to
address the convergences - but, more important,
the divergences - in opinion on certain issues. That
would advance the work of the Council and make it
more relevant to the global realities of the day. We
also hope that the discussions and views expressed in
Arria formula meetings will find their way into the
deliberations of the Council's formal agenda.

The Maldives hopes to be elected to the Council
at the election to be held in June for the term 2019 to
2020. We will bring fresh views to the Council and lead
the discussions in finding innovative and long-term
solutions to emerging issues. We believe that creating
an accountable, transparent and coherent Security
Council is a clear way to lead the Organization into the
twenty-first century.

