Mr. Davutoglu (Turkey): I would first like to
express our appreciation to Ms. Norma Chan, who over
the years has made a tremendous contribution to the
work of the Council. During the short period of time of
Turkey's membership in the Council, our mission has
greatly appreciated her kind assistance and cooperation
on every issue, and thus she will be sorely missed by
all of us.

I would also like to thank Special Representative
Kai Eide for his briefing, and I take this opportunity
also to commend him and the staff of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan for the
valuable work they have been doing in that country. I
also welcome my dear friend Mr. Rangin Dadfar
Spanta to the Council and offer, through him, our best
wishes to the people ofAfghanistan.

The Afghan people should receive our
recognition for their tireless endeavours and
commitment to democracy in their country. Every
experience around the world shows that only the
commitment and perseverance of the people can make
democracy work.
In this regard, as we await the final results of the
vote, let us take a moment to recognize that
Afghanistan continues its journey towards becoming a
vigorous democracy. We in the international
community should extend our strong support for their
pursuit. Whatever lessons exist must be identified and
whatever issues arise must be addressed primarily by
the independent Afghan authorities, and we should give
our assistance and support to them.

Immense challenges that require urgent attention
continue to exist on the ground and require the
attention of the Government in Kabul. Winning hearts
and minds is most important. Our messages to the
President of Afghanistan for the next five years will be
to embrace the whole proud Afghan nation and to work
courageously for national reconciliation. We should
continue to extend our cooperation to him and offer the
helping hand of the international community.

Next year, Turkey will be the lead country in the
Security Council on Afghanistan. We intend to build on
the positive momentum created by Japan, with the
assistance of the United Nations and other Security
Council members.

Turkey is not an outsider in that geographic
region. Historically, we have been a friend and brother
to the people of Afghanistan. We have always been
involved in one form or another, but always in support
of our brothers and sisters in Afghanistan. Currently,
Turkey is implementing its most comprehensive ever
programme of assistance to Afghanistan. We will
continue our intensive work to support reconstruction.
Turkey is also active at the regional level, inter alia in
the trilateral summit process.

Turkey believes that a four-pronged approach is
necessary in Afghanistan. First, the international
community and the Government of Afghanistan need to
initiate a robust campaign for a massive and refocused
economic reconstruction plan. Secondly, an effective
and self-sufficient Afghan military and police should
be created at a faster pace. Thirdly, the international
community must encourage an inclusive national
reconciliation process led by the Government of
Afghanistan. And, last but not least, we must foster an
environment conducive to democracy and development
through modern education.

With these thoughts in mind, I particularly thank
the Secretary-General for the report presented today
and for his benchmarks, which are focused and
achievable. I particularly welcome the fact that these
benchmarks contain the most important five aspects of
a comprehensive strategy - security, good
governance, social and economic development, human
rights and the fight against narcotics - which Turkey
has always emphasized.

Let me close by again thanking the Special
Representative and confirming Turkey's full
confidence in and support for his work.

