Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): We welcome the
Chairman of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
His Excellency Mr. Radmanovie, and thank him for his
statement. We thank Mr. Inzko, High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina and European Union
Special Representative in Bosnia and Herzegovina, for
his briefing.

We commend the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina for its important contribution to the
stability of the country. We also commend the High
Representative for his efforts in facilitating the
implementation of the Dayton Agreement. It is
important that all leaders in the country continue to
commit themselves to dialogue and peaceful
coexistence.

We are concerned by actions questioning the
sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina's State
institutions, as well as the continued challenges to the
authority of the High Representative and the Steering
Board of the Peace Implementation Council. It is
important that all parties, including neighbours of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, uphold their commitments in
the spirit of good-neighbourliness and peaceful
coexistence, as enshrined in the United Nations Charter.
We call on the authorities of the Republika Srpska to
refrain from rhetoric and actions that challenge the
sovereignty and constitutional order of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

The European Union military mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina has continued to play an important
role in providing the reassurance needed by the citizens
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We salute the European
Union Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in
cooperation with the Armed Forces of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, for contributing a safe and secure
environment. It is important, however, that every effort
be made to support the national security forces so that
they can assume their full responsibilities.

We welcome the progress that has been achieved
in the country in the area of the entrenchment of the
rule of law, particularly in terms of police reform and
coordinating the policing aspects of combating major
and organized crime.
We are concerned that the situation of refugees
and displaced persons remains unresolved. This is a
potentially destabilizing matter if not addressed in a
holistic way. We therefore call on the authorities to
ensure the implementation of the aspects of the
General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina in dealing with refugees.

We commend Bosnia and Herzegovina for the
progress made in economic development, despite the
challenges brought about by the global financial and
economic crisis. We call upon the international partners
to support the country in its efforts to address these
challenges.

Finally, we once again commend the High
Representative and his staff for their good work.

