Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): Against the
backdrop of the proliferation of asymmetric conflicts,
Senegal commends the Bolivian presidency for holding
a briefing on a topic that is so important to international
peace and security - demining.

I would like to thank our briefers today,
Mr. Alexander Zuev, Assistant Secretary-General for
Rule of Law and Security Institutions of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, and Ms. Nathalie Ochoa
Nifio, of the United Nations Mine Action Service in
Colombia, for their instructive briefings.

Ms. Ochoa Nifio explained why humanitarian
demining was a precondition for peace, reconciliation
and development and a real turning point for the
Colombian Final Peace Agreement, which her
country signed.
Since the adoption, 20 years ago, of the the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling,
Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and
on Their Destruction, otherwise known as the Ottawa
Convention, significant efforts have been made to
combat anti-personnel mines - as evidenced by the
accession of 162 Member States to that Convention.
Senegal is one such State. Despite the mobilization of
the international community, those explosive devices
continue to be a genuine threat to international peace
and security, in particular in a context of a growing
number of non-State actors, such as terrorist groups.

Even more concerning, as mines get cheaper
because they are easy to produce, their removal
becomes exponentially more expensive - with a
devastating impact on the socioeconomic development
of contaminated areas. Since Senegal incorporated
the Ottawa Convention into its domestic laws and
implemented relevant institutional mechanisms, it
subsequently destroyed its stockpile of anti-personnel
mines between 2000 and 2004. Since then, my
country has continued to ask countries that produce
such weapons to demonstrate greater political will in
limiting their manufacture in line with the goal of the
total destruction of such weapons and explosives. With
the support of its bilateral and multilateral partners,
a humanitarian demining programme has been
launched in southern Senegal with a view to removing
landmines from the entire area in order to ensure the
effective return of the population to the area and the
resumption of economic activities in a region with vast
economic potential.

From 2008 to date, thanks to the Senegalese
National Mine Action Centre, an area of more than
1.8 million square metres spanning four communities
has been completely demined. Similarly, Senegal
focuses all the required attention on other important
aspects of humanitarian demining that are elements
of mine action, including risk-reduction education,
advocacy, assistance to victims and the destruction of
stockpiled mines. With regard to the astronomical costs
of demining efforts, the Government of Senegal has
decided to earmark a portion of its budget every year
to that important endeavour. It will not be sufficient,
however, and that is why we require the support of our
partners in order to remove all anti-personnel mines
by 2021.

Since its entry into force in August 2010 with 101
States parties and 18 State signatories, the Convention
on Cluster Munitions has enjoyed the growing support
of the international community, which has fully taken
note of its legal and moral accountability in attaining
a world free of cluster munitions. It should be recalled
that those weapons have reprehensible traumatic and
psychological effects on civilian populations. We are
pleased to state that, in the same spirit that inspired the
parties to the Ottawa Convention, African countries,
including my own, play a key role in the implementation
of this international legal instrument. In that regard,
Senegal, which does not possess such weapons and is
committed to honouring its obligations, along with its
international partners, will continue to raise awareness
among other States in order to make the Convention
on Cluster Munitions universal, as it is essential to
international peace and security, and in particular the
protection and dignity of civilians.

As a major contributor of troops to United Nations
peacekeeping operations, Senegal commends the
attention paid to the threats posed by landmines, the
explosive remnants of war, improvised explosive devices
and cluster munitions in the context of discharging
mission mandates. Similarly, my country commends the
fact that this dimension is under consideration by the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations. The
use of such weapons, in particular by non-State actors,
such as terrorist groups, in a volatile and unpredictable
environment similar to that in which the United

Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali operates, is an additional challenge to
peace soldiers.

We take this opportunity to commend the tireless
efforts of the United Nations, and in particular of
the United Nations Mine Action Service, through
cooperation, capacity-building and technical assistance
to achieve a world free of such explosive devices, which
are responsible for the indiscriminate killing of children
and adults, civilians and military personnel.

In conclusion, my delegation reaffirms its readiness
to work with the other members of the Security Council
to make a positive contribution to the relevant draft
resolution that your country, Sir, has submitted for
its consideration.

