Mr. Soares (Portugal): At the outset, I would like to
say that Portugal concurs fully with the statement made
earlier by the European Union presidency.
The establishment of the United Nations Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINURCA) is an example
of the cooperation of the United Nations with an African-
led initiative to promote regional peace and stability.
Portugal strongly believes in such initiatives and supports
the recommendations of the Secretary-General for the
establishment of a peacekeeping operation in the Central
African Republic.

It must be remembered that the current situation of
relative security in the Central African Republic is very
much due to the tireless efforts of regional leaders. We
praise the mediation efforts of President Bongo and the
role of the International Monitoring Committee in the
resolution of this crisis. In addition, the strong
commitment of many African countries and of France to
the Inter-African Mission to Monitor the Implementation
of the Bangui Agreements (MISAB) was essential in
promoting stability, often under difficult circumstances.

However, the continued presence of the international
community is required to assist in the important tasks that
remain ahead. The National Reconciliation Pact adopted
by the Reconciliation Conference, which took place in

 

Bangui earlier this month, was an important step in
fostering stability in that country. We harbour great hope
that the holding of free and fair elections in
August/September of this year will help consolidate peace
in the Central African Republic. However, the situation
remains fragile, and we clearly understand that further
reform is required.

In this context, my delegation is pleased to see the
establishment of MINURCA, starting next April. We see it
as a clear example of the willingness of the international
community to cooperate closely with regional efforts in
Africa. Indeed, MINURCA is a peacekeeping force with a
mandate tailor-made to the requirements of the situation in
the Central African Republic. In particular, we would like
to stress MINURCA's future role in maintaining and
enhancing security and stability. Let me also underline that
its mandate will include supporting the national security
forces in matters of law and order, assisting in coordination
with other international efforts in a short-term police
trainers programme and providing advice and technical
support to the national electoral bodies.

We also welcome the appointment by the Secretary-
General of a Special Representative in the Central African
Republic. As head of MINURCA, with overall authority
with regard to United Nations activities in that country, the
Special Representative can play a crucial role in the
stabilization of the present situation. Moreover, we attach
importance to action by the Special Representative to
encourage the provision of assistance by United Nations
agencies and programmes in the areas of development and
economic recovery.

Portugal has always been firm in its support for the
creation of a peacekeeping operation in the Central African
Republic. We see this operation as a meaningful step on the
part of the international community to promote peace and
stability in the Central African Republic. Therefore, we will
vote in favour of the draft resolution before us today.

