Ms. Bekwa (South Africa): We too would like to
express our appreciation to the briefers today for their
comprehensive briefings. We would also like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
David Shearer, and the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) for all the hard work that they
are doing under difficult conditions in South Sudan.

I would like to focus my interventions on three key
issues: the political situation, the security situation and
the humanitarian situation.

On the political front, the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan continues to be an integral part of creating
engagement for constructive dialogue and democratic
processes towards sustaining peace and development in
South Sudan. Equally vital is that we encourage Mr. Riek
Machar to return to Juba, as that will further enable
the implementation of the agreement. In that regard, it
is important that we all rally behind the peace process
and encourage the implementation of all outstanding
provisions. We concur with Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Shearer that this is the only path
that will lead to peace and stability.

We note the decision of the parties on the
unanimous agreement on the extension of six months of
the pre-transitional period. However, we strongly urge
the parties to do everything possible to implement all
the remaining tasks of the pre-transitional period.

While we recognize and acknowledge all the
positive strides that have been made, we are also
cognisant that the situation in South Sudan remains
very fragile, considering the slow progress and
insufficient resources to sponsor the implementation
of the revitalized agreement. We would like to urge
the Council to support the implementation of the
agreement, ensure that we keep the momentum going
that has been created, and prevent South Sudan from
sliding back into conflict.

We note with appreciation the work of the
Independent Boundaries Commission, which has
completed its work and submitted a report to the
ministers of the States members of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) in Addis Ababa on
19 June. We recognize that the boundary issues are
still very divisive in nature and need to be treated in
a transparent manner to minimize the risk of sparking
conflict. We urge parties to continue working to resolve
this matter.

On the security situation, my delegation is
encouraged by the positive developments outlined in
the Secretary-General's reports, particularly the report
that the ceasefire is holding and that the Violence has
decreased. This is imperative to creating conditions
conducive to making peace. South Africa wishes to call
on all our international and South Sudanese partners
to mobilize and make resources and relevant expertise
available in support of the implementation of the
agreement, especially with regard to the implementation
of security sector reform.

For South Africa, the role of local communities in
the security sector reform process is critical to ensuring
local ownership, cultivating trust and confidence, and
the legitimacy and success of the entire process. That
can be achieved only through adequate and timely
consultation with various stakeholders at all stages of
the process. But more important to the process is the
inclusion of women, as they are key to any sustainable
conflict resolution.

On the humanitarian situation, we welcome the
improvement of humanitarian access, which is a
critical lifeline for thousands of vulnerable people. We
further welcome the reports that, owing to increased
peace, along with some positive signs of change, the
security situation has improved, which has allowed
some internally displaced persons to return, while
cautiously also exploring options to return to other
areas of relocation.

South Africa urges international stakeholders
to make meaningful contributions to post-conflict
reconstruction and development programmes and to
support efforts to repatriate and resettle internally
displaced persons and refugees returning to South
Sudan, as well as to help rebuild their communities
and livelihoods. The pledge of $100 million by
the Government of South Sudan towards the
implementation of the agreement is a positive step. We
urge the Government to urgently disburse the funds for
the implementation of the critical pending tasks.

In closing, we remain steadfast in our commitment
to playing a key role in supporting the peace process in
South Sudan through the mediation efforts of President
Ramaphosa, as Chair of the African Union High-level
Ad Hoc Committee for South Sudan, as well as Deputy
President Mabuza as South Africa's special envoy to
South Sudan. We continue to reaffirm that these efforts
are always geared towards complementing the African
Union's efforts, as well as IGAD processes. We continue
to commend the hard work being done by IGAD in
trying to support the South Sudan peace process.

South Sudan continues to be a critical part of
the region, as its stability is interdependent with that
of many countries in the region. More importantly,
however, the people of South Sudan deserve to finally
enjoy the tangible peace dividends that have eluded
them for many decades.

