Mr. Mansour (Palestine): We congratulate Poland
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council and thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs for
convening this important debate.

I am honoured to represent the State of Palestine
and to join the other countries of the Middle East to
address the Security Council on the challenges to
peace and security in the Middle East. This matter is
urgent, as the peoples of the Middle East are enduring
recurrent crises and violent conflicts that are causing
immense human suffering and threatening international
peace and security. At the crux of this situation is
the Palestine question, the longest-standing issue on
the United Nations agenda and the core of the Arab-
Israeli conflict.

It is impossible to truly examine, understand and
remedy the root causes of the situation in the Middle
East without addressing the Palestine question.
Attempts to side-step or downplay the ruinous impact
on the region of the uprooting of the Palestinian people
from their homeland, more than 70 years ago, of more
than a half-century of Israel's military occupation
and of the ongoing denial and violation of Palestinian
rights are misleading and do a disservice to the aim
of achieving peace and security in the region. Absent
Palestinian-Israeli peace, that goal will remain elusive.

Moreover, such attempts ignore the depths of
distrust, anger and despair that that injustice has sown
across the region, have shaken beliefin international law
and the fairness of the international system and continue
fuelling toxic narratives of double standards, including
among young people, who make up the majority of
populations across the Arab and Muslim world.

Despite persisting hopes and expectations,
confidence in the Security Council is in free fall,
as its efforts to halt violence, uphold international
humanitarian law, including to protect civilians, and
peacefully resolve conflicts are repeatedly obstructed,
with Israel's blatant, long-running defiance of the
Council being the most glaring example.

No one can deny that the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict's protraction - chiefly due to a systemic failure
to hold Israel accountable and halt its gross violations
in occupied Palestine - has cultivated a destructive
culture of impunity. That, in turn, has fostered a climate
ripe for the proliferation of conflict in the region with,
a vast political, social, economic and security impact,
in many cases creating fertile conditions for the spread
of extremism and terror, as well as religious strife,
thereby undermining the potential of religion as a force
for social good, tolerance and coexistence.

In that regard, we must once again caution against
provoking religious conflict in Palestine. Reckless
Israeli provocations in occupied East Jerusalem,
including daily violations and incitement at Al-Haram
Al-Sharif by Israeli occupying forces, officials and
religious extremists, in disrespect of the historic legal
status quo and religious sensitivities at that holy site,
risk sparking a dangerous religious conflict, which
must be averted.

In that connection, we recall with horror and pain
the incidents of 50 years ago today involving attempts
by Israeli extremist settlers to burn down the Al-Aqsa
Mosque and Al-Haram Al-Sharif, which, among other
things, led to the creation of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference. So we do not forget such horrific
terrorist incidents by the Israeli occupying authority.
Tragically, the human cost of such impunity has
also been profound, with humanitarian disasters
widespread throughout the region, including as a result
of the forced displacement of millions of civilians,
including 5.5 million Palestine refugees. I believe
that the Ambassador of Kuwait mentioned that one
third of today's 70 million refugees are in the Arab
region and that, among the 24 million from the Arab
region, the 5.5 million Palestinians among them have
been refugees for more than 70 years. Unchecked,
such human insecurity, poverty and misery can only
continue to destabilize the region and cause an outflow
of desperate people seeking survival and a better life
for their families, as witnessed in the turmoil of the
past decade.

While the conflicts in our region are many,
and collective political efforts are urgently needed
to solve them, we are certain that forging a secure,
peaceful future in the Middle East requires at its core
a just solution to the question of Palestine in line with
international law and the relevant United Nations
resolutions, as many speakers before me indicated.

The path is well known, as long ago determined
by the Council in its resolutions, including resolution
2334 (2016), which clearly called for the intensification
of international and regional efforts to end the
Israeli occupation that began in 1967 and achieve a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East, based on the relevant United Nations resolutions,
the Madrid terms of reference, including the principle
of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
Quartet road map.

Those are not tired formulas or slogans. They
constitute the internationally endorsed basis for
reaching a peaceful solution. The problem is not
that the Council's resolutions are unrealistic, vague
or unimplementable, as claimed by some. They are
wholly realistic and clearly and carefully articulated,
with due regard for the international consensus on the
two-State solution, which is based on compromise, not
extreme absolutes, and due respect for international
law and the Charter of the United Nations, including
the prohibition on the acquisition of territory by force.
Some who come often to the Council are deaf and do
not want to hear what everyone here articulates all the
time - that we all know what the solution is, namely,
the end of the occupation, the two-State solution within
the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as the capital of
our country, and a just solution to the refugee problem.
That is often repeated by all Council members, the
Europeans and by ministers. But some Ambassadors
who are sitting here are living in a fantasy land and
refuse to listen. Either they are deaf and should go see a
doctor to fix their ears, or they are unable to accept what
everyone else is articulating as to what the solution is.
And there is consensus based on that.

The problem is that those solutions have never been
given a fair chance to be implemented. The Council's
authority has instead been met with flagrant contempt
by Israel, the occupying Power, which continues
entrenching the illegal occupation with its settlement
colonization campaign, oppressing the Palestinian
people in the most inhumane, cruel ways, and obstructing
every credible peace initiative. A Permanent member's
use of the veto has further undermined the Council
and exacerbated the situation, blocking any attempt to
compel a halt to the occupation's crimes and peacefully
resolve the conflict.

This is the dilemma that the international community
continues to face in the region. Overcoming the many
serious challenges that we face requires addressing
this central issue. There is no military solution to this
conflict or any other conflict in our region. Likewise,
the imposition of unjust solutions - such as the
"deal of deals" or the "deal of the century" - is not
peacemaking and will fail, with increased massive
political, security, economic, social and human costs.
What is needed is the immediate mobilization of the
political will to implement the Security Council's
resolutions on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We
remain committed to the path ofpeace and negotiations,
based on the relevant resolutions aimed at achieving a
peace agreement that resolves all final-status issues
and realizes the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people, including the right to self-determination and
a life of freedom and dignity in an independent and
sovereign State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, living side by side in peace with the State
of Israel within secure, internationally recognized
borders, based on the 1967 lines, and ajust solution for
the Palestine refugees, based on resolution 194 (III) and
the Arab Peace Initiative.

We reiterate our call for a multilateral political
process based on the long-standing parameters and
within a set time frame and reaffirm our readiness to
engage, including in an international peace conference.
We urge the Security Council to act and also call on
the members of the Quartet, in line with their Council
mandate, to exert serious efforts to that end, in
cooperation with all regional partners concerned, the
League of Arab States and all peace-loving nations.
Only through such a collective drive for peace can we
justly resolve the Palestine question, establish Israeli-
Palestinian peace and truly contribute to peace and
security in the Middle East, which is so essential for a
more just, stable and peaceful world.

With your indulgence, Madam President, I would
like to take a minute to respond to the false assertions
from a speaker who took the floor not too long ago.
According to Israeli media, before he came to the United
Nations, that speaker had a reputation for being a big
liar in Israel. Today, and on many previous occasions,
he proved that he truly lives up to that reputation and
the characterization by the Israeli media. Although he
is not succeeding, he is trying to tell the Council that
we did not make the historical compromise to agree
to have the Palestinian State on 22 per cent of historic
Palestine, which is less than what is available to us
according to resolution 181 (II). It is a lie that we do not
want to have peace and the two-State solution. On the
other hand, the Government that he represents, which
is the most extreme in the history of Governments
in Israel, is creating a one-State apartheid reality in
historic Palestine. Who, then, is destroying the global
consensus of a two-State solution? Is it the Palestinian
leadership that he falsely attacks by spreading lies
against it? Or is it the extreme Israeli Government of
occupation that destroys any hope of peace based on
the global consensus that is reflected in many Security
Council resolutions and to which all members agreed?

I also challenge the liar to say whether or not
he accepts the implementation of Security Council
resolutions on the conflict. We do, as do members. As
the German Ambassador said not too long ago, Security
Council resolutions are part of international law and they
need to be implemented. The Council has a responsibility
under the Charter of the United Nations to ensure that
they are implemented. This deaf man is not listening
to the message that members keep repeating, repeating
and repeating, and yet he chooses not to listen to it. He
lives in a fantasy land, believing that he is opening the
doors for normalization with Arab countries - another
lie. All of the representatives of the Arab countries
who spoke, including the representative of the League
of Arab States, reiterated their commitment. That also
includes the representative of Bahrain, as he referred to
the statement made by the Foreign Minister of Bahrain.
They all said that they remain committed to the just
cause of Palestine and to the Arab Peace Initiative and
its implementation. He can listen to whatever noise is
in his head, but he is refusing to listen to the members
of the Security Council. Yet he comes here to abuse
the privilege the Council provides him to listen to his
statements. When we come here to speak, we are all
required to respect the Security Council and to work to
implement its resolutions.

