Mr. Chikoti (Angola): Many questions have been
brought to my attention. I would like to express my
appreciation for the spirit of the statements of the
members of the Council, in which they have expressed
sympathy over the situation in Angola, proposed
solutions and raised questions about the critical
humanitarian situation in the country. Indeed, I believe
that it is a concern of everyone, and I would like to
make a few important points.

First, it must be very clear to the Council that the
Angolan Government is committed not only to
achieving peace by all means at its disposal but also to
protecting human life and human rights in Angola and
to maintaining a democratic environment and a
democratic Constitution. It might not be very easy for
many people to understand how difficult it is to keep
this balance, to keep institutions working in a
democratic environment.

The Council will recall that in 1992 we held
elections, and they provided an environment for peace.
Twelve political parties participated, all of which are
represented in Parliament. Indeed, UNITA is
represented in Parliament. However, when the post-
electoral conflict started, the Government had no army.
I recall that the provisions of the 1991 agreement stated
that the two belligerents should disarm. The
Government disarmed; UNITA did not.

What we saw from then on - from when UNITA
resumed the conflict after rejecting the election
results - is an increase in the numbers, because for the
first time the conflict was affecting bigger towns and
villages, and the amount of destruction was very high.
So far, the Government has never had any support, in
military terms, from anyone. The Government had to
rebuild its army and to maintain the institutions in
order to build confidence. We are coming from a
situation, in 1992, in which the Government controlled
only a few provinces. With the Lusaka Protocol, we
wanted to conclude the process; that means no war, and
thus no more displaced persons. Unfortunately, that has
not been the result.

With respect to UNITA-controlled areas, what the
Government is now doing reflects the fact that today
UNITA does not control territory as such; the
Government has extended its authority to the borders
with Zambia and with Namibia. What has happened is
that the people who had followed UNITA into the bush
are coming back today, because we have established
authority in those areas. Most of the country is in fact
being liberated. I think that what some organizations
have written with regard to the notion of "forced
displacement" is something that has to be clarified.
There is no forced displacement of people. There are
people who are surrendering to Government authority,
and there are also people who are willingly coming to
Government authority. That is something that nobody
expected. Remember that when UNITA controlled
certain areas, UNITA, through the violation of
sanctions, was getting support from outside and it thus
kept people in certain areas. Such people are today
coming to Government authority. We think it important
that we understand that there are no forced
displacements.

The military activities that are going on do not
tend to increase the number of displaced persons; they
tend rather to increase the authority of the Government,
so that we will be able to help the people in those
areas. We know that there are areas to which it is
difficult to gain access. The military do indeed have
access to these today, but the humanitarian
organizations do not go there; it is not easy. First, we
need to build bridges; secondly, we need to make sure
that we have territorial administration in those areas:
that is what the Government intends to do. I brought a
map to show the methodology we are pursuing in that
regard. This principally relates to areas where we are
extending our authority to the border with Zambia,
where in fact part of the UNITA leadership is located.
We are finding that new people who are coming in are
in a very, very bad state. I have to point out that when
most of these people - generals and their families -
come, we need to put them in hospital for at least two
weeks before we can let them go home or stay in
camps. That is the situation.

The Government is not saying that there will be
no access. In the context of the Secretary-General's
efforts, when Mr. Gambari came we discussed this
issue with the military. We discussed how well we can
coordinate among ourselves, non-governmental
organizations and the United Nations system in order to
provide assistance to those areas. This is what we
intend to do: first, we should put Government
administration into those areas. But they are areas that
were liberated by the military, and the military, along
with their military activities to introduce Government
authority, is providing humanitarian assistance: it is
transporting food to the people it finds; it is
transporting medicine to the people it finds. The
Government needs to re-establish its administration,
because these are areas where there was no
Government administration at all - because UNITA
does not administer anything in those areas.

The second stage has to be rebuilding bridges -
because then we can send trucks carrying food - and
rebuilding some of the airstrips. I think that the
challenges are greater than a mere question of access.
The Government is not saying that nobody can gain
access; the problem is that it is difficult to gain access
to some of those areas, particularly in the province of
Moxico. These are areas where you, first, have the
problem of access, but also the problem of population:
you do not have as much population. You have 0.5
inhabitants per square kilometre in those areas.

I think there is indeed an openness on the part of
the Government to respond, along with the
international community, to these things. The
Government has already adopted supplementary
measures to repair the Kuito airstrip; I think it will be
done in due course. I do not believe that part of the
statement by Mr. De Mul of the United Nations
Development Programme was true - unless there is an
appropriate inquiry to determine what the situation is.
We believe that what may have happened is that the
company that initially should have repaired the Kuito
airstrip did not have the technical capacity to do the
job. We have to say that most of the equipment must be
transported from about 500 to 1,000 kilometres away;
the equipment must come from Huambo or Luanda or
Benguela. We have now taken supplementary measures
to see if we can repair the airstrip.

I have said that, in order to respond to the urgent
need for transportation, we will increase the fleets of
motor vehicles, which will transport some of the food
from Huambo to Kuito and other areas that need it. But
this is the rainy season; it rains intensely in those areas,
and I believe that for the time being it will not be very
easy to continue the repair work. But that is one of the
challenges we have to face.

Another question was what the Security Council
can do to help reduce UNITA's military capacity. We
have been working very closely with the Security
Council; we are open to continuing to negotiate
through the mechanisms that have been employed by
Ambassador Gambari - and we encourage him in that
work. But we have also said that it is very important
indeed for the sanctions to be maintained. Sanctions
have made possible the reduction of UNITA's military
capacity. We think that is the only way to make UNITA
understand that it must rely on peaceful means to
achieve peace.

The time is short, so let me thank you again,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to come here today
and participate in this debate. I reassure you that the
Angolan Government is indeed committed, first and
foremost, to maintaining democratic institutions and
respect for human rights so that UNITA can be
integrated into the process. We want to help UNITA to
participate. We should avoid making political
interpretations of things that the Government does not
intend. There is an environment that provides for all
political parties - not just UNITA - civil society,
churches and, above all, the traditional authorities,
which are not generally mentioned. Angola is not only
a Catholic country. There are also traditional people,
representing a large segment of our population, whom
we think should be part of this process.

