Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): Allow me at the outset to congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the important post of the presidency
of the Security Council. I am convinced that, given your
wisdom, experience and outstanding talent, you will guide
the Council's work this month to a successful outcome. I
wish also to take this opportunity to thank your
predecessor, His Excellency Ambassador Wisnumurti of
Indonesia, for successfully guiding the Council's work
last month.

The Commission of Inquiry is being established for
the purpose of investigating arms deliveries to members
of the former Rwandan government forces, with a View
to adopting effective measures to check these deliveries,
thus creating conditions for social stability in Rwanda. As
the Secretary-General has pointed out, the establishment
of the Commission will be an important element in
preventing renewed conflict in the region. Based on its
consistent support for the peace process in Rwanda, the
Chinese delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before us.

We hope that the Commission will cooperate fully
with the countries concerned, for only with their
cooperation and support can it successfully carry out its
mandate. We therefore hope that the Commission, while
exercising its rights, will see to it that the sovereignty of
these countries is respected and that there is no
interference in their internal affairs. We believe that the
adoption of this draft resolution will further promote
peace and stability in Rwanda and help the Rwandan
people to achieve, at an early date, national reconciliation
and to live and work in peace and contentment.

It is an important component of China's foreign
policy to strengthen friendly relations of cooperation with
all African countries. China supports the African people
in their efforts to maintain peace and stability. We deeply
sympathize with the conflict-torn African continent in the
post-cold-war era and with its people in their suffering
caused by the conflicts. We hope that the international
community will continue to take measures to help the
Rwandan Government and people resolve their current
difficulties so that they can enjoy peace and stability
again at an early date.

