Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): At the outset,
I would like to thank Ambassador Nestor Osorio
for presenting the 90-day report of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). Since
this is his last briefing to the Council, I would like to put
on record our commendation of Ambassador Osorio's
very able stewardship of the Committee over the past
two years and of the professionalism with which the
Committee has fulfilled its mandate.

I would also like thank the Panel of Experts for
its midterm report submitted to the 1737 Committee
last month. While we are studying it, we appreciate
the Panel's work, including its outreach activities. We
encourage it to continue its work in strict accordance
with the relevant resolutions of the Security Council
in an independent, objective, transparent and impartial
manner. The Panel should also continue the practice of
briefing the Committee regularly on all its activities.

We have taken note of the report submitted by
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in
November on the implementation of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons Safeguards
Agreement and the relevant provisions of Security
Council resolutions on Iran (GOV/2012/55), in
accordance with paragraph 4 of resolution 1929 (2010).
We hope that agreement on a structured approach will
allow Iran and the Agency to start substantive work on
the outstanding issues.

India has consistently supported the right of all
nations to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in
accordance with the relevant international treaties to
which they are party. Iran should fully cooperate with
the International Atomic Energy Agency to restore
confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of its
nuclear programme. We hope that the outstanding
technical issues concerning the Iranian nuclear
programme will be resolved peacefully through Iran's
cooperation with the IAEA.

We welcome the fact that the five permanent
members of the Security Council and Germany (P5+l)
have reiterated their commitment to continuing their
engagement with Iran. We think that the talks between
the P5+l and Iran should be resumed as soon as possible,
leading to a resolution of all outstanding issues through
dialogue and discussion.

In conclusion, India supports the full implementation
of the relevant resolutions of the Security Council
concerning the Iran nuclear issue. While implementing
them, it is essential that every effort be made to ensure
that legitimate trade and economic activities do not
suffer.

