Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I thank
you, Sir, for your briefing and chairmanship of the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907
(2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea. It is abundantly
clear that the Council needs to remain diligent and
focused on supporting Somali efforts to advance a
stable, prosperous future with fair and transparent
governance, establishing a Government that is
accountable to the people and has the capacity to ensure
that the country's natural resources are harnessed for
the benefit of all Somalis, and not misappropriated by
thieves or used to fund terror.

We would like to thank the Somalia and Eritrea
Monitoring Group for its efforts to oversee the
implementation of these important sanctions and to keep
the Council and the Sanctions Committee informed on
a range of issues, including countering Al-Shabaab,
piracy, corruption and violations of human rights.
These sanctions have limited the illict flow of charcoal,
depriving the terrorist group Al-Shabaab of revenue,
and the Committee, with the support of the Monitoring
Group, has helped us understand and maintain focus on
the corruption that undermines efforts to build strong
institutions in Somalia.

Peace will neither emerge nor be sustainable in
Somalia until Somalis create a professional security
sector, and we are commited to doing everything we
can to facilitate security assistance to achieve that
goal. However, the Government of Somalia must do
its part by accurately reporting on the composition
and disposition of its security forces. Without that
reporting, we lack the most basic information to judge
whether arms or related materiel supplied to strengthen
Somalia's security sector will be safeguarded from
diversion. Al-Shabaab still constitutes a serious threat
to Somalia's peace and we remain committed to
ensuring that this terrorist group is defeated. Cutting
off Al-Shabaab's sources of financial support is central
to that effort and a key to bringing about stability in
Somalia.

The Committee, with the support of the Monitoring
Group, should continue to expose and crack down
on the illicit charcoal trade. The Committee should
continue to engage directly with countries that may
be receiving such charcoal, and Member States should
remain vigilant and cooperative and actively share
information, including information on vessels carrying
charcoal, shipping documents, data on importers and
anything else that can help in order to robustly and better
enforce the ban. By imposing the charcoal ban, the
Security Council came together to take firm, effective
action to break the linkage between natural-resource
trafficking and threats to stability in Somalia. Where
we encounter this nexus, the Security Council should
act. We should not shy away from addressing drivers
of conflict in Somalia or elsewhere. We encourage the
Committee and the Council to look broadly at how
to prevent the diversion of Somalia's natural wealth
to terrorists, corrupt officials and others who would
undermine peace.

Related to that, we commend the commitment of
the Combined Maritime Forces to helping track illicit
exports. The Committee should do more to ensure
that information from the Combined Maritime Forces
about illicit smuggling trends is publicly shared and
brought to the attention of relevant States. We would
also like to encourage the Combined Maritime Forces
to work closely with the Monitoring Group to update
the Committee in real time, if possible, on charcoal
shipments being tracked from Somalia. Such timely
intervention can lead to swift action to interdict. It can
help translate our intentions and commitments in the
Council into more real and meaningful changes on the
ground.

Even as we tackle the challenges posed by
terrorist groups such as Al-Shabaab and the illicit
trafficking of natural resources that finance them,
the Security Council must also keep a close eye on
another scourge that threatens Somalia - corruption.
The mismanagement of public funds in Somalia will
undercut any security gains made in the country.
We therefore believe that the Federal Government of
Somalia must redouble its efforts to ensure financial
transparency, particularly with respect to the signing of
contracts related to natural resources. We encourage the
Monitoring Group to continue to focus on such issues
and make appropriate recommendations to improve
public financial management in Somalia.

As we fight terrorism and corruption, we must
redouble our efforts to ensure that Somalis are not
victimized, especially by those working to help secure
their country. We are deeply disturbed by allegations
that international forces bombed and launched ground
attacks on civilian areas on 15 January in Gedo and in
Middle Juba. We understand that this happened in the
wake of an Al-Shabaab attack on the Kenyan Defence
Forces of the African Union Mission in Somalia at the
El Adde forward operating base. The point of fighting
terrorists is to keep people safe. When the actions of
those fighting terrorists potentially endangers rather
than protects civilians, it merits serious scrutiny.
We urge the Monitoring Group to investigate such
allegations, including claims that cluster munitions
were deployed in violation of international law, and
report back to the Committee as soon as possible.

Finally, with regard to the situation in Eritrea,
unfortunately little has changed and, frankly, it needs
to. The Government's refusal to engage constructively
with the Monitoring Group and the Sanctions Committee
must change before anyone can take Eritrean calls for
the sanctions to be lifted seriously. Obstructing the
ability of the Group to fulfil its mandate, combined
with further reports of Eritrean non-compliance with
the sanctions, is simply at odds with the stated desire
of Eritrean officials for the sanctions to be lifted. We
therefore call once again upon Eritrea to respond to
Monitoring Group requests for information and permit
the group to travel to Eritrea.

