Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): I wish
to thank you, Madam President, for organizing today's
important debate, and to thank the briefers for their
contributions. Allow me also to commend the Security
Council on its unanimous adoption of resolution 2462
(2019), which the Kingdom of the Netherlands proudly
co-sponsored.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands fully aligns
itself with the statement made by the observer of the
European Union. In my national capacity, I would like
to highlight three issues - first, obligations under
international law; secondly, public-private cooperation;
and, thirdly, coordination.

Many of the previous speakers today have said
that the terrorist threat is changing and the technology
with which they finance their operations is developing,
and that we therefore have to change and develop our
approach to terrorism financing. We agree. Resolution
2462 (2019) will guide us in doing so. But changing and
developing our approach does not mean that the rules of
the game have changed. On the contrary, every country's
obligation under international law, particularly human
rights law, international refugee law and international
humanitarian law, is now more relevant than ever.
This is also why the Kingdom of the Netherlands is a
candidate for a seat on the Human Rights Council for
the 2020-2022 term. If we waver on our commitments
under international law, we will only be playing
into the hands of the terrorists we want to fight. We
therefore have to ensure through fair risk assessment
that non-governmental organizations can continue to
operate in a free space and that humanitarian actors
can continue to deliver aid in line with humanitarian
principles. We call on the Security Council to see to
those aspects when it reviews the implementation of
resolution 2462 (2019), a year from now.

With regard to my second point, on public-private
cooperation, the public and private sectors are natural
allies in the fight against terrorism and its financing.
I applaud France's efforts to enhance public-private
cooperation in countering the financing of terrorism
through resolution 2462 (2019). In the Netherlands
we have already had good experiences with such
cooperation. For some years now, our public prosecutor,
police, financial-intelligence unit and private
companies, including banks and insurance companies,
have shared information on individuals and transactions
related to terrorism on a basis of civil law. Since its
inception, this public-private partnership has resulted
in more than 300 additional suspicious transactions
reports related to terrorism financing. We encourage
the United Nations and its Member States to engage in
similar efforts to join forces with the private sector.

On my third and final point, coordination, I
commend France's efforts to bring the important work
of the Financial Action Task Force closer to that of
the United Nations. The coordination of these bodies'
efforts, as well as those of the Global Counterterrorism
Forum, the Egmont Group and the Global Coalition to
Defeat ISIS, is extremely important to us if we are to
stay ahead of the curve. The same goes for international
coordination within the United Nations system. As
United Nations entities, Governments and international
organizations, we have to learn from each other, share
good practices and strengthen capacity-building. Only
by doing so can we be greater than the sum of our parts
in countering terrorism.

In conclusion, two weeks ago, two men were
arrested in Amsterdam in connection with a horrific
terrorist attack that occurred in the capital of your
country, Madam President, in 2015. The two men are
accused of selling Kalashnikovs and explosives that
were used in the Paris attack that killed 129 people.
Four years later, this shows that investigating financial
and other resources is key to holding terrorists and their
accomplices to account. It shows that complacency
in our fight against terrorism is not an option and
cannot be one. And it shows that the Kingdom of the
Netherlands continues to cooperate with its partners
and the United Nations and its Member States to stop
terrorism at its source.

