Mr. Inderfurth (United States of America): I should
like, first, to extend to you, Sir, my delegation's
congratulations on your assumption of the Council
presidency for the month of August. We know that we will
be in good and wise hands. We would also like to express
our great appreciation to the Permanent Representative of
Honduras and his delegation for their excellent
stewardship of the Council during the month of July.

I should like to join other representatives by
extending my delegation's welcome to the United
Kingdom's new Permanent Representative. We offer him
our very best wishes and our hopes for great success as
he takes over his new responsibilities at the United
Nations.

The Council has acted today to continue an effort
which is succeeding - step by step and more slowly in
some areas than we had hoped, but succeeding surely and
steadily. My delegation strongly endorses the extension of
the mandate of the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM. III) to continue its support of the full
implementation of the "Acordos de Paz", the Lusaka
Protocol and the resolutions of this Council. Several
factors have contributed to the successful progress to date,
not the least of which has been the regular personal
contact between President dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi.
We commend those two leaders on the impetus they have
given to the peace process and encourage them to
continue in this constructive vein.

We also commend the excellent works of the
Secretary-General's Special Representative, Mr. Alioune
Blondin Beye, and all those associated with UNAVEM. III
for bringing the peace process to this hopeful stage.

The United States has been a firm supporter of the
Lusaka accord and believes that this process has placed
Angola on the road to lasting peace. Over the past two
years we have provided more than $200 million in
humanitarian and emergency assistance in the form of
food aid and medical supplies. The United States wishes,
in cooperation with the United Nations, to help Angola to
develop its long-term economic potential and reduce its
reliance upon emergency assistance.
We are concerned, however, that road conditions are
inhibiting the deployment of United Nations peace-
keepers to Angola and are slowing the progress of the
peace process. About 45 per cent of the bridges in Angola
were damaged or destroyed during the civil war. We must
also be mindful of the possibility of increases in mine
accidents as humanitarian-aid convoys begin using roads
ahead of mine-clearing operations. Destroyed bridges and
a number of mined areas have already slowed movements
of peace-keepers. In order to help to surmount these
obstacles, the United States has made an offer of bridging

 

material to UNAVEM. III, in addition to the assistance for
mine clearance that we have pledged.

Land-mines have been a deterrent to more rapid
progress in accomplishing UNAVEM's goals. The
completion of scheduled deployment depends on having
clear and passable routes. The Secretary-General has called
upon States Members of the United Nations to aid ongoing
demining efforts in Angola. United States support for mine-
clearance and mine-awareness activities is an important
component of our efforts. At the international meeting on
mine clearance, held in Geneva in July, my delegation
announced a contribution of more than $7.5 million for
demining in Angola this year. This figure includes cash and
equipment to support demining by non-govemmental
organizations and the United Nations. These funds
effectively double all current demining spending in Angola.

Some skilled non-govemmental organizations have
already been successfully engaged in demining, but their
activities are insufficient for the number of mines and the
size of the territory. The Angolan armed forces and UNITA
must be involved to the greatest extent possible in clearing
the areas they have mined.

The Angolan Government and UNITA both have
acknowledged the seriousness of this problem. They plan to
cooperate through the Angolan Central Mine-Action Office.
The Government of Angola has already allocated $3 million
for demining, and UNITA is becoming more involved in
national demining planning - a trend that we hope will
continue.

United States assistance is designed to aid the peace
process immediately by facilitating the deployment of
UNAVEM. III troops. In the longer term, United States
assistance will also help to clear crop lands to reduce the
need for food aid and will give the Angolans the ability to
conduct demining operations themselves for the long time
required to eradicate this threat from the land.
The assistance provided by the United States is merely
a start when we consider the magnitude of the problems
facing Angola. We look to other United Nations donor
States to support demining and reconstruction activities
through non-governmental organizations, through
contributions to UNAVEM. III and through donations to the
United Nations Unit for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Assistance to Angola. We will continue to coordinate
closely with the United Nations and with other donor States
to build up the Angolan Government's ability to continue
mine-clearance operations and other efforts at
reconstruction and development for the long term.

The success of the peace process will require the
concerted efforts of the Angolan Government, UNITA,
the United Nations, donor Governments and Angola's
friends and neighbours. We hope that our combined
efforts can contribute to a lasting peace in Angola, and
we appeal to other States to contribute funds, equipment
and personnel towards this very worthy goal.

