Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): At the outset, I would
like to express once again my best wishes for your
successful presidency in December, Sir, and to reiterate
our sincere and complete support for your delegation in
fulfilling these responsible duties. I would also like to
pay tribute to Ambassador Durrant of Jamaica and her
team for their excellent leadership of the Council's
work in the month of November.

I am pleased to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Mr. Hedi Annabi for his very comprehensive briefing. I
would also like to take this opportunity to welcome the
productive efforts of the Special Representative,
Mr. Jacques Paul Klein, and his team in implementing
the key tasks of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina (UNMIBH).

Six years after Dayton and one year before the
completion of the mandate of UNMIBH, we can see a
wide range of positive developments in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. From our standpoint, further progress in
its political and economic reconstruction will depend
on three major factors.

First, there will be no visible breakthrough unless
the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina takes its
own share of responsibility for strengthening a multi-
ethnic society. In this regard, the recent appointment of
the Election Commission, which has already taken
national responsibility for holding elections, is an
encouraging sign.

Secondly, as the overall situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina still remains fragile, the international
community should become further involved in the
country. It goes without saying that the failure of
international efforts in this State would have an
immediate and dramatic impact on the whole region.

Thirdly, we believe that the way to inter-ethnic
reconciliation and the development of stable and
democratic State institutions in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is through the implementation of the
European Union road map for the country. We call
upon the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
follow this important guideline actively.

In this context, my delegation welcomes the
suggestion of the Secretary-General, stated in his
report, that while UNMIBH progresses towards the
completion of its core mandate in 2002, it would be
desirable for regional actors to assume responsibility
for continued monitoring of the situation and assistance
to preserve what has been achieved in the country. I am
confident that such an approach is more than
acceptable: it is vitally important.

However, such an important step should be based
on a thorough entry strategy. In this respect, I would
like to ask Mr. Annabi to comment on the practical
essence of the activities of the Special Representative,
Mr. Klein, that are aimed at strengthening cooperation
with the organizations that are assessing the
requirements for the follow-on police mission. In
addition, my delegation would like to hear from
Mr. Annabi some comments concerning the format of
such a mission and its possible composition.

During the period under review the activities of
UNMIBH have been marked by a number of significant
achievements. Despite resistance, the United Nations
Mission succeeded in achieving a qualitative
improvement in inter-entity and regional police
cooperation, as well as in State Border Service
activities. We welcome the reported results in
launching the Police Commissioner project,
introducing a disciplinary code and preparing a State
Information and Protection Agency.

Obviously, this list of achievements is not
exhaustive. However, the list of tasks yet to be
implemented is much longer. In this context, there are
two crucial points I would like to mention.

First and foremost, let me convey the message
from the Government of Ukraine concerning our deep
interest in intensifying and enhancing cooperation with
UNMIBH and the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in addressing the issue of the trafficking
of human beings. I would like to support the Mission's
activities in the framework of the Special Trafficking
Operations Programme (STOP) and to express our firm
commitment to further cooperation in this field. We are
ready to discuss practical arrangements for such
interaction.

Secondly, I would like to draw the Council's
attention to the issue of national minorities in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. This point has been raised by my
delegation on several occasions.

As presented in the report on human rights in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, recently submitted by Jose
Cutileiro, the Special Representative of the
Commission on Human Rights in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
the conditions for the national, political and cultural
revival of persons that belong to ethnic minorities in
Bosnia and Herzegovina remain unsatisfactory. I would
kindly ask Mr. Annabi to comment on the current
developments in this field. I believe that this issue
could be also taken up in the next report of the
Secretary-General to the Security Council on UNMIBH
activities.

