Mr. Silva (Sri Lanka): At the outset, my
delegation condemns the shocking terrorist attack on
the United Nations office in Abuja. We extend our
sincere condolences to the families and relatives of the
victims. We stand in support of and solidarity with the
United Nations family and the Government of Nigeria
in the face of that horrific attack.

Let me join previous speakers in congratulating
India on its initiative to convene this timely and
important debate. The Sri Lankan delegation associates
itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement by the representative of
Morocco.

Today, United Nations peacekeepers are one of
the most widely recognized members of the United
Nations family. They bring hope and security to
millions of people around the world. They are at the
forefront of the Security Council's effort to carry out
its mandate to maintain international peace and
security. United Nations peacekeeping operations, an
activity that was not envisaged at the inception of the
Organization, have come a long way from their modest
beginnings and have evolved into complex operations.
Therefore, it is appropriate that the performance and
direction of United Nations peacekeeping be reviewed
at regular intervals to maintain its focus on priorities,
fundamental principles and ground realities.

The world today is a relatively safer place
because of United Nations peacekeepers. They
safeguard the peace, often in hostile and difficult
environments. Let us remember and pay tribute to the

hundreds of peacekeepers and associated staff who
have sacrificed their lives in the line of duty over the
years. Theirs was a sacrifice for the today, the
tomorrow and the future of many countries and their
peoples.

Sri Lanka is honoured to have been able to serve
with other Member States in United Nations
peacekeeping operations. Over the years, we have
made a modest contribution to assisting United Nations
peacekeeping missions. The year 2010 marked the
fiftieth anniversary of our first contribution to a United
Nations peacekeeping mission. We believe that United
Nations peacekeeping missions embody the best
example of nations coming together for peace and
security. Cooperation between troops and police
personnel from different countries forges bonds of
friendship and trust that transcend differences in
language and culture.

We continue the training and assessment of
peacekeepers in Sri Lanka in an effort to uphold the
highest standards of peacekeeping. Sri Lanka's
steadfast commitment to United Nations peacekeeping
is reflected in our strategic reserve of a highly
professional and fully equipped battalion for
deployment within 48-hours' notice. In keeping with
the United Nations stated goal of ensuring gender
parity in all areas, Sri Lanka also has in reserve highly
professional and well-trained female personnel to serve
as peacekeepers.

Peacekeeping should not be treated as a substitute
for addressing the root causes of conflict. The ultimate
goal should be building peace and the institutional
capacities of the affected countries to enable them to
manage their own affairs free from outside
interference. Hence, exit strategies are of paramount
importance. A successful transition can be guaranteed
only by developing clear, credible and achievable
mandates, which this Council agreed to ensure at its
deliberations in February.

Sri Lanka firmly believes that United Nations
peacekeeping operations should be conducted in
respect for fundamental principles such as the consent
of the parties, the non-use of force except in self-
defence, and impartiality. The success of any
peacekeeping mission will depend on the respect
accorded to the principles of the sovereign equality and
territorial integrity of States. It is equally important
that the criterion for the selection of peacekeeping
troops always remain the level of their proven and
recognized professionalism and integrity during their
deployment.

Peacekeeping budgets and the number of
peacekeepers have grown as the nature of
peacekeeping mandates has changed - a development
that has attracted criticism. At the same time, the gaps
between mandates and the resources required to carry
them out have widened. We hope that this debate will
focus on the importance of providing adequate
resources to allow peacekeeping missions to carry out
their mandates. From the stage of planning until actual
deployment, it is imperative to have closer
consultations and careful evaluations of the resource
gaps. United Nations peacekeeping operations remain,
despite their shortcomings, vastly superior in terms of
effectiveness and efficiency to other alternatives.

In conclusion, Sri Lanka is pleased to reiterate
our continued commitment to the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

