Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): I would like to
welcome Judge Jorda, the President of the International
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991 (ICTY), to the Council and to thank him for
his comprehensive briefing. We found his comments
very interesting and useful, as are the proposals
contained in the report on possible ways and means of
improving the operation of the Tribunal and
streamlining its working procedures.

Previous discussions in the Council on the work
of the ICTY, including the most recent briefing of the
Tribunal's Prosecutor, undoubtedly underscored the
important role the ICTY plays in meting out justice and
healing the wounds caused by the human tragedy that
shook the former Yugoslavia and continues there. No
less important is the Tribunal's role in the process of
reconciliation and restoring peace in the region. It is
therefore imperative for that judicial institution to
maintain the highest standards of impartiality and to
remain free of any political considerations in its
activities, although, as we can see, that is most difficult
to achieve. It is from this perspective that any proposed
measures to expedite and rationalize its proceedings
should be looked at in the first instance.

We recognize the huge workload facing the
Tribunal. Of course, the need for changes is obvious.
Based on the perspective that the Tribunal will
complete its task by the year 2016, I should simply like
to ask a rhetorical question: Could one have imagined
that the Nuremberg tribunal would end its work in
1968, 23 years after its creation?

The questions raised in the report are rather
complex and, apart from the proposals to introduce a
new category of ad [item judges and to delegate a large
part of pre-trial work to senior legal officers, include
such issues as the long-term plan of the Tribunal's
activities, the length of its mandate and its future
relations with the International Criminal Court. My
delegation welcomes this forward-looking analysis
undertaken by the Tribunal and supports a thorough,
action-oriented examination of all these issues by the
Security Council in an appropriate agreed format. The
potential financial implications should, of course, be
examined too.

While looking forward to that review, I would
like to indicate one issue of concern to my delegation:
the absence of judges from Eastern Europe in the
Tribunal. While this question, as of now, remains in the
hands of the General Assembly, we think that this
situation should be addressed. Can anyone imagine the
Rwanda Tribunal without African judges? The non-
election of the only Eastern European candidate to the
ICTY last year was indeed disappointing. A wide
representation ofjudges from all regional groups in the
Tribunal, as in the case of practically all United
Nations organs, including the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda - is important for the
effectiveness and credibility of that body. We believe
that this issue should be taken into account when
considering the proposed changes in the Tribunal's
statute.

Another important aspect that is worth
mentioning in the context of the report before us is
that, when considering ways to improve the operation
of ICTY, the Security Council should in no way create
the impression that the similar problems now facing the
International Tribunal for Rwanda are less important or
pressing. I think that the changes contemplated for
ICTY would be difficult to approve without adopting
the same approach to the problem of the workload of
the Rwanda Tribunal, and these two issues should be
considered in conjunction.

Finally, I would like to mention yet another
matter that we consider to be an important part of the
effective operation of the Tribunal, which is the need
for a wider dissemination of information regarding the
activities of the Tribunal and its role in establishing the
rule of law and promoting reconciliation in the
Balkans. We welcome the launch last fall of an
outreach programme with a focus on countries of the
former Yugoslavia. At the same time, we would like to
encourage the Tribunal to broaden the activities of that
programme to other countries of the region and to
make it more public-oriented.

