Mr. Wittig (Germany): I thank you,
Mr. President, for guiding our meeting today. I would
also like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Mr. Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing. Germany
aligns itself with the European Union statement to be
delivered later on.

On many occasions, we have deplored the
political stalemate in the Middle East. We have
consistently urged for efforts to find a political solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict to be intensified.
Therefore, we very warmly welcome the Jordanian
initiative in support of Quartet efforts to facilitate
direct contacts between the parties with the aim of
resuming direct and meaningful negotiations.

Our primary goal remains a just and lasting
peace. The viability of a two-State solution must not be
jeopardized by developments on the ground, in
particular, continued settlement construction in
Jerusalem and Area C. At the end of December, we
discussed the settlement issue in depth in the Council
and, together with France, the United Kingdom and
Portugal, outlined our concerns. As a matter of
urgency, we want to see comprehensive proposals on
borders and security, as envisaged by the Quartet
statement of 23 September of last year, and confidence-
building measures that help to build trust between the
parties and that demonstrate a genuine commitment to
start meaningful negotiations. Any statements or
developments referring to possible settlement plans for
the area around Jerusalem called E1 are of particular
concern. Pushing forward with such plans would mean
cutting off East Jerusalem from the West Bank. That
would have a highly negative impact on the viability
and contiguity of a Palestinian State in the occupied
territories in the context of a two-State solution, if not
make it possible.

We welcome measures taken by the Israeli
authorities in response to increasing settler violence.
We trust that determined law enforcement will bring
the perpetrators to justice, in compliance with the
obligation to protect civilians under international law.

Forced relocations of Palestinians in Area C must
be halted and the implementation of demolition orders
in that Area must be stopped. Restrictions on access
and movement should be further lifted. Palestinians
must be allowed to use their natural resources in
Area C.

On Gaza, import capacity has increased but we
are still at only 40 per cent of the weekly volume of the
first half of 2007. Much more, also with regard to
exports, is needed to allow the Gaza economy to
recover and to generate jobs. Further progress on
access and movement would also contribute to easing
legitimate Israeli security concerns as it would
strengthen the business sector, at the expense of radical
forces, and could help dry up the financial basis for
Hamas provided by the tunnel business.

Rockets targeting the Israeli civilian population
continue to be launched from Gaza. We strongly
condemn those attacks. There is no justification for that
indiscriminate violence. It must end.

There was mention of the Mufti of Jerusalem's
inflammatory speech on 9 January at a rally marking
the forty-seventh anniversary of the founding of Fatah.
We strongly condemn that speech. Such incitement
against the Jewish people is repulsive, unacceptable
and purely anti-Semitic. Jerusalem is a city sacred to
three faiths and all its religious leaders should promote
respect and tolerance.

On its tenth anniversary, the Arab Peace Initiative
also deserves renewed attention. The Arab Spring has
demonstrated that the peoples in the region want to
shape the future on a peaceful basis through
negotiations and discussions, not by the use of
violence. Our primary goal remains a just and lasting
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. That
ambition must be turned into reality - the creation of
a sovereign, independent, democratic, contiguous and
viable Palestinian State, living in peace and security
side by side with the State of Israel.

On Syria, we welcome the important decision
taken by the League of Arab States just two days ago.
A clear signal from the Council that supports the
initiative of the League of Arab States in all its aspects
is needed. The Council should condemn the continued
and systematic human rights violations and the use of
force against civilians by the Syrian authorities and
demand an immediate end to all violence. It must recall
that all those responsible for all violence and human
rights violations should be held accountable. It must
build on the decisions of the League of Arab States, in
particular those taken last Sunday.

We fully support the efforts of the League of Arab
States in all their aspects. We welcome the intention of
the Arab League to appoint a special representative on
Syria and to seize the Security Council of the situation
in Syria. We would therefore welcome the Secretary-
General of the League of Arab States and the President
of the ministerial follow-up committee briefing the
Security Council as soon as possible on the Arab
League's initiative to solve the crisis in Syria.

To solve the Syrian crisis there should be Arab
ownership, but with the strong unified support of the
Security Council. With the steps taken by the Arab
League, a page has been turned, and the Security
Council now needs to respond with one voice.

