Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
would like to join my other colleagues in thanking you,
Sir, for organizing this open debate on a topic that is
of particular importance to all States, members and
non-members of the Security Council alike, given the
mission entrusted to the Council by the Charter of the
United Nations as the main agent in the maintenance
of international peace and security. We believe that
our well-established practice of holding this annual
debate, in which many delegations participate, is an
important achievement that confirms - as if it were
necessary - the particular importance that Member
States give to the activities, work and decisions of
the Security Council. We remain convinced that the
Council will continue to be attentive to the views and
proposals expressed during these debates to further
improve its working methods.

I also wish to congratulate our colleague Mrs. Maria
Cristina Perceval, Chair of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions,
and her whole team for their dedication, perseverance
and vigorous activities, which have already allowed
for specific measures to be adopted, as contained in
notes S/2013/515 and S/2013/630, aimed at strengthen
relations between the Council and its various partners.

The growing number of items on the Council's
agenda as a result, in particular, of the growing
threats to international peace and security, has given
rise to a pressing and persistent need to re-examine
our working methods with a view to improving the
Council's effectiveness, enhancing its transparency and
strengthening its cooperation with other institutions and
concerned parties. It cannot be denied that the Council
has made a great effort by taking specific steps towards
improving its working methods. We continue to believe
that this is a work in progress that will continue in the
years to come.

We welcome the fact that over the past two years of
our Council membership, we were able to contribute,
together with other Council members, to the adoption
of a package of measures, through five presidential
notes, to strengthen the implementation of the note in
document S/2010/507, dealing with a broad range of
issues, including the utilization of resources and the
management and organization of Council meetings and
of cooperation with other United Nations bodies, troop-
and police-contributing countries and other actors. All
this notwithstanding, we are convinced that Council
members and, more generally, other Members of the
United Nations, must continue working to improve
working methods.

I will permit myself in this regard to make the
following remarks and observations.

First, we noticed improvement in the organization
of and preparations for open debates to allow for broader
participation by Members of the United Nations. In our
View, their contributions must be taken into account in
Council discussions. Moreover, the choice of topics for
open debates must be diversified, while ensuring that
their scope remains within the mandate entrusted to the
Security Council by the Charter.

Secondly, the trend towards holding ever more
meetings in public is in itself positive. However, the
Council must retain full leeway to meet under other
formats when it deems it useful and appropriate for the
topic under discussion.

Thirdly, it is important foster greater interaction
among Council members during informal consultations.
In practice, this allows for discussions to be more
focused and better structured and to take fully into
account the information provided by the Secretariat
and Council members during consultations. I know that
in practice it is difficult for consultations to be made
genuine interactions, but it is possible, for example, for
the President, at the very beginning of consultations, to
propose organizing the discussion around two or three
points. I think that that would enhance the interactive
nature of consultations.

Fourthly, while we note the improvement since last
year in the process of assigning chairmanships of the
subsidiary organs, we believe that more must be done
to ensure that elected Council members can be fully
consulted and involved in that process and that their
points of view are taken into consideration as far as
possible.

Fifthly, the work of Council's subsidiary bodies is
of the utmost importance and is attracting ever greater
interest. More regular interaction between those bodies
with the broader membership and other actors, such as
United Nations agencies and regional and subregional
organizations, would be beneficial. As Chair of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, we worked, with the
agreement of the Council members, to hold as many
open meetings as possible, with the participation of
other Member States and other actors.

Sixthly, we welcome the recent adoption of note 630,
on cooperation between troop- and police-contributing
countries and the Council. It provides for specific
measures to make the most out of such interactions. It is
clear that the complementary roles ofthose two partners
in maintaining international peace and security calls
for ongoing consideration to strengthen the means for
cooperation between the two entities.

In the same context, the Council should step up its
interaction with the Peacebuilding Commission and its
country-specific configurations, which have become
major actors in maintaining civic peace and promoting
development in post-conflict situations. While we
welcome the provisions in note 515, there is a need for
more creativity to ensure optimal coordination and
cooperation between the Council and the Commission
in the interests ofpeace and stability. Over recent years,
we have had the chance in our personal and national
capacity to appreciate the invaluable contribution of
the Chairs of the country-specific configurations to our
debates, and we continue to believe that there should be
more possibilities for such interaction with the Council.

Since we are only a few weeks away from the
end of our mandate, I could not conclude my remarks
without paying particular tribute to the staff of the
Security Council Affairs Division and its Director,
Movses Abelian, for their unwavering dedication and
the professionalism with which they interact with
Council members, in particular when members assume
the presidency. I thank them for their availability and
commend their perfect mastery of procedural and other
aspects of the work of the Security Council and their
preservation of its institutional memory.

