Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French):
At the outset, my delegation would like to welcome
you, Mr. President, and to congratulate you on taking
the initiative to hold this debate devoted to assessing
United Nations support to African Union peacekeeping
operations authorized by the Security Council. As an
African country, Gabon recognizes the importance of
this issue, which confirms the place that Africa
occupies on the Council's agenda.

We thank the Secretary-General for the
presentation of his report (S/2010/514). I also take this
opportunity to welcome the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Nigeria, His Excellency Mr. Henry Odein
Ajumogobia, and to thank him for his contribution to
this debate. We also thank Mr. Lamamra for his
valuable contribution. We share and support the views
he so eloquently expressed.

As we take stock of the situation, we will touch
on the following three points: the positive aspects of
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union (AU), the acknowledged shortcomings,
and future prospects.

Concerning the first point, my delegation
welcomes the active cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union, based primarily on the
2006 agreement setting the framework for the 10-year
capacity-building programme for the African Union.
While it is true that many of the hopes cherished by
Africa have not always been met, we must
acknowledge that in recent years we have seen positive
developments in many of the areas targeted by the
programme.

Among the initiatives attesting to the vitality of
this cooperation, we stress the joint United Nations-AU
efforts undertaken in the context of the African-Union
United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). This force, whose support, command and
control structures are provided by the United Nations -
and, I recall, headed by a joint Special Representative -
has a military component under African command,
functions with financial support from the United
Nations, and is assisted by a Joint Mediator. Although
its hybrid nature was seen as potentially jeopardizing
its effectiveness, we must recognize that UNAMID has
contributed significantly to providing greater security
in Darfur, without which the peace negotiations
currently being conducted by Mr. Djibril Bassole, and
before him by Mr. Rodolphe Adada, would have been
impossible.

In Somalia, we welcome the logistical and
financial support provided by the United Nations to the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and its
two support offices, based in Nairobi. In fact, the
United Nations strategy for Somalia, launched in 2008,
has contributed, inter alia, to strengthening AMISOM's
operational capacity, allowing it to carry out more
robust action under its mandate to defend the positions
of the Transitional Federal Government and to protect
the civilian population.

I should also mention the joint efforts of both
organizations in the area of mediation and
peacekeeping in the Sudan, particularly through the
coordinated action of the African Union High-level
Panel; the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General; the United Nations Mission in the Sudan; and
the Panel on the Referenda in Sudan, recently
announced by the Secretary-General. The joint efforts
of the various stakeholders have created a environment
conducive to the pursuit of the difficult peace talks
currently under way in Darfur. Today, they guarantee
the trust necessary to the positive development of the
continuing negotiations between the parties to the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement, particularly with
regard to the Abyei and South Sudan referendums.

My delegation also notes with satisfaction the
increasingly close cooperation between the United
Nations Security Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council. Indeed, the consultative
meetings held between those two organs since 2007
have allowed for an ongoing exchange of views and
shared decision-making on issues of common interest
in the area of peace and security. The signing of an
agreement on 25 September by the Chair of the African
Union Commission and the United Nations Secretary-
General creating the Joint Task Force, as well as the
opening in July in Addis Ababa of the United Nations
Office to the African Union, are also the results of this
approach, aimed at bringing the two organizations
closer together.

While it is increasingly active, the cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union in
the area of international peace and security should be

strengthened further. We have particularly in mind the
financing of African Union peacekeeping operations
authorized by the Council, as well as the logistical
support for those missions. African Union support and
peacekeeping operations require predictable and
sufficient resources if they are to be more effective on
the ground.

In this regard, we welcome the European Union
support for the African Peace Facility, a European
response to the African Union's resolve to shoulder
responsibility for its own peace and security. Since its
establishment, the Facility has allowed the African
Union to carry out wide-ranging actions to prevent
crises and provide post-conflict stabilization.

We also welcome the United Nations assessed
contributions. It is, however, essential, as
recommended in the Prodi report (8/2008/813), for the
United Nations to set up a more flexible, predictable
and sustainable financing mechanism for the African
Union. We therefore endorse the Secretary-General's
recommendation in this respect by inviting the United
Nations to establish a standing trust fund to be
managed by the African Union and accountable to it
for its disbursements.

We cannot envisage the future of security in
Africa without considering the effectiveness of the
African standby force, created by the African Union to
assist it in fully shouldering its responsibilities in
carrying out its peacekeeping missions. Unfortunately,
due to a lack of sufficient financing and logistical
resources, the force is not yet operational. When it does
become so, the standby force, whose various
components will be based in the five subregions of the
continent, will have the advantage of being able to
mobilize very quickly. That will undoubtedly allow it
to contain conflicts rapidly and to undertake timely
efforts to restore peace. We therefore ask the
international community to provide support for this
force, whose action could be only extremely useful for
the United Nations, which, by relying upon it, would
necessarily avoid the all-too-frequent serious delays it
shows when deploying its peacekeeping forces in
Africa.

My delegation believes that the African Union,
which has in recent years already made considerable
efforts to be perceived as a credible partner in the
maintenance of peace and security, must now focus in
the long term on implementing its global strategic
framework to strengthen its capacities with the
cooperation with the United Nations and other
international partners. We welcome the fact that the
presidential statement to be adopted at the end of this
debate underscores the need for the Security Council to
assist the African Union, in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter, and to shoulder its full
responsibility in maintaining peace and security
throughout the Continent. The ultimate goal is to
contribute to building an Africa free from conflict.

