Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to begin by thanking the Secretary-General
for his latest report (S/20l6/753), as well by expressing
my gratitude for the briefing provided by Special
Representative Sandra Honore.

As a consequence of Hurricane Matthew, Haiti is
once again suffering a new humanitarian crisis, the
most devastating since the 2010 earthquake. We deeply
regret this new blow dealt by nature. From the start,
Spain has been in contact with the Haitian authorities
and, in coordination with the international community,
and has rapidly mobilized emergency assistance. I
shall not dwell upon the details; I simply refer to the
more than half a million dollars worth of aid, with two
consignments sent on 10 and 11 October, respectively.
The important thing is the immediacy of the Spanish
response, which reflects the traditional solidarity of all
the people of Spain with the friendly country of Haiti.
Spain maintains and will maintain its commitment
to Haiti, which continues to be - and I want to
underscore this - the main beneficiary of Spanish
official development assistance in the world.
The tragic situation in Haiti following Hurricane
Matthew means that we must reflect on the
country's urgent need for a Government elected
through democratic, inclusive, free and transparent
elections - one that can provide a strong institutional
basis to promote the development and capacity of the
country to confront the major challenges that lie ahead.
It is therefore vital for the Government to establish, as
soon as possible, a new date for the elections that were
planned for 9 October, thereby reactivating the electoral
process already under way. The country's return to
constitutional order is more of a priority than ever.

Spain believes that the role of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) continues
to be fundamental in order to ensure the necessary
security conditions for the country. In the current
circumstances, its contribution to security in the
electoral process is even more relevant. Spain therefore
supports the renewal of the MINUSTAH mandate until
April 2017.

As the Secretary-General recommends, we should
maintain the current authorized troop level, which
we believe to be essential for the mission to fulfil
its mandate. Moreover, Spain considers it timely to
deploy a strategic assessment mission, circumstances
permitting, in order to evaluate what form the role and
presence of the United Nations in Haiti should take
once the MINUSTAH mandate expires.

Spain has always maintained in its statements
before the Council that decisions on MINUSTAH must
be adopted in a flexible manner, depending on foresight
and analyses of the short- and medium-term, as well as
the changing political and security situations. This is
simply because we should not risk the progress that has
already been achieved. We believe the evalution of the
strategic assessment mission should be carried out in
close collaboration with the new Haitian Government
in order to ensure the success of the transition. For this
reason it is pertinent that the mission be deployed once
a new President has taken office - one who has been
democratically elected in Haiti - and preferably once
his new Government team is in place.

Spain would like to highlight the need for these
recommendations, in addition to being based on the
results of the strategic assessment mission, to deal with
the politico-institutional situation in the country and
assess its impact on security and stability in Haiti. We
also support the notion that the Security Council should
work in the most inclusive and transparent manner
possible and that its decisions always take the interests
and opinions ofthe States affected by them into account.
It is for that reason that we shall listen attentively to the
statement made by the Ambassador of Haiti and to his
thoughts and expectations as to MINUSTAH, as well
the contributions of countries involved in the Mission.

Finally, Spain aligns itself with the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union later in
this meeting.

