Mr. Baublys (Lithuania): We sincerely thank
the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, for his latest briefing on the
situation in the region.

We are deeply concerned about the dramatic
escalation of violence in the Gaza Strip and the loss in
human lives. We deeply deplore the growing number of
civilian casualties, many of whom are children, and we
extend our most sincere condolences to the families.
It is our greatest concern that the situation could
rapidly deteriorate even further, taking more human
lives, causing greater numbers of wounded and further
increasing the most humanitarian needs in the region,
which was already suffering from a chronic lack of
basic humanitarian goods.
Lithuania strongly condemns the firing of rockets
from Gaza and Hamas' mounting belligerent rhetoric
and its tactics involving the indiscriminate targeting
of civilians. We join the United Nations and others
in strongly condemning the placement of rockets in
the school operated by the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
We call on Hamas to put an immediate end to those
acts and renounce violence. All terrorists and militant
groups in Gaza must disarm.

We recognize Israel's right to protect its population
from the firing of rockets from Gaza. Nevertheless,
we reiterate that in doing so Israel must fully comply
international humanitarian law, act proportionately
and ensure the protection of civilians at all times.
Furthermore, it has to respect its obligations to allow
full, unimpeded access to humanitarian aid.

The ceasefire proposed by Egypt was a ray of hope,
and we deeply regret that the agreement was short-lived.
Once again, we call on both States to immediately stop
the violence, de-escalate the situation and return to
calm. A humanitarian pause is no substitute.

Lithuania welcomes the ongoing efforts of the
international community, the League of Arab States
and regional partners, including Egypt, to convince
both sides to immediately stop all hostilities and restore
the 2012 ceasefire agreement. We urge Israeli and
Palestinian leaders to commit to an immediate, durable
ceasefire and restart the dialogue. Lithuania remains
committed to the two-State solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict.

