Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, to whom I wish once again to pay tribute; the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Zambia; the President
of the Commission electorale nationale independante;
the President of the Conference episcopale nationale
du Congo; and the Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations for their important
interventions. It is vital that the Security Council gain
a broader perspective on the conduct of the elections,
including through the assessments of the organizations
that carried out electoral observation missions on the
ground, alongside civil-society organizations.

France wishes first of all to pay tribute to the
Congolese people as a whole, who demonstrated
patience when the elections were postponed for more
than two years and who turned up in large numbers on
30 December to exercise their right to vote. While there
were many technical and political pitfalls during those
two years and numerous hiccups in the implementation
of the agreement of 31 December 2016, what we will
remember most of all is the image of those Congolese
who queued up in an orderly manner, sometimes for
several hours, in order to exercise their right to freely
choose their representatives. That is an example of
democratic vitality that France wishes to commend.

France also extends its congratulations to the
political actors, civil society and relevant institutions
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo on the
organization of the elections, which were held under
conditions that were deemed satisfactory, despite some
irregularities, by the international election observation
missions of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region, the Southern African Development
Community and the African Union. France commends
the work of the observer missions and of Congolese
civil society, whose presence throughout the country
contributed to the smooth conduct of the vote.

The process is not over. The Commission electorale
nationale independante announced provisional results on
10 January regarding part ofthe provincial elections, as
well as the presidential election. France is now awaiting
the publication by the Commission of the results of the
legislative elections, as well as the compilation of the
minutes for the provincial elections and the detailed
results of the presidential elections. The initial results
have been disputed publicly. Congolese law provides for
remedies and, as the African Union has pointed out, it
is vital that any challenge to the results, in particular in
relation to a discrepancy between them and the verdict
of the ballot boxes, be carried out peacefully through
existing legal procedures and political dialogue among
all stakeholders.

In this crucial period, France renews its appeal to
all parties to stay calm. It calls on all actors concerned
to demonstrate responsibility and to foster national
consensus, based on respect for democratic principles
and the will expressed at the polls by Congolese
voters, as well as for human rights and civil peace.
These elections represent a historic moment for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo that could lead to
the first peaceful alternation of power in the history
of the country as well as to the strengthening of its
democratic institutions. That would be the culmination
of a cycle that began in Sun City, South Africa, 16
years ago.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo has taken
important steps in recent weeks towards that goal.
France stands with the Congolese nation and people and
will accompany them on their path, while respecting
the democratic choice made by the Congolese. In that
context, France will propose to States members of the
Council to adopt as soon as possible a press statement
welcoming the conduct of the elections, calling on
all parties to engage calmly in the next stages of the
process and inviting them to build national consensus
in respect for the law and in the service ofpeace.

