Mr. Acharya (Nepal): I would like to extend to
you, Sir, my sincere congratulations on Peru's
presidency of the Security Council for this month. My
delegation thanks the Council for holding this open
debate on children and armed conflict and thanks the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative,
Ms.Radhika Coomaraswamy, for the report on the
subject (S/2006/826). We also commend the United
Nations, including UNICEF, for the valuable role it has
been playing in this field.

Women and children are the most vulnerable
groups in armed conflicts in many parts of the world.
In view of the grave situation and plight of children in
many complex situations that persist today, the
Security Council has rightly included the matter on its
agenda.

My delegation has been closely following the
developments taking place in the deliberations held by
the Security Council in recent years, including the
adoption of resolution 1612 (2005), the establishment
by the Secretary-General of a monitoring and reporting
mechanism, the appointment of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the setting
up of a Working Group of the Security Council in this
context. However, we need further careful
consideration with regard to the results achieved so far
on the implementation of the monitoring mechanism in
the field, which is supposed to enhance national
capacity for alleviating the plight of children and
improving their living conditions.

The report of the Secretary-General contains
some specific references with regard to children and
armed conflict in Nepal. There is no denying the fact
that, as elsewhere, children in Nepal have suffered
greatly in over a decade of armed conflict. However,
since the establishment of the democratic Government
after the successful People's Movement last April and
the signing of peace agreements, the situation has
changed to a remarkable degree. The signing of the
comprehensive peace accord on 21 November 2006 has
put an end to the decade-old armed conflict in Nepal,
paving way for Constituent Assembly elections by mid-
June 2007.

The comprehensive peace accord has also given
rise to opportunities for lasting peace and stability, the
rule of law, multiparty democracy and the protection
and promotion of human rights and fundamental
freedoms in our country. The Government firmly
believes that its efforts for lasting peace will help in
bringing about improvements in the overall situation of
all sections of society, including children, women and
the elderly, which are the vulnerable groups most
affected by armed conflict.

Among other things, the comprehensive peace
accord provides for special protection of the rights of
children from all forms of violation. It also includes a
provision not to conscript or use in the armed forces
children aged 18 or below. It also provides that
children thus affected shall be rescued immediately and
that appropriate assistance, as may be needed, shall be
provided for their rehabilitation. Implementation of
these agreements will definitely create better
conditions for the protection and welfare of children in
our country.
In accordance with these agreements, Nepal has
sought the continued assistance of the United Nations,
including in the area of human rights monitoring. The
United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights in Nepal has been playing a
commendable role in the protection of human rights,
including those of children. We hope the United
Nations will be able to provide necessary assistance, as
requested by Nepal, as quickly as possible in order to
support the momentum of the home-grown peace
process and to advance national efforts towards lasting
peace in our country.

Nepal is fully committed to protecting and
promoting the rights of children. Recruitment of
children for military service is prohibited by law. Any
activity related to that would be considered as a crime
punishable by law. The Government is also fully
committed to the reintegration of separated children
and child soldiers into their families and their society
by providing them with education and other services.

On behalf of the Government of Nepal, I take this
opportunity to reiterate Nepal's full commitment to the
protection of children and the promotion of their rights
and development in all circumstances. As a party to the
International Convention on the Rights of the Child,
Nepal adheres to all its international obligations in this
regard. Nepal welcomes the Secretary-General's
recommendation that adequate resources and funding
be made available to national Governments, the United
Nations and partners for the rehabilitation and
reintegration of all children who have been associated
with armed forces.

We have observed that the Secretary-General's
report contains certain recommendations which could
ideally be taken up by other relevant treaty bodies and
mechanisms of the United Nations, and not by the
Security Council itself. Thus, in conclusion, we
underline the need for greater coherent and coordinated
efforts by the relevant bodies and agencies of the
United Nations towards enhancing the national
capacity of the countries concerned for protecting and
promoting the rights of children around world,
including in post-conflict situations.

