Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Since the beginning of this year, Iran's nuclear issue
has attracted more and more attention in the world.
Regrettably and disappointingly, Iran has yet to
respond positively to the requirements of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and the
Security Council and show flexibility on the
suspension of enrichment-related activities.

After issuing a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2005/15) in March and adopting resolution
1696 (2006) in July on Iran's nuclear issue, the

Security Council has today adopted another resolution,
aiming at safeguarding the international nuclear non-
proliferation mechanism, reinforcing the IAEA's
authority and role, and promoting diplomatic efforts to
seek peaceful solutions to Iran's nuclear issue. The
Chinese delegation has therefore voted in favour of the
draft resolution before us.

China wishes to emphasize that sanctions are not
the end, but are a means to urge Iran to resume
negotiations. The sanction measures adopted by the
Security Council this time are limited and reversible,
and they target proliferation-sensitive nuclear activities
and the development of nuclear-weapon delivery
systems. There are also explicit provisions indicating
that if Iran suspends its enrichment-related and
reprocessing activities, complies with the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and meets the
requirements of the IAEA, the Security Council would
suspend and even terminate the sanction measures.

The Security Council cannot handle Iran's
nuclear issue single-handedly. The IAEA remains the
principal mechanism for dealing with this issue.
Dialogue and negotiations are the fundamental, indeed
the only, way out. The solution to Iran's nuclear issue
requires all-around diplomatic efforts.

Diplomatic efforts outside the Security Council in
particular should be strengthened. The resolution
welcomes the commitment of China, France, Germany,
the Russian Federation, the United Kingdom and the
United States to a negotiated solution to this issue, and
encourages Iran to engage with those six countries'
proposals for a long-term comprehensive agreement.
Such an accord would allow for the development of
relations and cooperation with Iran based on mutual
respect and the establishment of international
confidence in the peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear
programme. All these aspects would be conducive to
reactivating a new round of diplomatic efforts.

All along, China has supported safeguarding the
international nuclear non-proliferation mechanism and
opposed the proliferation of nuclear weapons. We do
not wish to see new turbulence in the Middle East. We
are in favour of a peaceful solution to Iran's nuclear
issue through political and diplomatic efforts and
negotiations.

Under the current circumstances, we wish to call
upon all the parties concerned to adopt a highly
responsible and constructive attitude, remain calm,

practice restraint, and refrain from taking any steps that
would harm diplomatic efforts and lead to a
deterioration of the situation. At the same time, we
hope that the parties will seek to resume negotiations
in a creative and forward-looking manner and continue
to spare no effort in seeking to enhance diplomatic
endeavours in favour of the comprehensive and
peaceful solution of Iran's nuclear issue.

China is ready to continue to work jointly with all
the parties concerned and contribute to maintaining
international and regional peace and stability,
safeguarding and consolidating the international non-
proliferation mechanism, and resolving Iran's nuclear
issue through political and diplomatic efforts.

