Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): By
sheer coincidence, yesterday I was watching a
documentary on the resistance to occupation in
European cities during the Second World War. I saw
members of the resistance, who Israel today dares to
call terrorists. I saw the popular armed resistance
against the occupation of the cities of Warsaw, and
Arnhem, in the Netherlands, and other cities and
villages in Russia, Ukraine, Poland, Norway, France
and elsewhere. I was indeed profoundly saddened to
see this attempt to reverse the truth, falsify criteria,
blatant lies and other actions that attempt to circumvent
international law and marginalize the role of
international will embodied in Security Council
resolutions.

We all watch on television the continuing savage
onslaught against Palestinian civilians, cities and
towns. We all see the Palestinian people attempting to
resist the occupation forces. We are confident that the
outcome will be what we have witnessed throughout
the course of human history: the defeat of occupation
forces and the victory of the right to self-determination.
However, the question that remains is, how long the
world will permit victims to fall and cities and towns to
be destroyed and their inhabitants to be attacked.

Israel continues its aggressive military operations
against the Palestinian people, their infrastructure,
churches, mosques, homes, schools and hospitals.
Israel continues to refuse to implement the resolutions
of this Council, 1397 (2002), 1402 (2002) and 1403
(2002). The Israeli Government continues to claim that
it is extending its hand towards peace. However, it is
actually using it hands to kill civilians. It attempts to
impose hegemony and is using blind armed force,
leaving the injured and the dead in the streets,
preventing any assistance from reaching them and
preventing their burial. In so doing, it is deepening
hatred and is inciting extremism. Israel is attempting to
delude the world, claiming that it raises the banner of
democracy and the culture of peace. In fact, it practises
an illegal policy of inhuman aggression.

Yesterday the Council issued a statement to the
press, declaring its deep concern at Israel's failure to
implement its resolutions. It pointed out that the
continuing violence by the Power controlling events on
the ground is unacceptable. We were deeply shocked
once again at the Council's failure to stand firmly and
resolutely against this Israeli violation of Council
resolutions; this is a situation that has reached the point
at which the Council is incapable of calling the
occupying State, Israel, by name and refers to it in all
its previous resolutions as the occupation State. Today
we see the Council timidly referring in whispers to the
violence of the controlling Power. The Council today is
called upon to be resolute, to assume its responsibilities
in accordance with the Charter of this Organization and
not to allow the law of the jungle to overcome
international law.

Despite the bilateral efforts by several parties of
the international community and the forces that
influence the international scene, the Security Council
is called upon to stop the aggression, using the
mechanisms available to it. It is called upon to order
the immediate withdrawal from the Palestinian
territories and to dispatch an international observer
force to guarantee protection of the Palestinian people
and to ensure that Israel will never again carry out
aggression against the Palestinian territories.

Until now Israel has rejected the proposal to send
an international observer force to the Palestinian
territories. On our side, we fully realize the reasons
behind this intransigent attitude. Israel feels that the
arrival of such a force refers to textual commitments in
the Tenet plan and Mitchell recommendations, which
contradict its expansionist policies and its policy of
glorifying occupation and maintaining the land for the
settlers at the expense of the future of the Palestinians
and of international law.

The Israeli Government's practices are deepening
the conflict and the hatred. They threaten the future of
coexistence and cooperation in that region. My country
is at the very heart of that region, and thus we hope that
the Security Council will understand the role it is
called on to play and that it will carry out that role with
the effectiveness expected of it. Therefore, we hope
that the Council will call for immediate Israeli
withdrawal so that the situation can be brought under
control and so there can be an end to all acts of
confrontation, allowing the opportunity for calm and
for the entry of international observers in an
appropriate and requisite number so that the situation
may be stabilized, thus allowing implementation of the
understandings and recommendations that we have
already mentioned. This must be followed by the return
to negotiations in order to achieve settlement on the
basis of international law and the resolutions,
agreements and understandings of which we are all
aware.

I wish to make a final comment. We emphasize
this and call on the Council members to understand it,
confident that they will agree with us on these
particular points. We mean the following.

First, all attempts to jeopardize the personal
safety of President Arafat in his capacity as the
legitimate President of the Palestinian people will be
broken on the solid rock of Palestinian determination to
maintain its national leadership and the entire world's
support of that leadership. Secondly, the acts of the
Israeli Government will, unfortunately, lead to further
innocent victims on both the Palestinian and Israeli
sides.

We hope that the Council will succeed in
fulfilling its responsibilities in facing the defiance and
aggression of Israel.

