Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
Two years after the death of Osama Bin Laden, we are
reminded that terrorism remains one of the most serious
threats to international peace and security. Though
Al-Qaida's core is now weaker, the recent attacks in
Boston and Mogadishu, Baghdad and Karachi remind
us that, although we have made progress, the struggle
to combat terrorism endures. We must continue to
work together to adapt to evolving threats and terrorist
tactics.

We know the key components of a comprehensive
United Nations approach to countering terrorism.
Those include preventing the resurgence of Al-Qaida,
building State capacity to counter terrorist threats, and
making sure terrorists do not acquire the most dangerous
weapons. The work of the Security Council's three
counter-terrorism Committees reflects this integrated
approach. We commend the Committees and their
expert groups for their outstanding work. We express
particular gratitude to the new Chairs - Australia,
Morocco and the Republic of Korea - for their
leadership since January.

The Al-Qaida sanctions regime remains one of
the Council's most effective tools for countering the
growth of Al-Qaida and its affiliated groups. As a
signal of the international community's resolve, those
sanctions identify the most dangerous individuals and
entities affiliated with Al-Qaida. They also help stop
attacks by limiting terrorists ability to travel, acquire
weapons and finance their operations. Yet those
sanctions work only if we implement them effectively.
We therefore encourage States to propose listings to the
Committee and to improve their capacities to enforce
those measures.

We would like to welcome Alexander Evans to his
new role as Coordinator of the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team. We encourage him and his
Team, in collaboration with the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, to
focus on implementation challenges, particularly in
those States where sanctioned individuals and entities
are located. The Committee's recent meeting on
terrorist threats in Mali is a great example of how we
can best focus our attention on areas of key concern.

Finally, we remain committed to ensuring that
the Committee's procedures are fair and we commend
Ombudsperson Kimberley Prost for her vital work.

The success of our counter-terrorism efforts will
depend on States' abilities to take effective action
domestically. The Counter-Terrorism Committee
and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) continue to help States to build
those capacities. We commend the leadership of its
Executive Director, Mike Smith, to whom we are
grateful for his service over the past five years. The
United States remains committed to supporting these
capacity-building initiatives, including those focused
on training police, judges, prosecutors and border
security officials at the regional and subregional levels.

We are pleased with the increased emphasis that
CTED is placing on the promotion of the rule of law in
its work and on the essential role of civil society. We
are gratified by the growing number of joint projects
involving both CTED and the Terrorism Prevention
Branch of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, thereby leveraging each entity's comparative
advantages. We hope that collaboration can be replicated
within the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force and the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre
as we continue to promote strategic coordination among
the United Nations counter-terrorism entities.

The appointment of a United Nations counter-
terrorism coordinator, as proposed by the Secretary-
General, would further strengthen and focus our
collective counter-terrorism efforts. The United Nations
should also continue to work with multilateral entities,
such as the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum. Such
collaboration can help build increased international
capacity to bring terrorists to justice within a rule of
law framework, counter violent extremism and prevent
kidnapping for ransom. We also look forward to the
United Nations developing a close partnership with the
new International Center of Excellence on Countering
Violent Extremism in Abu Dhabi.
The risk that non-State actors will gain access
to weapons of mass destruction remains one of the
greatest threats to international security. For nine
years, the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) has been dealing with that threat. During
that time, many countries have strengthened their
laws, procedures and capabilities to deter and counter
that threat. Many countries have improved the ability
to stop the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons, as well as their delivery systems.
States have also bolstered their ability to stop the illicit
spread of related materials to non-State actors. While
that progress is welcome, the United States continues
to urge all countries needing assistance in that field
to request it. We also encourage those countries and
other bodies capable of providing such assistance to
offer it. We have donated a total of $4.5 million to the
United Nations Trust Fund for Global and Regional
Disarmament Activities to help implement resolution
1540 (2004), and we encourage others to contribute as
well.

We look forward to the development of the 1540
Committee's twelfth programme of work. With a more
robust Group of Experts and a mandate extending to
2021, the Committee has an opportunity to develop
a strategic approach to meeting the goals set out in
resolution 1540 (2004) for the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. The full implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) is a long-term process that
requires engagement with regional, subregional and
intergovernmental organizations, civil society and
industry. The celebration of the tenth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004) next April will
present an opportunity to expand outreach and focus on
efforts needed to further implementation.

We encourage the Council's counter-terrorism
Committees to guide and reinforce States' actions to
respond to that threat. Under the capable leadership
of the Chairs, we think that the Committees have
great potential to accelerate their contribution to our
collective efforts to counter terrorism, as well as the
violent ideology that underpins it.

