Mr. Fall (spoke in French): The report of the
Secretary-General before the Council is based on three
key ideas: the structure of the process of the
organization of the conference, its dynamics and the
specific role to be played by the United Nations.

With regard to the structure of the organizational
process, the report stresses the objectives assigned to
the conference, on the one hand, and, on the other, the
organizational frameworks of the conference. As
described in paragraphs 6 and 8 of the report, the heads
of State of the region are hoping to adopt and
implement, at the conclusion of the consultations
initiated by the first meeting of national coordinators in
June 2003, a stability, security and development pact
for the Great Lakes region based on four priority
sectors - namely, peace and security, good governance
and democracy, economic development and regional
integration and humanitarian and social questions.
Each of these four sectors will target priorities and
outline in a practical and concrete manner policies,
strategies, programmes, projects and specific activities
which will have precise targets for the short, medium
and long term, reflecting intersectoral relations.

Even though it is already now possible to have
some idea of the priority concerns, following the talks
with the Governments of the region, clearly, we must
await the deliberations of the first regional preparatory
meetings to establish the priorities that all of the States
of the region will decide on in exercise of their
sovereign will. The agreement of good-neighbourliness
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and its

neighbours, signed here in New York recently, and the
statement made by the Deputy Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the United Republic of Tanzania, speaking
on behalf of all of the countries of the region - that
already constitutes a valuable contribution.
As to the organizational framework of the
conference, this consists of two levels, as described in
the report. At the regional level, each country has a
national coordinator appointed by the Government, as
well as a national preparatory committee placed under
the operational authority of the coordinator.

During the first meeting of the national
coordinators, it was decided that each preparatory
national committee would consist of a governmental
component at the inter-ministerial level and a non-
governmental component made up of representatives of
civil society. It was also decided that special measures
should be taken by each country to guarantee
quantitative and qualitative representation of women
and young people in each national preparatory
committee.

Finally, it was decided that each national
committee would have a small support secretariat, the
financing of which would require urgent international
assistance. The functioning of the national preparatory
committees - and therefore the implementation of the
work done by the secretariats - is essential for the
success of the preparatory process of the conference.

At the regional level, all of the national
preparatory committees and their representatives make
up the regional preparatory committee, and its work
will be attuned to the initial preparatory phase of the
conference.

Turning now to the organizational sequencing of
the conference, a second major subject described in the
report of the Secretary-General, this sequencing has
been largely established and is based on a draft
timetable containing two main principles: regional
ownership and international partnership.

Regarding regional ownership, I think it would be
useful for me to make the following comments: Firstly,
the conference is intended to be a process, not an event.
It will take place in two stages. The first stage, the
expert stage, consists in meetings of the regional
preparatory committees from June 2003 to May 2004.
The major expected outcome is a report containing
proposals on the guidelines for the future security,
stability and development pact, as well as practical
ideas and proposals for action on each of the four
themes of the conference.

This preparatory expert phase will be followed by
the political preparatory phase, during which the
ministerial committees, upon instructions from the first
summit of heads of State to be held in June 2004 in
Tunisia, will translate the experts' ideas and proposals
into targets in the areas of policy, strategies,
programmes and projects. The work of these
ministerial committees will go on for some months,
and the duration will be decided on by the first summit.

Finally, this preparatory phase will culminate in
the second summit of heads of State, planned to be held
in Kenya, although the date has not yet been decided
on, and it, inter alia, will adopt the security, stability
and regional development pact, comprising the
declaration of principle and programmes of action.

Regional ownership also means the active and
decisive involvement by as broad a spectrum as
possible of the main stakeholders in each country,
including representatives of the various ministries
concerned, representatives of civil society, as well as
representatives of parliamentarians, union
organizations and the business sector.

The United Nations has already been approached
by several of these institutions and regional and
international groups, some of which, such as the
Nyerere Foundation, the ITEKA League of Burundi,
and the International Peace Academy, have already
organized or plan to organize by the end of the year,
meetings to enhance the preparatory process of the
conference.

In order to strengthen regional ownership,
regional meetings of women and young people will be
organized in order to better highlight, in each of the
four themes of the conference, specific concerns of
these two important social categories. The same applies
to the meeting of the secretaries-general of the
subregional organizations, which will cover all or part
of the Great Lakes region, and the special envoy of the
African Union - Mr. Keli Walubita, referred to this
meeting just now - and it will be organized jointly by
the African Union and the United Nations, and the date
has just been decided on - from 8 to 9 December
2003.

Finally, in order to enhance the principle of
regional ownership, apart from the core countries of
the region, their neighbours will be invited to
participate as observers throughout the entire
conference. Naturally, the decisions relating to the
conference, including projects, will depend on the will
of the States of the region. The United Nations, the
African Union, the neighbouring countries and
international development partners should give full
support to the principle of regional ownership, which
was decided on by the heads of State of the region as
one of the basic conditions for their agreement to hold
the conference.

The second pillar of the process for the
conference is the principle of international partnership,
and this is covered in paragraphs 24-27 of the report.
This principle encompasses several levels. First of all,
it is reflected in the recognition of the importance of
the participation, from the beginning to the end of the
organizational process of the conference, of bilateral
and multilateral development partners of the Great
Lakes region. It is further expressed in the status of
active observer granted to development partners. While
the practical and operational conditions of this observer
status remain to be clarified, it emerged very clearly
during the meeting of National Coordinators that
development partners will have the right not only to
attend meetings, but also to take the floor and to
contribute to the debates.

Finally, the principle of international partnership
is the basis of the imminent establishment, on 4
December 2003 in Geneva, of the Group of Friends of
the Great Lakes region, thanks to the facilitation
provided by Canada following consultations with the
United Nations and the African Union. The Group will
provide a framework for information exchange,
consultation, cooperation and the harmonization of the
individual and collective actions and initiatives of the
international community of development partners for
the preparation and holding of and follow-up to the
international conference on the Great Lakes region.
The principle of international partnership will play a
particularly important role at the second summit of
heads of State, at which the stability, security and
development pact is to be adopted, and throughout the
follow-up phase to the conference, in which the pact
will be implemented and periodically assessed.

The role of the United Nations is the third
important element highlighted by the report for the
preparation and convening of the conference. It can be
analysed at three levels. The first is the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
Basically, this is a question of the United Nations
providing technical support for the national preparatory
committees; the secretariat responsible for preparing
and convening the follow-up meetings of the regional
preparatory committee; political guidance for the
discussions in the thematic meetings; institutional
coordination of the contributions of the various
departments, programmes and agencies of the United
Nations system; and assistance in mobilizing the
international community for the conference.
In that respect, the Office of the Special
Representative works in close cooperation with the
various United Nations missions and offices in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi and
with all of the coordinators of the United Nations
system in every country of the region.

Finally, a steering group has been established
incorporating all of the United Nations agencies
represented in Nairobi. It will serve as a framework for
coordinating the system's contributions to all aspects of
the preparation and holding of the conference. It is in
this setting that the work in each of the conference's
four thematic areas will be coordinated by one United
Nations entity, represented in Nairobi.

The second level will be based in New York,
where an inter-departmental and inter-agency working
group has been established within the Secretariat and
meets periodically to coordinate contributions to the
conference. As the report notes and as the Secretary-
General reiterated in his opening statement, it is
important that the Office of the Special Representative

"be provided with adequate resources so that it
can meet the increasing demands that the
launching of the preparatory process prompted".
(5/2003/1099, para. 29)

The third level is the Security Council. The role
of the Security Council, as the organ primarily
responsible for the maintenance of international peace
and security, is of crucial importance in the preparation
and convening of the conference; in providing political
guidance in the conference process; in giving essential
diplomatic support; and in mobilizing the international
community for the conference. Indeed, from the
perspective of any of the four thematic areas, the
conference ultimately hinges on the question of
security in the most noble meaning of that word -
human security.

