Mr. Sinirlioglu (Turkey): We thank Special
Representative Yamamoto for his briefing, and
the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, His
Excellency Mr. Mahmoud Saikal, for his statement.

At the outset, let me reiterate our heartfelt
condolences for those who lost their lives in the series
of terrorist attacks that began on 31 May in Kabul.
We once again strongly condemn those heinous
acts of terror. Turkey will continue its support to
the Government of Afghanistan in its fight against
terrorism and in its efforts to bring peace, security and
stability to the country.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
commend the members of the diplomatic community
in Kabul for their perseverance in the execution of
their duties despite all the challenges they face. We
also commend the role played by the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in
standing with the Afghan people and coordinating the
efforts of the international stakeholders in Afghanistan.
We will continue to support UNAMA's activities and
efforts in that regard.

I would like to express our appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/20l7/508). We share his concerns regarding the
deteriorating security situation in Afghanistan.
We also applaud the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces (ANDSF) for their determined stance
against terrorism. We acknowledge the sacrifices of
the ANDSF.

The presence of Da'esh in the country is also a
cause for serious concern and constitutes yet another
reason to continue supporting Afghanistan.

The achievements of the past 15 years need to be
consolidated. The continued support of the international
community during the transformation decade is crucial.
We are pleased to see that the international community
reiterated its support for Afghanistan in the NATO
Warsaw Summit and the Brussels Conference last year.
It is imperative to live up to the commitments made
to Afghanistan.

Turkey upheld its previous development contributions
and pledged another $150 million for the period 2018-
2020. We are also providing $60 million to sustain the
ANDSF for the period 2018-2020, in line with the NATO
Warsaw Summit decisions. We will contiue to support
the Afghan Government's security and development
efforts, both bilaterally and on multilateral platforms.
In that context, our support through the NATO Resolute
Support mission and the training of Afghan women
police officers in Turkey will continue.

In line with the international community's
continued support to Afghanistan, we welcome the
anti-corruption efforts of the Afghan Government. We
attach importance to the functioning of the National
Unity Government, as it symbolizes Afghan unity. The
international community should continue to support
the National Unity Government and encourage its
components to work in harmony with each other.

We are closely following the developments regarding
First Vice-President Dostum, who is currently in Turkey
for medical purposes. He will return to Afghanistan
upon completion of those medical procedures. We
agree that upholding the rule of law and eliminating
impunity are imperative for stability in Afghanistan.
However, the case against First Vice-President Dostum
might not be the most appropriate occasion to prove
that point. The case needs to be handled in a way that
will not put at risk the support provided to the National
Unity Government or create further deterioration of the
security situation, especially in northern Afghanistan.

We support Afghan-led and -owned peace and
reconciliation efforts, which aim at achieving lasting
peace and stability in Afghanistan. The first meeting
of the Kabul process for eace and security cooperation
conference, held on 6 June, was a positive development
in that direction. The meeting also provided the
international community with an opportunity to display
its solidarity with Afghanistan in a difficult period.
We hope that the agreement between the Afghan
Government and Hezb-i Islami will serve as a model
for others. The progress made in the implementation of
the agreement is encouraging, and we were pleased to
see them participating in the Kabul process meeting.

Enhanced cooperation and increased dialogue
among the countries of the region is also necessary.
In fact, it is the region itself that has the greatest role,
interest and responsibility in establishing and sustaining
a secure, prosperous and peaceful Afghanistan. In
that regard, Turkey will continue its contributions to
Afghanistan, inter alia within the multilateral platforms,
including through the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process.

