Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): We would
like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council. We would also like to thank
Ambassador Yafiez-Barnuevo for his efforts as
President of the Council last month.

We are extremely disturbed by the turn of events
in Palestine over the past few days. The situation there
is, indeed, worsening; self-defence cannot justify the
massacre of innocent civilians. The loss of life,
particularly among civilians in the occupied territories,
is unacceptable. That is why we condemn in the
strongest terms the disproportionate use of force in the
occupied territories. Every human life is valuable, and
there can be no exception to the obligation to protect
and preserve human life.

The international community's renewed
commitment to ensure respect for the rule of law
cannot stop at the gates to Palestine. Palestine, too, is
part of the global village that we are trying to make
more tolerable for all of its inhabitants, present and
future. Accordingly, we call for an immediate halt to
the military operation currently under way in the Gaza
Strip. Israel's position will be better heard if it fully
respects its moral and legal commitments as a State
member of the international community. It is a State
that claims to be democratic. We urge Israel to
cooperate in good faith with a view to developing,
together with the Palestinians, a common area of peace
and prosperity.

We urge Israel to abide by its obligations with
regard to the people in the occupied territories. We
recognize Israel's right to protect its territory and its
people against terrorist attacks. The continuing
deterioration in the situation in the Middle East shows
how necessary it is to return to the road map. That
remains the only practicable way of arriving at a
lasting resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We
therefore urge both parties to fulfil their obligations
under the road map and to enter into a dialogue in good
faith with a view to establishing the necessary
conditions for creating a Palestinian State, in
accordance with the vision of two sovereign States
living side by side within internationally recognized
borders. Neither the rocket attacks on Israeli villages
nor the incursions of the Israeli Defense Forces into the
occupied Palestinian territories accord with the terms
of the road map.

Finally, we again make an urgent appeal to the
Quartet to step up its efforts to bring the parties back to
the negotiating table.

