Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to express
our gratitude for the briefings that we heard from the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), Ms. Leila Zerrougui; Ambassador
Mansour Alotaibi of Kuwait in his capacity as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo; and Ms. Justine Masika Bihamba.

We welcome the ongoing progress and commitment
demonstrated by the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to meet the deadlines set out in the electoral calendar,
in particular with respect to the promulgation of the law
on the distribution of seats for the national, legislative,
provincial and local elections. We welcome also the
publication of the list of platforms and political parties.
We have taken note of the audit of voter register, which
took place in an inclusive atmosphere bringing together
members of the Maj orite presidentielle, members of civil
society and regional and subregional organizations. We
therefore hope that all registered voters will be able to
cast their ballot in the elections.

We reiterate that to ensure the effective holding of
elections leading to a peaceful transfer of power, and in
order to ease tensions at the political level, the parties
must implement the confidence-building measures
enshrined in the 31 December 2016 agreement. We
deplore the fact that these measures had not been fully
implemented by the deadline, which has passed, and
therefore call once again for their full and effective
implementation. We believe that the Government
and the opposition must work together in order to
make headway in such implementation. Although the
Government must take the initiative and the leadership
role in such implementation, the measures will not be
practicable without the participation of the opposition.
We therefore appeal to all parties to cooperate in the
run-up to the holding of transparent, credible, peaceful
and inclusive elections.

We believe that the full and effective participation
of women at all stages of the elections, as well as that
of young people, is vital, in keeping with the joint
communique issued by the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council at their
twelfth annual joint consultative meeting, held on
19 July.

On another front, we support the initiatives and good
offices of the Special Representative. We welcome her
meetings with various stakeholders aimed at allowing
for an exchange of views and ensuring a coherent and
coordinated approach on the part of the United Nations
and regional actors. We also welcome the meetings held
with various authorities, political platforms and civil-
society groups to discuss the electoral process.

We also commend the support for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo provided by
regional organizations, such as the Southern African
Development Community, the Economic Community
of Central African States and the African Union, among
others. We encourage them to pursue their efforts, in
close cooperation with the Government, to meet the
political and security challenges that the country is
facing. Similarly, we support the work of MONUSCO,
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
and the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
the Great Lakes Region in preparing the holding of
elections, and we encourage them to continue their
collaborative work with the Independent National
Electoral Commission.

We pay tribute to those who gave their lives for
the cause of peace in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We commend MONUSCO's work in connection
with measures taken for the protection of civilians. We
also welcome its work to reduce violence in areas of the
country by implementing projects to reduce community
violence, which have led to the return of 800 displaced
persons since April. We call for the pursuit of such
projects, in conjunction with MONUSCO's efforts
aimed at reconciliation among communities and
within the framework of the International Security and
Stabilization Support Strategy, focusing on stabilization
and the restoration of State authority in the country.

The challenges faced by the Democratic Republic
of the Congo have increased exponentially, and their
solution lies not only in the holding of elections, but
also in addressing the root causes of the conflict. One
of those is the lack of control over natural resources,
which is helping to prolong the crisis, the fragmentation
of armed groups and the systematic exploitation of those
resources by multinational corporations that operate
unchecked and whose revenue can be used to fund
continuing instability in the country. Accordingly, we
believe that, in order to deal with that issue, achieving
control of areas rich in natural resources and their
sovereign administration must be an essential goal, in
terms of both a cessation of hostilities and economic
development. When a country maintains effective
control of its resources and there is political will to
administer them for the benefit of the population, it
is possible to achieve a structural change leading to
stabilization and the strengthening of the rule of law.

In that regard, we commend the work of Kuwait,
in its capacity as chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and we agree that
Committee members must be updated on the efforts of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and other States
to address questions concerning the illegal exploitation
and smuggling of natural resources by armed groups
and on measures taken to help the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region and the countries of the region to
develop responsible commercial trade in minerals, with
the understanding that strategies must be developed
leading to the consolidation of peace in the post-
electoral process.

We also express our solidarity with the victims
of the Ebola outbreak and commend the Congolese
authorities, the international community and the World
Health Organization for their prompt response to that
health crisis. We are concerned about the humanitarian
and security crisis in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo caused by armed groups, as well as by increasing
intercommunal violence, particularly in the regions of
Ituri, Kasai, the Kivus and Tanganyika. We condemn
in the strongest terms the many abuses committed
against the population. We call on all armed groups
to immediately end all forms of violence, including
violations and abuses against children, and other
destabilizing activities, including the illicit exploitation
and trafficking of natural resources. Those groups must
immediately and permanently disband, lay down their
weapons, reject violence and release the children whom
they hold within their ranks.

Lastly, we welcome the cooperation of the
international community and other international
partners in raising funds to meet humanitarian needs
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We call on
them to pursue such efforts, in continued cooperation
with the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and in strict respect of its sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity.
