Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Our
delegation too would like to express its appreciation to
you, Mr. President, and to the Slovak Republic, for the
initiative to hold an open debate in the Security
Council on security sector reform - an issue that the
Council has already identified as key to any
stabilization process in post-conflict situations,
recognizing the need for the United Nations to outline
more coherent strategies in this regard.

I would like to make some general comments
regarding how the delegation of Uruguay approaches
this issue. The traditional concept of security,
understood as the protection of the State from external
threats, is losing its relevance and giving way to a new
concept of security that puts people, together with
human rights and development, at the centre of its
concerns. This new concept of security is closely
connected to conflict prevention and peacebuilding.

Security sector reform is an essential element in
the promotion of greater democratic civilian control
over defence and security with a View to improving the
efficacy of security institutions. We should not forget
that the security sector has particular characteristics
because of the important role that could be played by
the potential use of force. Given that security sector
reform affects institutions that protect State
sovereignty, such reform will not be viable unless there
is agreement, ownership, cooperation and the full
participation of the State carrying it out.

Security sector reform is a process, not an end in
itself. Experience shows that the tendency of some
donors and institutions has been to follow the security
model of Western democracies, without taking into
account the specific characteristics of each country in
need of security reform. Attempting to apply a single

security model to societies that are undergoing
transition and dealing with economic and political
limitations - societies whose institutions are weak or
non-existent or in which armed conflict may even be
continuing - amounts to resorting to general formulas
without acknowledging the complexities and
particularities of each case.

The vast majority of international security sector
reform initiatives focus on developing countries,
especially those emerging from civil conflict. However,
we should be aware that such reforms are just as
relevant for developed countries. We need only
consider the cases of police brutality in some of those
countries, selective police searches on the basis of
racial criteria and the general lack of measures to
prevent or respond to violence against women, as well
as the high levels of military expenditure.

The gender perspective must be taken into
account in any security sector reform strategy.
Resolution 1325 (2000) urges us to incorporate a
gender perspective into all efforts for the maintenance
and promotion of peace and security. That could yield
an effective response to gender-related threats,
especially violence against women, and, in particular,
could compensate for the underrepresentation of
women in decision-making within the security sector.

I would like to make several concrete
suggestions. My delegation believes that the United
Nations should agree on a common approach to
security sector reform. In this context, we believe that
the request made in March 2006 by the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations to the
Secretary-General is relevant. In paragraph 123 of its
report contained in document A/60/19, the Special
Committee requested the Secretariat

"to conduct a process of joint policymaking on
security sector reform best practices bearing in
mind the distinctive competencies of the United
Nations, and those of other partners, and
recognizing the linkages with disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration."

Security sector reform policies should be an
integral and sustained component of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding strategies. With regard to peacekeeping
strategies, our delegation welcomes the Security
Council's increased inclination to include in peace
mission mandates responsibilities relating to human
rights, the police and judicial, legal and correctional
systems. However, it would be useful to know what
concrete results have been attained so far in security
sector reform in countries emerging from conflict.

It would be very helpful for the Council to have
such information, especially when the time comes to
renew peacekeeping mandates. It would also help the
Council to focus on formulating policies aimed at
correcting errors made in implementation and at
strengthening those areas of security reform that a
country's specific situation requires.

With regard to peacebuilding activities, our
delegation welcomes the fact that security sector
reform has been included in the mandates of the United
Nations Integrated Offices in Burundi and in Sierra
Leone. It would be interesting to know the experiences
and results in both countries in drawing up and
implementing such policies so that the Peacebuilding
Commission, in close cooperation with the Security
Council and the Integrated Offices, can follow up on
those policies.

Last but not least, international cooperation is
indispensable for promoting and implementing
activities linked to security sector reform. For example,
Uruguay has developed a cooperation and assistance
project for Haiti in the area of the consolidation of
democracy. Through that project, my country hopes to
be able to make a contribution in the area of elections,
helping to strengthen Haiti's institutions and to
promote democratic training through programmes in
civics education and citizen participation.

