The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.

I thank Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson for
his briefing and for his support for this issue. We also
greatly appreciate the remarks of our four briefers, who
have made a compelling case for the challenges and risks
thatjournalists face. Their experiences demonstrate the
indispensible role that journalists play in focusing the
world's attention on conflict. That is why the United
States has convened today's open debate on protecting
journalists.

Journalists are literally our eyes and ears in every
corner of the world. They sound the warning when local
tensions threaten to erupt into war. They document the
suffering of civilians in conflict areas. And they expose
human rights violations and war crimes. Journalists are
critical to the Security Council's ability to remain well
informed so that it may fulfil its mandate to maintain
international peace and security.

Reporting from the former Yugoslavia in the 19905
brought attention to mass atrocities there and helped to
mobilize the response of the international community,
including support for a war crimes tribunal. More
recently, the Council relied on videos, photos and the
reported accounts of citizens to understand the events
taking place in Libya in 2011. That real-time reporting
gave us the information necessary to act quickly to
prevent even more horrific violence by the Al-Qadhafi
regime.

Tragically, this work is not without sacrifice, as
the case ofjournalist Mohamed Nabbous and his wife
Samra Naas demonstrated. When a sniper killed Mo
while he was broadcasting live during Al-Qadhafi's
assault on Benghazi, Samra, pregnant with their first
child, took his place, declaring "What he has started
has got to go on, no matter what happens."

In Syria, the Al-Assad regime continues to kill,
imprison and torture journalists. Mazen Darwish,
head of the Syrian Center for Media and Freedom of
Expression, the only Syria-based non-governmental
organization accredited to the United Nations, has been
held incommunicado since February 2012, and was
reported to have been tortured by the Al-Assad regime.
His so-called crime, like so many ofhis colleagues, was
to exercise his universal right to freedom of expression
to show the world the regime's atrocities.

As others have noted, resolution 1738 (2006)
reminds us that journalists operating in armed conflict
are protected under international humanitarian law.
Given the invaluable contribution of journalists to
our work, the Council must do all it can to ensure
their protection. Therefore, we ask the Secretary-
General to increase his focus on the safety and security
of journalists, media professionals and associated
personnel in his reports on the protection of civilians
and in his reports on peacekeeping missions whose
mandates include civilian protection.

Furthermore, we urge Member States, especially
those that contribute troops and police to United
Nations peacekeeping missions, to ensure that their
judicial officials, law enforcement officers and military
personnel know their obligations under international
human rights law and international humanitarian law
as regards the safety ofjournalists.

Impunity for violence against journalists must
end. The United States endorses fully the 2012 United
Nations Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and
the Issue of Impunity. We encourage Member States to
enact its provisions and put in place voluntary protection
programmes forjournalists operating in conflict areas.

We also underscore the specific risks faced by
women journalists, including sexual and gender-
based violence. A gender-sensitive approach is needed
when considering measures to address the safety of
journalists.

New and emerging forms of twenty-first century
communication technologies, including various
Internet forums, blogging, texting and other social
media platforms, have transformed the way journalists,
including citizen journalists, work. Those new forms
of communication have allowed wider and more rapid
dissemination of information from conflicts across the
globe. We call on all Member States to maintain and
safeguard the infrastructure that enables the work of
journalists in situations of conflict.

In conclusion, recognizing the value of the work
ofjournalists reporting on conflict, the Council has an
obligation to help protect those who provide us with so
much vital information. We thank journalists around
the world who risk their lives to seek the truth and shine
light on the darkness for the entire world to see. The
Security Council could not do its job without them.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I wish to remind speakers to limit their statements
to no more than four minutes in order to enable the
Council to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations
with lengthy statements are kindly requested to
circulate the texts in writing and to deliver a condensed
version when speaking in the Chamber.

I now give the floor to the representative of Brazil.

