Mr. Nesho (Albania): Allow me, Sir, to express
our sincere congratulations on your excellent work and
the results achieved by the Security Council during the
month of your presidency.

The Albanian delegation welcomes the presence
of Mr. Harri Holkeri, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and wishes him success in his
important work, following the successful efforts of all
his predecessors: the late Mr. Vieira de Mello,
Mr. Kouchner, Mr. Haekkerup and Mr. Steiner.

The Albanian delegation commends the
Secretary-General for his report and Special
Representative Holkeri for today's comprehensive
briefing. We emphasize Albania's consistent and
comprehensive commitment to implementing
resolution 1244 (1999) and to working together with all
the countries of the region in order to achieve full
democratic integration into the European Union and
foster sustainable peace and stability in the Balkans.

Albania welcomes the beginning of dialogue
between Pristina and Belgrade in Vienna, and
encourages continued dialogue between the parties on
technical cooperation issues in the priority fields
defined by the United Nations. Kosovo's political
institutions must understand that the process of
cooperation between the two parties is the only way to
establish a democratic and multi-ethnic society.
Starting the dialogue demonstrates a great sense of
responsibility. Kosovo's democratic institutions should
set something new in motion by getting rid of the
hatred and national division nourished by past
totalitarian regimes. Dialogue means progress, not
submission. It is a process that does not deny the
legitimate and universal rights of peoples to self-
determination and independence; rather, the power of
reason and uncontested reality legitimizes it as
irreversible.

The international community would probably
have raised awareness of the need for dialogue better if
the representatives of Kosovo's institutions had felt
legitimate and entitled to represent their country and
exercise their free will. The lack of full executive
competences, which have not yet been transferred; the
inability to accelerate the pace of privatization in order
to ensure a free market economy; and the absence of a
complete judicial framework for the economy and
administration: these have psychologically influenced,
and thus slowed down, a constructive dialogue.

The political situation and the forthcoming
elections in both countries have resulted in the dialogue
process being used for political and electoral rhetoric;
in many cases it has been used for propaganda,
declaring victory by one party over the other, in an
attempt to reassert control and dominance. In his report
the Secretary-General repeatedly and rightfully
expresses concern over the existence of parallel
structures in Kosovo and various pressures that have
been hindering the creation of a multi-ethnic society. It
will be difficult to consolidate a multi-ethnic society if
one party cannot fully guarantee the freedoms and
rights of minorities, and if the other will think and act
under pressure as if it were not part of the society.
In some cases, certain Belgrade officials put
pressure on independent United Nations institutions of
justice to judge the leaders of political parties in
Kosovo who were members of the international
coalition against Milosevic's criminal regime, while
there has never been a public apology for the
monstrous crimes committed against the Albanian
people of Kosovo - the mass graves, the genocide of
the last century. Albanians in Kosovo can forgive, but
they cannot forget. New messages of trust and
confidence should bond the two countries.

Albania believes that the international
community's request for implementation of the
standards before status policy is a priority for Kosovo.
Achieving it will show the seriousness of the
Government of Kosovo about meeting its commitments
for the future.

The Albanian delegation has repeatedly urged
that representatives of the legal institutions of Kosovo
be present at discussions about the duties of the
Security Council and relevant matters under its
consideration, so that they may better take
responsibility for their own future. We regret to inform
the Council that not only the citizens of Kosovo, but
also the ministers of its interim Government, learn
about Security Council positions and directives only
through articles and editorials of the free media. Their
presence as part of the delegation of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General would
reinforce their sense of responsibility and their
commitment to the successful carrying out of the
United Nations mission.

