The President (spoke in Spanish): I will now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Plurinational Republic of Bolivia.

We thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special Envoy
of the Secretary General for Syria, for his briefing and
we are grateful for his tireless efforts in a difficultjob.

We want to emphasize that in the past few months
there has been a reduction in military activity in
various regions of the Syrian territory, thanks partly to
the Syrian Government's consolidation of its control,
but also to the efforts of the Astana guarantors, whose
agreements must be reinforced if the aim is to reduce
violence and facilitate peace and stability in Syria.
In that regard, we are pleased with the results of the
agreement between the Russian Federation and Turkey
on Idlib governorate, which has allowed a demilitarized
zone to be established there. We welcome the fact
that although the agreement was in force only until
15 October, it is still valid and has been enabling radical
combatants to withdraw from Idlib.

We should reiterate, however, that any action in
the fight against terrorism must be conducted within
the framework of international law and international
humanitarian law in particular, so as to guarantee the
protection of civilian lives and of workers from the
various humanitarian agencies in the field. We reiterate
our support for the Special Envoy's work, and for his
conversations with the various parties at a so-called
high diplomatic level. In that regard, we will be closely
watching the results ofhis visit to Damascus in the next
few days, and if necessary the presidency of the Council
will convene a meeting to hear a report on his efforts.

We reiterate that there can be no military solution
to the conflict in Syria, and we therefore reject any
attempt to provoke fragmentation or sectarianism
there, as well as the presence there of external forces
with no authorization from the Syrian Government.
On the contrary, it is clear that the solution requires
the continued implementation of the Sochi final
declaration, whose main objective is the establishment
ofa constitutional committee.

Lastly, in accordance with the provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations, international
law and respect for the principle of the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Syria, we call
for the resolution of this conflict through an inclusive,
dialogue-based and concerted political process, led by
and for the Syrian people, that would make it possible to
reach a peaceful, lasting solution to the situation in the
framework of the Geneva process and resolution 2254
(2015), and under the auspices of the United Nations.

1 now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.

