Mrs. Albright (United States of America): The
United States regrets that this discussion of Israel's
closure of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip is taking
place. It has been our View - and that of many other
members - that such a discussion cannot help the peace
process. It can only polarize that already difficult situation
and distract us from the focus of our real challenges: how
to combat terror, guarantee security, ease the economic
dislocation of Palestinians and pursue the process of
peacemaking.

The international community has responded
aggressively to those challenges. Twenty-nine world
leaders, including 13 from the Middle East and others
from non-regional supporters of the peace process,
convened at Sharm El Sheikh for a summit meeting co-

 

sponsored by President Mubarak and President Clinton.
Participants at the summit expressed their full support for
the peace process and issued a strong condemnation of
terrorism. They also agreed to develop a plan to fight
terrorism with all available means. The positive tone set by
that summit has already been reinforced by a meeting of
experts in Washington, where, in addition to exploring
measures to combat terror, a package of steps to begin to
ease the suffering and hardships of Palestinians was
announced. This is positive action - action designed to
foster unity among those countries that want to combat
terrorism, support Israel and the Palestinians, and preserve
the peace process.

This is where we should be focusing our efforts: on
seeking ways to combat those who would destroy the peace
process and prevent Arabs and Israelis from achieving
further progress. Suicide bombers should be seen for what
they are: not only as murderers of people but also as those
who want to kill the peace process. The terrorism posed by
Hamas is as much a threat to the Palestinians as it is to
Israel. The Government of Israel has taken measures to
confront the terrorist threat and to protect its citizens, and
the Palestinian Authority is grappling with this challenge.
This body should not be engaging in a divisive rhetorical
debate when there is so much work to do in all these areas.

We regret the economic hardship and suffering of
Palestinians caused by the recent Hamas terror attacks and
the measures Israel has taken to deal with this threat. We
call on the international community to do all it can to
alleviate those economic hardships. We commend the
efforts of those countries and organizations which have
worked overtime to come up with ideas and funding to help
the Palestinians cope with the current difficulties. We also
acknowledge that the Government of Israel has already
taken steps to ease the current situation.

In this regard we take note of the recent meeting of
the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee of the donors that met in
Brussels on 12 April. That meeting outlined several key
steps, including emergency job creation for Palestinians and
project development, and outlined a strategy to mobilize the
necessary resources to support those efforts. This will not
be an easy effort, and there are no quick fixes. Both Israel
and the Palestinians must rise to the challenge. Palestinians
must do all they can to continue to root out terror; Israel,
consistent with its security needs, must do everything it can
to ease economic hardships for Palestinians. And together
they must move to restore momentum to the process of
implementation of their agreements. It is imperative that we
lend them all our support.

This Council's sole objective must be to aid and
support all those efforts. Rather than engaging in endless
debate here in New York, we should recognize that the
real answer to extremist terror and violence lies in the
pursuit of the peace process by the parties themselves and
in the achievement of a comprehensive peace. This is our
goal, and my Government will do everything in its power
to bring this about.

