Mr. Mayr-Harting (European Union) (spoke in Russian): I would like to congratulate you personally,
Mr. President, as well as the Russian Federation, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council this
month.

(spoke in English)

I would also like to thank our Korean friends and
colleagues for their presidency last month.

I have the honour to speak on behalfofthe European
Union (EU) and its member States. The candidate
countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia; the countries of
the Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia,
align themselves with this statement.

In the interests of time, I will give a shortened
version of the written text that was prepared for today's
meeting; the full version of that text will be circulated
in the Chamber.

Let me begin by saying that we are grateful for the
work done by the Secretariat to innovate and strengthen
the capabilities of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Peacekeeping remains the flagship activity
of the United Nations and a crucial tool paving the
way for longer-term stability and development of
countries emerging from a crisis. The important work
of all actors in partnership with the United Nations is
a tremendous effort that may not always be given due
recognition. A few days ago, on 29 May, we celebrated
International Day of United Nations Peacekeepers. We
would like to once again pay tribute to and express our
deep appreciation and respect for those who have lost
their lives in the service of the United Nations.

We share the view that the peacekeeping agenda
requires regular exchanges among all stakeholders,
from troop- and police-contributing countries, the
Secretariat, the Security Council, to the broader
membership of the General Assembly. In that regard,
we underline the relevance of resolution 1353 (2001).
Important discussions have also taken place earlier in
the year in the context of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations.

The direct involvement of peacekeepers is
required in increasingly volatile situations, and they
are facing higher risks than ever before. Ensuring that
peacekeepers are well trained and equipped with the
most up to date tools is of essence if mandates are to
be delivered with due regard to the safety and security
of men and women on the ground. We should ensure
that troops benefit from the certified training they need
before their deployment to the field.

A more robust mandate and the use of new
capabilities, such as the Force Intervention Brigade in
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
have demonstrated that peace enforcement where
necessary and under defined conditions can support the
success and legitimacy of a United Nations operation.
At the same time, we also need to focus on using
existing capabilities in the most effective way possible
and on making sure that those capabilities can perform
in an optimal way.

The European Union and its member States support
those modernization efforts. Specifically, we commend
the Secretariat's efforts towards the wider use of
modern technologies in peacekeeping operations.
We have learned that the use of such technology in
MONUSCO has already supported a better delivery
of its protection mandate and increased the situational
awareness of troops on the ground. We encourage the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to further
explore opportunities to use modern technology in
peacekeeping missions.
Secondly, we strongly believe in the central
importance ofthe protection of all civilians, particularly
women and children, in armed conflict. That is often
decisive for the success and legitimacy of a United
Nations peacekeeping operation.

We also encourage ongoing efforts to fully
implement the resolutions on women and peace and
security, including in engaging women in conflict
prevention, peacemaking and peacebuilding processes,
and its resolutions on children and armed conflict.
Integrating a gender and child protection perspective
in the training of military, police and civilian staff
in peacekeeping operations is equally important. We
welcome the United Nations resolve in preventing and
combating sexual exploitation and abuse and emphasize
the key role senior mission leadership plays in ensuring
accountability.

The presidential statement (S/PRST/20l4/3) adopted
on the occasion of the debate on the protection of
civilians (see S/PV.7109) earlier in the year gives further
guidance for the consideration of issues pertaining
to the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
Nonetheless, more needs to be done in order to translate
the normative process into concrete improvements on
the ground.

Peacekeeping missions play an important role
in peacebuilding and the continued work on the
peacekeeping/peacebuilding nexus remains important.
We recognize the close links between peace, security,
development and gender equality. In that context, we
welcome the work on the United Nations policy on
transitions, which demonstrates the close links between
those different activities, with the aim of producing a
positive outcome to post-crisis situations.

We appreciate the increased attention given to
the role of regional organizations in peacekeeping.
In that context, the European Union obviously also
welcomed the adoption by the Council of the first-ever
presidential statement in which it encouraged both
organizations - the United Nations and the European
Union - to further strengthen their institutional
relations and strategic partnership (S/PRST/2014/4).
High Representative Ashton has briefed the Council
on numerous occasions, and Under-Secretary-General
Ladsous regularly attends informal EU Defence
Ministers' meetings.

On the ground, there are also many concrete
examples that show the close partnership the European
Union has with the United Nations. For instance, the
European Union military mission to contribute to
the training of the Malian Armed Forces is working
alongside the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali to deliver
on our shared aims. The European Union has also
developed a strong partnership with the African Union
in Somalia, through the African Union Mission in
Somalia. The European Union has played and continues
to play an important role in the cases of Mali and the
Central African Republic by financially supporting
African-led missions that precede and pave the way
for United Nations peacekeeping operations. Last but
not least, the European Union and its member States
deploy many efforts to support African countries in
developing their own military capabilities with a View
to helping them contribute to the United Nations peace
and security agenda.

The EU and its member States make an important
contribution to the guidance of United Nations
peacekeeping and have a great interest in making United
Nations peacekeeping more efficient. We therefore look
forward to constructive exchanges with all partners on
issues raised in all the appropriate forums.

