The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.

The Russian Federation supported the Council's
draft resolution extending the United Nations
humanitarian programme into its ninth phase. This was
made possible by the sponsors' taking into account
several provisions that are matters of principle for us
and which truly promote the improved effectiveness of
the humanitarian programme.

The draft resolution mentions the understanding
reached in September on reducing the deduction rate of
funds transferred to the Compensation Fund from 30 to
25 per cent. The draft also contains provisions on the
elaboration of a mechanism for the further reduction of
the payments, which should become a reality in the
very near future. We also consider a step forward the
fact that the draft addresses the Security Council's
obligation to consider the question of Iraq's
contributions to the regular budget of the United
Nations.

There is a new and important element in the
humanitarian programme regarding the necessity of
providing 600 million euros to meet the needs of Iraq's
petroleum sector.

Particular attention should be given to the fact
that it was agreed not to include any confrontational
provisions in the draft regarding individual aspects of
the sanctions regime which do not have any direct
connection with the humanitarian programme.

I should like to emphasize that Russia has always
supported, and continues to support, an overall review
of the sanctions in the Security Council, but on the
basis of a comprehensive approach, not a selective one.
Regrettably, the draft does not reflect any of the
concerns contained in the report of the Secretary-
General and in the briefing of the Executive Director of
the Office of the Iraq Programme, Mr. Sevan,
including, most importantly, the continuing problem of
contract holds. We would like to see this problem
resolved as soon as possible, as the Secretary-General
recommends.

Russia continues to view the humanitarian
programme as a transition measure which cannot be an
alternative to the stable social and economic
development of Iraq.

We are convinced that a fundamental resolution
of the problem of the humanitarian crisis will be
impossible as long as sanctions are maintained.
Consequently, we are in favour of suspending and
lifting the sanctions in the context of the
implementation of the Security Council's resolutions.
We will continue to work actively to this end.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I put to the vote the draft resolution contained in
document S/2000/1149.

A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Argentina, Bangladesh, Canada, China, France,
Jamaica, Malaysia, Mali, Namibia, Netherlands,
Russian Federation, Tunisia, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America

The President (spoke in Russian): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1330 (2000).
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 9.05 pm.

