Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): Please accept my
felicitations, Madam President, on your assumption of
your very important office and for your able
stewardship in convening this very important debate.

We have carefully listened to the briefings of the
Secretary-General and Mr. John Holmes, the Under-
Secretary-General heading the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). We bid
him a fond farewell and commend the very good work
he has done in his tenure. It is a thankless job. Of
course, we wish him the very best in his next
appointment. I also wish to thank Ms. Navanethem
Pillay, High Commissioner for Human Rights.

At the outset, let me state unequivocally that the
Government of Pakistan condemns attacks on civilians
under all circumstances. It is indeed an abominable act
that cannot be justified under any circumstances. That
was rightfully reflected in Mr. John Holmes'
submissions.

Pakistan is very proud of being one of the largest
troop-contributing countries to United Nations
peacekeeping missions and is fully engaged in this
important debate on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. However, there have been some
references made that are perhaps somewhat out of
context and might have been better viewed in
perspective, as I shall explain in a while.

As we debate the subject of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, we understand, or should
understand, that this is not a debate on the protection of
civilians in all situations. There are some strict
applications and criteria. Perhaps we should have heard
more mention of parts of the world where innocent
people continue to suffer because of their inability to
exercise their right to self-determination and the lack
of judicial succour. Maybe the mention of the attack on
the humanitarian flotilla in international waters off the
coast of Gaza, which was an act of wilful intent, and
the continuing violations in Palestine could have been
portrayed a little better. But as far as we are concerned,
we have the very difficult task of eliminating the
scourge of international terrorism from our territories
and of protecting not only ourselves but the world.

I think that the two comments made about
Pakistan - one on the aspect of thousands of civilian
conflict dead, where we are bunched together with
Gaza, Sri Lanka, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Afghanistan and Somalia; and the other on the
1.8 million displaced people in Pakistan, although it
has been stated quite clearly that many have since
returned - need a little more explanation.

First, the world is calling upon us all the time to
take on international terrorism in the boundary regions
so widely mentioned in the document before me. We
have to go along with the international community. But
I think that document rightly says that, whereas in
Swat and in South Waziristan there were at one stage
nearly 1.8 million people displaced, they were not in
fact displaced. They were asked to leave the areas
before our militaries moved in with complete
international backing to rid the areas of the miscreants
creating world terror. The fact is that they went out
voluntarily and that OCHA did a really good job in
looking after them, as did many other institutions and
the Government of Pakistan. Less than a few hundred
thousand were actually in camps set up by OCHA; the
others were in fact looked after by our own people and
the Government. The fact that they went back at such a
fast rate is perhaps a reflection of the fact that they
were kept out of harm's way. They could have suffered
awfully, but we brought them out despite the fact that
our doing so perhaps gave a lot of leeway for the
terrorists to slip away. But we took that option because
it was the right one. We had to protect our people. By
the grace of God, we have been able to see a lot of
them back in the various parts from which they came.
In my mind, that is vindication that we have tried our
level best and succeeded in keeping civilians out of
harm's way.

Pakistan is a functioning democracy with a very
strong, rejuvenated judiciary that is pursuing suo moto
any contradiction of humanitarian acts or matters in a
very activist manner. That is being done at the highest
possible forums, even up to the supreme judiciary
level. We are determined to achieve the protection and
promotion of the human rights of all our citizens. That
objective has the fullest support not only of our people,
but also of the international community.

We are very concerned about attacks on
humanitarian actors, and we are committed and
continue to provide all possible protection and security
to humanitarian actors working in Pakistan. We have
often succeeded in retrieving those who were
kidnapped. Many hundreds of our own security
personnel have given their lives to protect
humanitarian actors. I cannot underscore that more
strongly than I am doing now.

Let us not underestimate our constraints, of
which the Council is aware, or let our will and sacrifice
be undermined by being included in dissimilar country
groupings. We have our own particular situation.
Obviously, we ask for the Council's indulgence and
understanding. But believe me, as far as we are
concerned, we will do anything to protect our civilians,
and yet relentlessly pursue all those who try to make
the world an unsafe place.

