Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I, too, wish
to thank Ambassador Osorio for his 90-day report and
for his effective chairmanship of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006).

The final report (S/2012/395) that the Panel of
Experts has just delivered to the Council presents
a comprehensive and detailed picture of the
implementation of sanctions on Iran. It makes clear that
sanctions have an effect. They deter Iran's acquisition
of ballistic and nuclear materials, thereby slowing its
nuclear programme. They have also compelled Iran to
alter its methods of acquisition and its illicit export and
financing. We should continue to rigorously implement
the sanctions.

The report also sheds light on the persistent violations
by Iran of its international obligations. Those violations
point to ever more complex and harmful methods of
evasion - phantom companies, bogus names, the use of
multiple brokers and exchanges, physical concealment
and false statements. Among other things, the Panel
underlines the continual involvement of members of
the Army of the Guardians of the Islamic Revolution
and of the Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping Lines in
violations.

I especially want to stress Iran's violations of the
arms embargo. We are seriously concerned about the
active role played by Syria, outlined yet again by the
Panel. Syria, which is carrying out a bloody repression
of its population, is involved in the majority of cases
of violations of the arms embargo reported to the
Committee. The scale of those violations bespeaks an
ongoing, systematic policy of illicit transfer of arms and
related materials between Iran and Syria. Moreover, it
is also known that Syria is involved in many violations
reported to the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), on North Korea.
Those are serious violations on Syria's part of its
obligations to the Security Council.

The independent Panel of Experts, established in
2010 by resolution 1929 (2010), plays a crucial role
in guaranteeing that measures adopted by the Security
Council are implemented and remain effective. I express
our thanks to the Panel for its professionalism and
outstanding work. We welcome the fact that its latest
final report will be available to everyone, and would
wish that to be the case as well with regard to last year's
report.
The Panel's work is far from finished. We therefore
welcome the extension of its mandate for another year.
That is one more signal to Iran of the determination of
the international community to enforce full compliance
with Security Council resolutions.

The Committee must also fulfil its role. We would
therefore like the Panel's recommendations to be
followed. The Committee must regularly update its
lists of goods, people and entities that are subject to
sanctions. That is especially true for individuals and
entities guilty of violations. In that respect, we are
pleased that for the first time since its inception the
Committee has designated two additional individuals
and one company with ties to the A1 Quds Force of the
Army of the Guardians of the Islamic Revolution and
involved in violations of the arms embargo reported by
Nigeria. That is an important step forward. It is proof that
sanctions violations will not be without consequences
and that all States have an important role to play in the
implementation of sanctions.

The Security Council has yet again received a
worrying report from the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). It
highlights that Iran continues to refuse to comply
with the demands of the Security Council and the
IAEA Board of Governors. Iran is actively pursuing
its uranium enrichment programme, to 3.5 and 20 per
cent, and its heavy water projects, in violation of its
obligations under Security Council resolutions, and
without any convincing proof of its civilian application.
In particular, Iran continues to enrich uranium to
20 per cent in its underground facility in Fordo, which it
concealed for years.

On the subject of the military dimension of Iran's
programme, unfortunately no concrete progress was
achieved by the IAEA at its recent meeting in Tehran
on 8 June on a structured programme document, which
represents an attempt to resolve outstanding issues
about Iran's programme, especially those relating
to militarization. Despite several recent visits to
Iran by the Agency and, in particular, by its Director
General, Tehran continues to refuse to formally agree
to the document. That is regrettable. In keeping with
the demands of the IAEA Board of Governors in its
resolution of last November, Iran must give the Agency
full access to all relevant documents, people and
sites, including the military facility in Parchin, where
the Agency has claimed that operations were being
conducted in violation of the required verifications.

What we ask for, as does the Council and the
international community as a whole, is for Iran to
instil confidence in the peaceful nature of its nuclear
programme. On 23 and 24 May, the E3+3 Governments
met with Iran in Baghdad. That meeting aimed to build on
the renewed discussions on Iran's nuclear programme in
Istanbul on 14 April. The E3+3 made concrete proposals
for creating confidence in the exclusively peaceful goals
of the Iranian nuclear programme. Those steps concern
20 per cent enrichment activities conducted by Iran, in
particular at Qom. They would be a first step towards
Iran's full respect of its international commitments.
We expect Iran to offer a constructive response to our
proposals during the next meeting in Moscow, in order
to engage a genuine negotiating process that will yield
tangible results.

