Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): We appreciate the convening of this
important briefing. Similarly, we appreciate the
briefings delivered by Mr. Voronkov and Ms. Coninsx,
which helped us to contextualize the ninth report of the
Secretary-General on the threat posed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh) to international
peace and security (S/2019/612).

With the fall of Baghouz in March, the military
defeat of Da'esh in Syria must be registered as an
important milestone of global efforts against terrorism.
As the report indicates, however, full success in that
important undertaking requires the international
community, in support of the affected States and in
respect of their sovereignty, to address the challenges
posed by the subsequent humanitarian situation, the
prosecution of Da'esh affiliates and their families,
especially women and children, and the dispersal of
foreign terrorist fighters to other territories.

In that regard, we remain concerned about the impact
of the growing presence of foreign terrorist fighters in
Africa and their interaction with, and reinforcement of,
Da'esh-affiliated groups, such as the Islamic State in
the Greater Sahara and the designated Da'esh provinces
in West and Central Africa. We are further concerned
over their collaboration with Al-Qaida and its affiliates
in the region and other terrorist groups and their
conflictive relations with groups such as Al-Shabaab
and Boko Haram, especially in West Africa, where
there has been an upsurge in violence and attacks
linked to Da'esh and Al-Qaida.

We therefore commend the strengthened
collaboration among the various United Nations
agencies, including those present here, in support of
States in designing and carrying out their counter-
terrorism strategies and implementing the relevant
Council resolutions and the 2018 addendum to the
Madrid Guiding Principles on foreign terrorist fighters,
among others.

That is why, as we have been doing, we encourage
those efforts to also focus on so-called geographical
blind spots in the fight against terrorism, in order to
reinforce efforts to prevent and curb the spread of
terrorist groups and their activities.

The African continent is being bled out by
the activities of terrorist groups, such as the Boko
Haram group in north-eastern Nigeria, which also
affects the neighbouring countries of the Niger, Chad
and Cameroon, countries which are neighbours of
Equatorial Guinea. There is the case of Al-Shabaab in
the east of the continent. Countries such as Mali and
Burkina Faso are falling victim to groups supported by
Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb. All those phenomena
cause enormous damage and pose serious challenges to
the lives and economies of the countries most directly
affected and, to a lesser extent, their neighbours and, by
extension, the whole of Africa.

Resolutions 2462 (2019) and 2482 (2019), which
the Council adopted this year, led by France and
Peru, respectively, and which Equatorial Guinea
had the honour of co-sponsoring, help revitalize and
strengthen the fight against Da'esh, Al-Qaida and
other terrorist groups by focusing on preventing and
suppressing the financing of terrorism and the links
between transnational crime and terrorism. Those two
strategic areas are important to preventing the use of
new technologies for the dissemination of terrorist
propaganda and as a tool for the recruitment and
radicalization ofjuvenile delinquents in prisons; illegal
mineral exploitation; human, arms and drug trafficking
for terrorist purposes; and the potential for the creation
and use of weapons of mass destruction.

Covert Da'esh and Al-Qaida networks, the
existence of lone wolves and new methods of terrorist
attacks executed by women, girls and entire families;
attacks against targets that are considered easy, such
as places of worship, family ceremonies, among others;
and the recent attacks by the extreme right remind
us of the need to galvanize international cooperation
against terrorism and spur investment in sustainable
development to tackle the root causes of terrorism
and conflict. In that regard, we are encouraged by
the holding of regional conferences in Tajikistan and
Kenya, which we hope will translate into concrete
results with a view to containing and eliminating the
terrorist threat.

We just celebrated the International Day of
Remembrance and Tribute to the Victims of Terrorism,
which focused on the resilience of victims of terrorism
and their families. In that regard, we wish to conclude

by acknowledging and encouraging the role of the
United Nations in facilitating international judicial
cooperation and gathering digital evidence. Moreover,
processes that promote accountability through
mechanisms such as the United Nations Investigative
Team for Accountability of Da'esh/ISIL, to promote
accountability for crimes committed by Da'esh in
support of victims in Iraq, including and especially
sexual and gender-based violence victims.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea remains firmly
committed to the implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions to ensure the success of
that important work.

