Mr. Bennouna (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
should like first of all to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month, which is soon to end. Your great skills
and experience have enabled the Council to discharge
its responsibilities very effectively. In this connection,
I would like to thank you in particular for taking the
initiative to convene this debate on post-conflict
national reconciliation and the role of the United
Nations. The considerable level of participation and the
very enlightening debate show how much we needed
such a discussion in the United Nations. I am
convinced that we will be able to reach some very
useful conclusions.

All previous speakers have recalled the special
role played by the United Nations in reconciliation
efforts. But before speaking specifically about that
issue, I would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate the new non-permanent members of the
Council, who began their term of office at the
beginning of the month: Algeria, Benin, Brazil,
Romania and the Philippines.

Today the Council is discussing post-conflict
situations, peace efforts and the fact that certain
developments, if they are not checked in time, can
evolve into lasting obstacles to peace and national
reconciliation strategies.

In the context of post-conflict situations, the
United Nations has incomparable experience, ranging
from the negotiation of political settlements among the
parties to participation in reconstruction efforts. The
success of United Nations efforts in Kosovo,
Afghanistan, Guatemala, Mozambique and elsewhere
testifies to the wealth of experience of the Organization
in this sphere. We can draw one major lesson from such
experience. Each conflict, and each and every post-
conflict situation, has its own characteristics and
features. There is no universal recipe that can be
applied in this area in a systematic manner. As the
Secretary-General stated in a debate in the Security
Council a little less than a year ago, on 30 April 2003:

"But the thing that stands out is that no
single approach has ever been adopted twice,
because no two conflicts or post-conflict
situations are alike. Even the four recent cases of
Afghanistan, Kosovo, Timor-Leste and Sierra
Leone are very different from one another
Therefore, one of the most important lessons is
the need first to reach a common understanding
of what makes the crisis in question unique, and
then to develop our responses accordingly. We
should draw on previous experiences while
bearing in mind that completely new approaches
may be required" (S/PV.4748, p. 3).

In other words, the Secretary-General wanted to
remind us that the Council should be creative each and
every time it considers a crisis situation, and, in
particular, that it should get as close as possible to the
realities on the ground, without, of course, forgetting
its experience drawn from other situations.

The success of the United Nations contribution to
national reconciliation in post-conflict situations lies in
the Organization's ability to take into account local
characteristics - the multi-ethnic nature of Kosovo,
the need to involve women in public life in
Afghanistan, for example, the disarmament of ex-
combatants in Sierra Leone and in Liberia. Tomorrow,
perhaps, the United Nations might be participating in
reconstruction in Iraq. All of these crisis situations
might seem similar, but they are, in fact, quite
different.

The role of the Council must be to provide
adequate responses and to design mandates that are
equal to the realities in the field. Of course, individual
responses to crises and in post-conflict situations
should form part of an overall strategy that
encompasses common objectives. In particular, as has
been stated, respect for the neutrality of the United
Nations is very important. As was also noted, the
Organization must work to bring the parties closer
together; it must not impose any solution that might
have been conceived of in advance.

Of the objectives I have mentioned, the first is
closely linked to the obstacles that quite often
undermine efforts made towards national
reconciliation. I have in mind the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of former combatants,
and the restoration of justice with the goal of
reconciliation and of economic and social
development. With respect to justice, there are also the
Truth and Reconciliation Commissions, which play a
supplementary role.

The reintegration of former combatants, with
clear-cut safeguards for their personal security; their
participation in public life, with respect for the rule of
law; and genuine economic and social prospects for
them and for their family members are pivotal elements
in the lasting settlement of conflicts. The representative
of Angola spoke quite eloquently this morning of his
country's experience in this respect. In Sierra Leone,
the United Nations has been involved in the
demobilization and reintegration of more than 46,000
combatants; however, a great deal remains to be done,
especially in Liberia.

Among the key objectives that should be
mentioned in defining an overall strategy in post-
conflict situations, pride of place goes to respect for
human rights and for international humanitarian law. It
is imperative to safeguard the lives and the dignity of
individuals. In this spirit, the international community
must involve itself in the resolution of the problems of
refugees and of displaced persons. We should
strengthen the protection mandate of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
seek lasting solutions for refugees by fostering in
particular voluntary repatriation, in conditions of
dignity and security.

A comprehensive approach must also take into
account all of the actors in the field - civil society,
non-governmental organizations, but also, and above
all, women. We cannot overemphasize the decisive role
of women in post-conflict reconstruction processes. To
be sure, the Beijing Platform for Action highlighted
that particular dimension and the valuable contribution
made by women, but we must now go farther and
promote the participation of women in the field and in
peacekeeping operations.

At the heart of current conflicts, we often find an
affirmation of specific identity in cultural, religious,
social or ethnic terms. In order to cope with the
increased number of identity-based tensions - which
have, regrettably, multiplied since the beginning of
globalization - the international community must not
only foster dialogue among parties to a conflict but
also seek lasting solutions in order to maintain peace
and stability.

In order to promote a culture of reconciliation
and, ultimately, a culture of prevention, it is important
to explore all possibilities available for settling
disputes while respecting the sovereignty and integrity
of States. Therefore, regional autonomy, as practised
by many democracies, allows them to preserve unity in
diversity and to avoid the tragic obstacle represented
by the constant fragmentation of State entities, which
can have dangerous consequences for international
peace and security. Indeed, we must enable peoples
fully to exercise their right to manage their own local
affairs while ensuring stability and security for the
country as a whole and for the subregion to which it
belongs.

The growing importance of the topic of today's
debate requires greater interaction among agencies.
This process has indeed begun, and my country
encourages such interaction among United Nations
agencies and organs, especially between the Economic
and Social Council and the Security Council. The
extension by the Economic and Social Council of the
mandate of the ad hoc Advisory Group on Guinea-
Bissau and the creation of a similar group on Burundi
constitute an encouraging response on the part of the
international community to the urgent need to devise
assistance programmes for vulnerable countries that are
emerging from conflict situations, especially in Africa.
It is important to ensure complementarity in the context
of the actions undertaken by the Security Council to
maintain peace and those of the Economic and Social
Council aimed at economic and social development.

Ongoing discussions on United Nations reform
must also involve an assessment of the shortcomings of
the United Nations system in conflict and post-conflict
situations, especially with respect to their humanitarian
dimension, by drawing lessons from past experiences
and in a spirit of creativity in order, as I said earlier, to
resolve current crises. This is an obligation of
solidarity that we owe to those peoples who have
suffered so much from war and from post-conflict
situations.

What do we owe one another? That was the
question posed by one of the founders of the
Encyclope'die, Denis Diderot. Diderot believed that
taking care of someone else was also a way of ensuring
one's own enlightened self-interest. Is this not the
morality that underlies international cooperation and
collective security, for which the Council is
responsible?

