The world is facing its biggest crisis since 1945. More than half a million people have already died from a virus for which we do not yet have a cure. Many more could follow. The emergency braking in the global economy will deepen humanitarian crises and destroy trust in State institutions. We have heard from our briefers how conflicts are spiralling out of control, especially in Africa and in war- torn countries such as Yemen and Libya. At the same time, human rights violations are soaring. The men and women who signed the Charter of the United Nations 75 years ago entrusted the Security Council with upholding peace and security. They drew the right lessons from the deadly reality they had just witnessed. The simple question before us today is: Do we? Yesterday, the Security Council finally sent a sign of unity by endorsing the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire. Resolution 2532 (2020) was long overdue. Let us now implement it together by working towards country-specific ceasefires. We all know that they can facilitate humanitarian access and serve as entry points for political talks. Today's meeting can also be a launching pad to address major health risks and their security implications more systematically. To do so, we should agree on three lines of action: First, we must address the effects that pandemics have on the conflicts and humanitarian crises on the Council's agenda. United Nations peace operations themselves will need to adapt by: monitoring the fast-changing dynamics of conflict; protecting the health of staff and local populations; and keeping the mission fully operational. That is why Germany, together with other European Union member States, has signed a letter assuring the Secretary-General that we will uphold our military, police and civilian contributions. Secondly, safe, unhindered and rapid access for humanitarian workers and medical personnel is even more important during a pandemic. It is the obligation of the Security Council and other member States involved to make this happen. We also heard the Secretary-General's call for immediate steps to ensure that the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) does not reverse progress achieved in gender equality and women's participation in peace processes. Germany therefore contributed €4 million to the COVID-19 emergency window of the Women's Peace and Humanitarian Fund, and we call on others to follow suit. Thirdly, the Security Council must finally embrace a broader understanding of peace and security. The founders of the United Nations may well have had artillery, bombers and soldiers in mind when they drafted the Charter. Today, we know that a virus can be deadlier than a gun, a cyberattack can cause more harm than a soldier and climate change threatens more people than most conventional weapons. Closing our eyes to that reality means refusing to learn. What we need is early, preventative action, based on good reporting and adequate capacities in the United Nations system. That is what "maintaining peace and security" means in the twenty-first century. A global crisis calls for a global response. It calls upon the United Nations and the Security Council. We should heed the call.
