Mr. Rivas (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to begin by welcoming Serbia's Deputy
Prime Minister Covie and Mr. Annabi, and by thanking
them for the information they have given us. That
information has provided us with a more
comprehensive picture of what is taking place on the
ground.

Several important events have taken place in the
last month that are of importance for the future of
Kosovo and of the region in general. We would like to
highlight four such events that we believe are relevant
to the discussions ofthe Security Council.

First, with regard to the formation of the
Government of Kosovo, we would like to highlight the
agreement reached in recent days between the leaders
of the main Kosovo parties and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. That
agreement has made it possible to move forward in the
formation of a new Government after several months of
efforts. We are convinced that the new leaders will be
cognizant of the historical responsibilities that rest in
their hands with regard to the creation of a multi-ethnic
society grounded in democratic principles. We urge
them to concentrate their efforts on building new
institutions that will guarantee a solid foundation for a
future debate on Kosovo's final status.

We are concerned by the reaction of the Serb
coalition with regard to its participation in the
Government. We hope that they will accept the options
put forward by Special Representative Steiner, and that
they will not make their participation in the
Government contingent upon the creation of a ministry.
We ask Deputy Prime Minister Covic' to intervene in
the negotiations in order to secure Serb participation in
the new Government structure.

My second point concerns the exchange of
prisoners between Belgrade and Kosovo. We welcome
the agreement reached between the Belgrade
Government and the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
concerning prisoners of war. That agreement led to
yesterday's transfer of over 146 Albanian prisoners
from Serbia to Kosovo. This is a demonstration of good
will and of the cooperative relationship that has been
established between UNMIK and the Government in
Belgrade, of which Mr. Covic' is one of the principal
architects.

My third point has to do with the setting up of the
joint committee on border affairs. We would like to
highlight the establishment of the committee of experts
on border issues after the signing of an agreement
between UNMIK and the Government of Macedonia.
We believe that the work of the committee will make
possible the search for adequate solutions to the
problems that are now arising between farmers and
livestock owners while, at the same time, taking into
account the Agreement on the delineation of the
border, signed last year by the Governments of
Yugoslavia and Macedonia. We believe that the
committee's work should be made known in a timely
way to the new authorities in Kosovo so as to avoid
any misunderstandings and ensure compliance by all
parties in any decision taken by the committee.

My fourth point concerns relations between
UNMIK, Belgrade and the Government of Kosovo.
Colombia has been insisting on the need to establish
transparent and effective cooperation between the
authorities in Belgrade, the new Government in
Kosovo and UNMIK through the Special
Representative ofthe Secretary-General. We would like
to take the opportunity offered by the presence here of
Deputy Prime Minister Covie - who has been an
essential contributor to the strengthening of relations
between his Government and UNMIK - to emphasize
the need for a rapprochement with the authorities in
Kosovo. We recognize that there are still several issues
on which the two Governments' positions are at odds
but we are convinced that with the help of the Special
Representative, they will find common ground and
ways of addressing the existing differences. It is only
through joint efforts between the leaders that we will
be able to ensure the creation of a multi-ethnic society
in Kosovo in which guarantees exist for all citizens.

Finally, we support the proposal of the Russian
Federation for a comprehensive review of the successes
and failures of UNMIK over the past three years.

