Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
I would like to begin by greeting and thanking South
Africa for having taken the initiative of organizing
this debate. I also thank the Secretary-General,
Ms. Mulamula, Ms. Vilakazi and Ms. Maite for their
introductory remarks.

Belgium believes that regional and subregional
organizations play a crucial role in conflict prevention,
in particular in Africa, where ownership of security
challenges on the continent has made unquestioned
progress over the past 10 years. When a crisis is
looming, neighbouring States, the subregion and the
continent are often the actors best placed to respond
rapidly and effectively.

Belgium supports regional integration, as our
history has shown us that this is the best way to resolve
cross-border andregionalproblemsinaconsensus-based
manner in order to unify regions and create solidarity.
I would like to once again stress that it is in all of our
interests for the African Union to strengthen its peace
and security toolkit. Ultimately, African Union peace
operations will need to enjoy more predictable, long-
term and flexible financing. In the division of labour
and responsibilities between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations, our approach
is guided by the pursuit of the most appropriate model
in a given context.
Two years ago in the Gambia, we saw an excellent
example of a subregional organization taking a leading
role. In Guinea-Bissau, complementarity was ensured
on the ground through the action of the Guinea-Bissau
Group of Five. In the Central African Republic, the
African Union saw its efforts supported by the Economic
Community of Central African States and the United
Nations, efforts that led to the peace agreement in that
country. Joint high-level African Union-United Nations
visits, with the participation of a representative of the
European Union, are an effective tool for monitoring
the situation in the Central African Republic.

In Burkina Faso, the Niger and Nigeria, the
United Nations Office in West Africa is contributing
to building capacities for the prevention of conflicts
between pastoralists and farmers as well as
intercommunal conflicts. These issues require a
regional approach throughout West Africa, and we
welcome the determination demonstrated by the
Economic Community of West African States during its
Extraordinary Summit held last month in Ouagadougou.

Mediation is an area where complementarity comes
into full play. Regional and subregional organizations
bring their local knowledge and expertise to the table,
while the United Nations brings its neutrality and
authority as well as universal norms. We commend
the progress made in operationalizing the Mediation
Support Unit Union and in the development of the
FemWise-Africa women mediators' network, whose
vital importance the Secretary-General and the three
briefers have just underscored.

Our responsibility is to do everything in our power
to prevent conflicts before they erupt. We must continue
with our early-warning exercises, including exchanges
of information between the Security Council and
the Secretariat. But in order for these exercises to be
useful, we must be as open as possible and not rule out
any option or any information. Many United Nations
entities and agencies as well as research institutions
and civil-society organizations are privy to extremely
valuable and detailed information that can inform us
about incipient conflicts. Let us be proactive and pay
attention to them and include such information in
our deliberations.

But we also need to go further: early warning is
meaningless unless we also have the capacity for a rapid
diplomatic response. Such a response is not necessarily
the preserve of the Security Council; it can also be the
good offices of the Secretary-General and his Special
Envoys, and of Resident Coordinators. It can also
include independent United Nations initiatives, as is the
case in Cameroon at the moment.

One thing is certain: we must make greater
headway on this front. Belgium stands ready and
determined to work in this direction within and outside
the Security Council.

