Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I am pleased to see you, Mr. President,
presiding over this meeting. We wish you and your
delegation success in your work this month.

Russia was pleased to welcome the signing at
Abuja of the peace agreement between the Government
of National Unity and the Sudan Liberation Movement.
An important step has been taken towards inter-
Sudanese reconciliation, the foundations for which
were laid more than a year ago by the agreements in
Naivasha.

To a significant extent, achieving a peace
agreement was promoted by the active participation of
the international community - first and foremost
through the tireless mediation efforts of the African
Union. Progress in the talks was also possible through
the constructive position of the Sudanese Government,
which demonstrated readiness for compromise
solutions. In order for the peace process to become
truly irreversible, it is necessary that all the
participants in the Abuja talks seize this historic
opportunity and join the comprehensive agreement.

In the current circumstances, strengthening the
potential of the African Union Mission is a significant
priority. It will be the African peacekeepers who in the
coming months will have to continue to fulfil an
extremely complex mandate that includes humanitarian
functions and providing assistance to the Sudanese
parties in implementing the comprehensive peace
agreement.

We agree with the view of the Secretary-General
and the African Union that the deployment and
effective action of a new, integrated United Nations
mission that also covers Darfur will require the
cooperation and support of the Sudanese parties,
especially that of the Government of National Unity.
We are convinced that resolving that matter should be
done through constructive dialogue. The planning for
the future operation continues to be of great
importance. In that regard, we expect specific
recommendations from the Secretary-General.

The political settlement of the situation in Darfur
should serve to promote real change in the critical
humanitarian situation in the region, where hundreds of
thousands of people find themselves on the brink of
hunger. We support the consolidated efforts of the
international community, under the aegis of the United
Nations, aimed at finding the earliest possible solution
to the difficult humanitarian problems in Darfur. The
Russian Federation will continue to lend all types of
assistance to help strengthen the political settlement in
Darfur, in the interest of the unity and territorial
integrity of the Sudan and of the strengthening of peace
and security in the region. The Russian peacekeeping
contingent is already contributing to the stabilization
efforts of the United Nations.

