Mr. Sin Son Ho (Democratic People's Republic of Korea): Mr. President, allow me first of all to express my
thanks to you for having convened this meeting. I wish
also to express my appreciation to Mr. Robert Serry,
United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, for his briefing to the Council today.

My delegation would like to associate itself with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

As witnessed by the world last year, on 29 November,
General Assembly resolution 67/19, on the non-member
observer state status of Palestine, was adopted by the
General Assembly with the support of an overwhelming
majority. The granting of non-member observer status
to Palestine in the United Nations was a historic event
that reflected the desire of the international community
to put an end to the decades-long Israeli occupation of
the Palestinian territories and to realize the Palestinian
people's right to self-determination.

My delegationjoined in sponsoring and supporting
the resolution, along with the majority of the States
Members of the United Nations. My delegation would
like to take this opportunity to congratulate Palestine
once again on its status in the United Nations.

It is, however, deeply regrettable that the Palestinian
situation is deteriorating instead of moving in a positive
direction, despite the absolute support and the efforts of

the international community.

Israel has turned a deaf ear to the just and fair
demands of the international community and continued
to cling to the aggressive and inhuman policies of
illegally occupying Arab territories, expanding
settlements, blocking the Gaza Strip, ruthlessly killing
civilians and so on.

Israel recently decided to build thousands of new
settlement units while confiscating land and seizing
money, seriously threatening the basic right to existence
of the Palestinian people, as a political reprisal against
Palestinian observer State status in the United Nations.

Those are rampant provocative acts and challenges
against the majority of States Members of the
United Nations, international law and related United
Nations resolutions that supported the founding of an
independent Palestinian State and durable peace and
stability in the Middle East.

Israel's undisguised confiscation ofPalestinian land
under the pretext of settlement expansion shows clearly
that it is none other than Israel that is aggravating the
situation and seriously threatening peace and security
in the Middle East.

The Democratic People's Republic of Korea
strongly denounces Israel for its settlement expansion
and demands that Israel immediately stop any act
undermining peace and security in the region and
withdraw its forces from all illegally occupied Arab and
Palestinian territories. Israel's continuous provocations
are unthinkable without the support and protection of
the United States. That clearly shows the hypocritical
nature of the United States policy towards peace in the
Middle East.

The establishment of an independent State of
Palestine is an inalienable sovereign right of the
Palestinian people.

It is today a world trend to support the justified
struggle of the Palestinian people for an independent
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, within 1967
borders.

The number of countries in the United Nations
recognizing the State of Palestine has reached more
than 130, which represents a majority of the States
Members of the United Nations. The non-member
observer State status of Palestine is a great development
that encourages us all.

That reality will surely bring about the realization
of Palestine's full United Nations membership and the
establishment of an independent sovereign State of
Palestine.

The Security Council, whose mandate is the
maintenance of international peace and security, should
pay due attention to the changed realities of today and
take strong measures to achieve a fair solution of the
Palestinian question and not turn away from Israel's
inhuman crimes, such as the blockade of the Gaza Strip
and the expansion of settlement units.

If the Security Council, despite the demands of
the international community, continues to protect only
the interests of a certain specific country in support
of Israel, that will have a negative effect on peace and
security in the Middle East and damage more than ever
before the credibility and reliability of the international
community in the Security Council.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to reiterate
its full support and consistent stand for the just cause
of the Palestinian people regaining their legitimate
national rights, including the establishment of an
independent State, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

