Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I wish
to thank you, Mr. Minister, in your capacity as President
of the Security Council, first of all for your initiative in
bringing this issue before the Council, and I wish to
thank the briefers for their valuable presentations.

Uruguay reiterates once again its firm
condemnation of terrorism. Today it wishes also to
express its indignation at the barbaric attacks that took
place this weekend in Cairo and Istanbul. It expresses its
solidarity with the families of the victims and conveys
its condolences to the peoples and the Governments of
Egypt and Turkey.

All terrorist acts are reprehensible. There can never
be any political, ideological, philosophical, religious
or other kind of justification for such acts. Uruguay
believes that international cooperation is vital in this
respect and therefore urges coordinated action on the
part of all States to combat terrorism, using tools that
are tailored to countering the increasingly sophisticated
methods now used by terrorist groups.

Uruguay has always made the rule of law,
especially international law, its modus operandi and
has always been a firm champion of cooperation as
a way of facilitating proceedings, in the recognition
that cooperation is one of the fundamental principles
of the international community. Judicial cooperation
is vital to combating crime in general and terrorism
in particular.

Uruguay co-sponsored and voted in favour of
resolution 2322 (2016) on the basis of its conviction
that it represents a robust instrument for promoting
cooperation and coordinated action among States in
their struggle against terrorism. In the framework of
such cooperation, we must take into account the varying
capacities of Member States and respect national
legislations, without prejudice to obligations deriving
from international law.

Another key aspect is coordination with
prosecutors' offices and judicial authorities. These
bodies must perforce be actively involved in promoting
knowledge-sharing on good practices and in facilitating
capacity-building. In accordance with international
law, Uruguay rejects the wrongful granting of refugee
status to those who commit, organize or facilitate acts
of terrorism. We therefore agree that it is not acceptable
to claim political motivations in the commission of
terrorist acts in order to try to avoid extradition. At
the same time, we must be careful not to resort to
unrestricted use of the right to extradition.

Uruguay is in favour of coordination in the area of
requests for cooperation in the digital sphere and for
the preservation of evidence and the transmission of
information. However, this must always take place with
due respect for human rights, privacy and the freedom of
thought and expression. In that respect, we must guard
against undermining the right to due process and respect
for human rights during investigations and proceedings
carried out as part of the fight against terrorism.

In conclusion, Uruguay, a country that respects the
rule oflaw as well as the internal judicial procedures of
nations, supports judicial cooperation as an instrument
of great relevance and utility in adopting joint
approaches that help combat terrorism and promote
international peace and security.

