Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We wish to echo the words of condolence
expressed by other speakers and convey them to the
people and the Government of Colombia in the wake of
the natural disaster in Mocoa. We extend our sympathy
to the families of those who died, and we hope that the
joint efforts of the Government and the Revolutionary
Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) in order to address
the consequences of the flood and the landslide will
translate into the process of national reconciliation and
advancement of the peace process.

We are grateful to Mr. Jean Arnault for his briefing.
We note that progress has been made in the peace
process in Colombia and hope that both sides will fulfil
their commitments faithfully and in a timely manner,
which is particularly important in this case.

We support the activities of the United Nations
Mission in Colombia, which oversees the disarmament
and reintegration processes. We welcome the guerrillas'
political confirmation of their intent to disarm in line
with the timeline. We believe that the incentive that
guides the FARC in this process is the possibility of
achieving their political ambitions in the upcoming
2018 election campaign.

We take a positive View of the Colombian
Parliament's speedy passage oflaws aimed at creating a
legal basis for the peace process, including the laws on
amnesty and the transitional justice system. This step
and future ones to be taken within the framework of
the peace process should provide a solid foundation for
national reconciliation and future post-conflict changes
in Colombia.

We are, however, concerned by indications that
certain difficulties exist in terms of the Government's
discharging its obligations, a situation that could have
a negative impact on the disarmament process. The
deterioration of the guerrillas' socioeconomic situation
owing to shortcomings on the part of the Government
could result in uncontrolled desertions from FARC. As
the Council is aware, to date already about 500 people
have stated that they will not follow the orders of the
guerrilla leadership. These people are highly trained
armed fighters and will inevitablyjoin different criminal
groups, which could lead to a new spiral of violence
in the country. We hope that the current difficulties
are only temporary and that the Government will do
everything in its power to overcome them.

In that regard, we welcome the decision taken
by the President of the country, Mr. Santos, to send
members of his cabinet to FARC camps in order to
assess the arrangements made there for FARC members
who support the peace process. Future steps to be taken
by the United Nations to promote the peace process can
be undertaken once the relevant parameters have been
agreed with the Government of Colombia and FARC.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/252)
does not contain any recommendations on an eventual
second mission in Colombia. Neither Bogota or the
guerrillas have taken a position on this issue. In general,
our view is that we should avoid endowing the mission
with excessive powers and thereby turning it into an
external watchdog with respect to the activities of the
sovereign Colombian Government.

We still need to determine whether the parties
and the United Nations will be able to conclude the
disarmament and demobilization process within the set
timeline and what the security conditions will be when
the mandate of the current Mission expires. Obviously,
at that time we will be discussing reductions in the
military and police components. However, when we
take that decision, we must ensure that the withdrawal
of all observers does not lead to a security vacuum. We
in turn intend to continue to fully support the peace
process in Colombia.

