Mr. Haysom: When I last briefed the Council (see S/PV.7467), I observed that Afghanistan continued to
need the support of the international community, as
well as the sustained attention of the Security Council,
as it faced down its difficult economic, security and
political challenges. I remain firmly of that view.
Afghanistan's path to stability and self-reliance cannot
be taken for granted. The current refugee exodus
reflects the despondency of many Afghans. Afghans
have clear memories of their recent but violent past,
face an opaque future and now keenly monitor their
environment for signs of international disengagement
or, more hopefully, of domestic stabilization. A clear
signal of continued international support will mitigate
the uncertainty fuelling that exodus.

Shortly after my last briefing, many points of
friction emerged within the National Unity Government
and between the National Unity Government and
elements of the political elite, driven by deteriorating
security and economic conditions, among other things.
Although neither of these were of the Government's
making, charges of inaction and miscalculation surfaced
in the media. Since then, there have been a number of
positive developments, including signs of progress in
the functioning of the National Unity Government. With
a few exceptions, all senior-level national posts have
now been filled and both the Council of Ministers and
Cabinet are active. I continue to encourage President
Ashraf Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah Abdullah
to finalize the appointments process, particularly
those of governors, Minister of Defence and Attorney
General.

The Government has also made progress in
addressing the issue of electoral reforms by establishing
the Special Electoral Reform Commission, which was
one of the key commitments of the National Unity
Government. The Commission, of which one of my
deputies is a non-voting member, has already tabled
its first set of recommendations. The Cabinet has
proactively endorsed seven and returned three for
further study. The recommendation to change the
electoral system will have, in particular, far-reaching
consequences for the country's future political
landscape. I therefore encourage the Government to
build a consensus around this issue before it makes
its final decision. Electoral reforms are critical for the
development of the country's democratic foundation
and they should be a source of stability, bringing people
together, not dividing them.

A senior officials meeting of the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework process - the first since
London - was held in Kabul in early September. It was
judged by the participants to be a success. It proved to be
an important element of the bridge between past donor
commitments and future pledges to meet Afghanistan's
need for ongoing support. The meeting, during which a
new mutual accountability framework was established,
provided an opportunity for the whole-of-Government
to establish its commitment to a credible reform agenda.
This is necessary to give confidence to donors ahead of
critical meetings in Warsaw and Brussels in 2016, at
which donor commitments are expected to be renewed.

It should, however, be noted that decisions to
commit funds to Afghanistan beyond 2017 will be
made not at these conferences in 2016, but in capitals
in coming months. Before then, the Government will
need to deliver on its agreed performance indicators,
and most notably indicators that demonstrate that
corruption is being effectively tackled. Afghanistan
has benefited from exceptional levels of development
assistance, even as global demands on aid budgets have
multiplied. Participants at the senior officials meeting
agreed on their mutual responsibility to ensure that this
aid is more effectively targeted and delivered.

At the sixth Regional Economic Cooperation
Conference on Afghanistan, held the day before the
senior officials meeting, the region affirmed the need
for greater economic cooperation, integration and
connectivity. The logic that informs the recognition
that economic growth and stability in Afghanistan
benefit the entire region was universally acknowledged,
as was the recognition that the problems of the
region - such as the transboundary traffic in narcotics
and people - cannot be resolved by one country alone.

The conflict continues to take a horrid toll on Afghan
civilians. In the first eight months of 2015, the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
documented the highest level of civilian casualties
since it began keeping records. The monitoring of
civilian casualties by UNAMA's Human Rights Unit, it
should be noted, has been recognized as a model of best
practice both within and outside the United Nations. I
say this because its finding - notably on responsibility
for the violence - have been contested by parties to
the conflict.

Anti-Government elements continue to cause
the majority of civilian deaths and injuries, although
casualties caused by Afghan security forces continue to
rise. UNAMA is encouraged by recent statements made
by President Ashraf Ghani that he will take official
steps to reduce civilian casualties. We trust that the
Government's civilian casualty mitigation policy will
incorporate all of the elements set out in UNAMA'S
mid-year report on the protection of civilians, in
particular in relation to the transparent investigation
of civilian casualty incidents. UNAMA stands ready to
assist the Government of Afghanistan in this regard.

UNAMA also continues its dialogue with all
parties to the conflict in order to reduce the toll of the
conflict on civilians, increase protection and respect
for basic human rights, and ensure humanitarian access
to all parts of the country. The Mission also encourages
the Government to continue its efforts to implement
the national plan on the elimination of torture, and in
particular urges the ratification of the Optional Protocol
to the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman and Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
It welcomes the stated intention of the Government
to take the first steps to that end at this session of the
General Assembly.

This year's conflict has been one ofthe most intense
faced by the Afghan National Security Forces (ANSF).
However, while they are once again proving their mettle
and resilience, as a number of analysts have observed,
insurgents have demonstrated a capacity to mass
large numbers of fighters in isolated areas. This has
challenged the ANSF's ability to maintain the ground
that it occupies or to hold on to it once it has retaken
contested sites. As predicated in earlier briefings, we
anticipate the intensification of the violence in the
country to continue through 2015.

This underscores the importance of renewing
a viable peace process. As noted by the Secretary-
General in his report (S/2015/684), the real progress
in launching such a process was suggested by formal
talks between the Taliban and a Government delegation
in Murree in July. However, it appears that peace talks
are on hold, first as a result of an internal succession
dispute within the Taliban following the unexpected
announcement of Mullah Omar's death, and secondly,
as a result of a hiatus in Pakistan and Afghanistan's
collaboration to create an inclusive Afghan-led peace
process.

A series of bombings in Kabul in early August
precipitated a spike in anti-Pakistan sentiment and a
hardening of rhetoric from the Afghan Government,
including the President. The President complained
that the hand he had extended to Pakistan in respect
of mutual assistance in dealing with terrorism in both
territories had not been reciprocated. He called on
Pakistan to curtail the insurgency, notably that of the
Hakkani network operating from Pakistani territory.
After an exchange of high-level visits, including that
of Pakistan National Security Advisor Sartaj Aziz,
the level of accusation and counter-accusation has
diminished and undertakings have been exchanged to
renew constructive collaboration towards the ultimate
objective ofa stable Afghanistan.

I reiterate my call for direct engagement between
the Taliban and the Government. A war-weary Afghan
population is clamouring for peace and deserves it.
The threats faced by Afghanistan do not all emanate
from its own territory. Many of the insurgents originate
from neighbouring countries. It is entitled to call for
international support, particularly from the region, in
dealing with them. It is the responsibility of the leaders
of the region and other stakeholders to prioritize support
for a peaceful and secure Afghanistan. In this regard,
UNAMA calls on all neighbours to play a constructive
role in suppressing the threat of terrorism, including but
not limited to the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
and in promoting an inter-Afghan peace process.

UNAMA will continue to engage, in the background,
with the Government, the Taliban, neighbouring
countries, and the international community to promote
a process that will allow Afghans to find an arrangement
by which they can live in peace. With regard to an
inclusive peace process, UNAMA welcomes the recent
launch of Afghanistan's National Action Plan on
resolution 1325 (2000), on women, peace and security,
which will promote the participation of women in any
national reconciliation process.

As requested by the Council, UNAMA, on behalf of
the Secretary-General and in full consultation with the
Government of Afghanistan and donors, has conducted
an examination of the role, structure and activities of
all United Nations entities in Afghanistan. Discussion
clarified the needs and expectations of Afghanistan.
It allowed the United Nations to examine how it could
best align its own projects with Afghanistan's priorities
and focus on institutional strengthening and capacity
building. It is our hope that the report will be useful to
the Council in its future mandate deliberations.

I conclude by expressing my appreciation to
Ambassador Tanin, for whom this is the last Council
debate in his capacity as Afghanistan's Permanent
Representative to the United Nations. I have appreciated
his advocacy for his country and his constructive
engagement.

