Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
will be very brief. China thanks Mr. Eliasson and
Mr. Salim for their briefings. China has taken note of
the fact that the two Special Envoys recently presided
over informal consultations on the political process in
Darfur in order to pool our collective wisdom to push
ahead the political process in the region. China
appreciates the tireless efforts made by the two Special
Envoys and their teams to resolve the Darfur issue.

The current situation in Darfur leaves no room
for optimism, and efforts in all areas face challenges.
The international community should continue to follow
the dual-track strategy and make full use of the
tripartite mechanism, with a focus on pushing the
political process forward and ensuring the deployment
of peacekeepers.

As pointed out in the Secretary-General's reports,
the key to restarting the political process in Darfur lies
in the parties' political will to seek a negotiated
settlement of their differences. China supports the
appointment of a chief mediator to integrate
international resources, optimize regional strategies
and present a united front to the parties, in particular
by sending a clear message to the rebel groups in
question and urging them to join the political process at
the earliest possible date.

China is deeply concerned over the lack of
resources for the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), because substantial
funding is available. We hope that the Secretariat will
continue to enhance its coordination with the troop-
contributing countries and to seek, from the
international community, the civil aviation,
transportation and engineering contingents that are so
badly needed. China welcomes the assistance to the

08-3959]
troop-contributing countries provided by Member
States in a position to do so through various means,
including in the areas of equipment and training, so as
to help the Secretariat in accelerating the deployment
of the peacekeeping forces.

The recent security situation in Darfur has
severely interfered with the humanitarian relief efforts
there. China urges the parties concerned to refrain from
attacking international relief organizations and their
workers, and to facilitate their work.

With the onset of the rainy season, humanitarian
problems resulting from food shortages, blocked roads
and rampant banditry will become ever more serious.
We hope that this will be given adequate attention by
the United Nations.

As always, China will support the United Nations
and the African Union in their efforts to resolve the
Darfur issue.

