Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the Chadian initiative to convene today's
open debate on terrorism and cross-border crime. I
thank Under-Secretary-General F eltman for his briefing
and Ambassador Antonio for his statement on behalf of
the African Union.

Frequent terrorist attacks have taken place recently
in Asia, Africa, Europe, the Americas and Oceania,
resulting in numerous casualties and focusing the
attention of the international community. The broad
geographic spread of terrorist attacks, the brutality of
the terrorists, the incitement and recruitment practised
by terrorist organizations on the Internet and social
media, and their convergence with cross-border crime
are posing a grave and real threat to international
peace and security. Against such a grim backdrop, the
international community should cooperate more closely
in the fight against terrorism, strengthen exchanges
of information and intelligence, share successful
experiences, enhance capacity-building and conduct
coordinated activities with a view to effectively
fighting terrorism and maintaining international peace
and security together. In that respect, I wish to stress
the following points.

First, in order to effectively deter terrorism, the
international community should adhere to a common
standard. Double standards and selectivity should not
be used in the fight against terrorism. We must also
take care not to link terrorism with any particular ethnic
group or religion. Counter-terrorism activities should
abide by the principles and purposes of the Charter
of the United Nations and respect the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of the countries
concerned. The lead role of the United Nations and
the Security Council should be brought into fullplay.
Pursant to the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and relevant Security Council resolutions,
all countries should adopt effective measures to cut
the access of terrorist organizations to people, funds,
materials and channels for incitement and propaganda,
and adopt integrated measures to eradicate the breeding
grounds of terrorism.

Secondly, heightened attention must be accorded
to Africa, which is at the forefront of the international
fight against terrorism. Due to a multitude of historical
and contemporary factors, some regions of Africa
are experiencing turbulent political and security
circumstances. Terrorists are exploiting the situation to
infiltrate African countries, thereby posing a serious
threat to regional peace, security and stability and
constraining economic and social development in
the continent. Counter-terrorism work in Africa is an
important component of the global counter-terrorism
effort. The international community should prioritize
it and actively help African countries and regional
and subregional organizations to fight terrorism and
maintain peace and security on the continent. The
international community should effectively help
African countries in strengthening their counter-
terrorism capacities and provide assistance without
political conditions. The United Nations should make it
a priority to help African countries in enhancing their
counter-terrorism capacities in the implementation
of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Counter-
terrorism mechanisms, such as the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, should provide
African countries with more assistance.

Thirdly, counter-terrorism activities should be
well targeted. In some regions, especially in Africa,
terrorism and cross-border criminal organizations are
closely linked to one another. Terrorist organizations
finance their activities by trafficking in arms and
drugs and engaging in illicit trade, endangering the
sovereignty of the countries concerned and intensifying
the spill-over effect of their domestic conflicts, thereby
threatening regional security and stability. The regions
concerned should engage their counter-terrorism
activities in fighting terrorism and cross-border crime
simultaneously with a view to severing the link between
them. The international community should assist the
countries involved, particularly in Africa, in building
their border control, customs and counter-narcotics
capacities.

United Nations special political missions to the
countries concerned should raise awareness of these
new features of counter-terrorism efforts, actively
develop programmes of work, and play a useful
coordinating role. The international community should
closely follow the cross-border criminal activities
of terrorist organizations by using information and
communications technologies such as the Internet, and
take measures to prevent and combat such activities.

Like other countries, China has been a victim of
terrorism. We understand the threat posed by terrorism
to certain countries, especially in Africa. China supports
the ability of African countries to independently choose
the paths of their own development that suit their
national situations. China supports African solutions,
led by Africans, to African problems. China supports
African countries in their counter-terrorism efforts.

China is a party to the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime. China actively
works to fulfil its obligations under the Convention
through legislation, law enforcement and judicial
measures, and promotes international cooperation in
that regard. China will continue to conduct bilateral
and multilateral exchanges and cooperation against
terrorism and cross-border crime with the international
community, especially African countries. China
will do its utmost to provide material assistance and
capacity-building to relevant countries with a view to
advancing their efforts to fight international terrorism
and maintain regional and world peace and stability.
