Mr. Niehaus (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): May
I first of all, Mr. Minister, congratulate you most
sincerely and wish you success in your work as President
of the Security Council and as Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Namibia. For the United Nations and for the
international community in general it is a cause for
particular satisfaction to see you in such a lofty and
important position.

A year ago, Ms. Graca Machel, then the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to study the
impact of armed conflict on children, reported to us that
recently more than a quarter million children had
participated as combatants in approximately 30 armed
conflicts. More than 2 million children died in those wars,
more than 4 million were handicapped, more than 1
million were orphaned and approximately 12 million lost
their homes.

While these figures are alarming, there can be no
doubt that in the past year they have only increased. But
the figures still hide the reality. It is impossible to express
the profound fear of the children who flee the flames and
the bombs. It is impossible to describe the terror of

 

children when they see their parents murdered. Is it possible
to imagine the pain of 4 million handicapped children? Is
it possible to grasp the dreams, hopes and promise of 2
million murdered children? Is it possible to measure so
much sadness and so much happiness lost? Children are the
first victims of wars and the most defenceless.

The time for action has come. First of all, we must at
all costs avoid the participation of minors in armed
conflicts. For this purpose, it must be universally declared
that the participation of those under 18 years of age in
armed conflict as combatants or as support staff for the
armed forces is unacceptable.

All States must commit themselves to refraining from
recruiting minors. In this connection, appropriate and
effective procedures must be adopted to check the age of
recruits and support staff. Governments must demobilize the
minors that are already in their armed forces or their
support staff and must give them psychological and social
assistance so as to enable them to be fully and completely
rehabilitated and reincorporated into society. Government
authorities must impose penal sanctions on those who use,
recruit or promote the participation of minors in armed
conflict and must guarantee that minors in military schools
will not be considered or used as part of their armed forces.
With regard to internal armed conflicts, it is
indispensable for the international community to declare
unacceptable the use of minors in armed forces opposing
the Government. All States and groups with influence on
such forces must pressure them so that they will refrain
from recruiting minors and will demobilize the minors who
already participate in their armed forces or support staff.
Governments must promote the social reintegration of
minors demobilized from the armed forces and provide
them the necessary social and psychological assistance. All
parties to a conflict must provide captured minors the best
possible conditions with a View to ensuring their speedy
rehabilitation and reintegration into society.

Internationally, we must urgently adopt the optional
protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child of
1989, as is currently being discussed in the Working Group
of the Commission on Human Rights, which would declare
18 years as the minimum age for recruitment into armed
forces. Members of the Security Council who here in New
York lament the effects of armed conflicts on minors bear
a particular responsibility in this connection and must show
leadership and commitment by supporting this proposal in
Geneva.

It is also necessary to adopt additional measures to
prevent children from becoming victims of armed
conflicts. We must ensure that indiscriminate methods or
practices of warfare must be prohibited. Any attack
targeting the civilian population is unjustified, immoral
and clearly prohibited by international humanitarian law.
Similarly, the use of weapons with indiscriminate or long-
lasting effects must be eliminated. We are particularly
pleased to note the rapid entry into force of the
Convention on the prohibition of anti-personnel
landmines, which have killed so many people in Central
America. However, further efforts must be urgently made
to deactivate the anti-personnel mines still on the ground.

In the context of the work of the Security Council,
studies must be conducted on possible impacts on the
vulnerable population, especially on children, before any
sanctions regime is adopted. We must ensure that those
regimes include measures that will minimize their harmful
effects on minors. Any peacekeeping operation must also
have a humanitarian component that is specially trained
to deal with the problems of minors. Moreover, intensive
efforts are necessary to provide humanitarian assistance
to minors during armed conflicts, as this is a particularly
vulnerable sector of the population.

To sum up, in order to ensure minimal conditions
for minors in situations of armed conflict, it is necessary
to ensure full compliance with the provisions of
international humanitarian law and human rights. This,
however, is merely the first step.

We must acknowledge that as long as war exists, it
will be impossible to free minors from its harmful
consequences. As long as armed conflict exists, there will
be orphans, as well as displaced, maimed and murdered
children. As long as there are wars, schools, hospitals,
roads and families will be destroyed. As long as there is
armed conflict, it will be impossible to ensure the full
development of minors into worthy, productive and
creative persons; it will be impossible to ensure minimal
conditions for the development of the human being.

The real way of solving the problem of the adverse
effect of armed conflict on minors is by eliminating such
conflicts. The international community must create a real
culture of peace in which political, economic and social
differences are resolved by peaceful and democratic
means. We must build a society where dialogue prevails
over weapons, a society in which families take
precedence over military barricades, a society in which

 

armies are superfluous and in which State investment is
devoted to education, health and culture.

Today we need coordinated action by the international
community to adopt effective measures to resolve the
situation of children in armed conflict. In this context, we
attach particular importance to the work carried out by the
Secretary-General and especially by his Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara
Otunnu.

Costa Rica trusts that the necessary will to achieve this
end will continue to be expressed through action taken both
by the Security Council and by the rest of the international
community.

