Ms. Tapesh: It is a great honour to address
the Security Council on behalf of the Afghan
Women's Network.

We, the women of Afghanistan, have cautious
optimism for peace. Yet we are concerned more than
ever that women's civil rights will be compromised in
the name of peace. An inclusive approach to peace and
reconciliation in Afghanistan will ensure that the voices
of all Afghans, especially women, are included and that
the benefits of peace are shared. Any agreement related
to peace and reconciliation in Afghanistan that fails
to meaningfully engage women and gender-equality
experts or fails to promote and protect the rights of
women and reflect the realities of women will not
result in peace for women. Rather, it will serve to bring
Afghanistan back to the social and political exclusion
that women were once subjected to and deepen the
drivers of conflict.

Today in Afghanistan, women play a significant
role in every sector in the country, including
decision-making. In the parliamentary elections in
October 2018, men and women from diverse areas
of Afghanistan chose to vote for women candidates,
dispelling myths concerning women's participation and
demonstrating that many of them have turned towards
promoting women's rights. The Afghan Women's
Network led a series of consultations in 2018 involving
women and women's organizations across the entire
country. Through this statement the Afghan Women's
Network shares the voices of those women from all 34
provinces of Afghanistan.

First, the women of Afghanistan call for their
full, equal and meaningful representation in peace
and reconciliation processes relating to Afghanistan.
Women are best placed to raise the concerns and
priorities of women, as well as to find broad-based
solutions that benefit all of society. Afghan women
emphasize the need for a transparent and accountable
peace process that protects and promotes women's
human rights, supports justice for victims of violence
and war and prevents a culture of impunity.

Secondly, we see the momentum towards a ceasefire
as critical. But women must be included in the security-
sector reform, and gender advisers must be included
in all stages of a ceasefire. An inclusive process will
ensure that a ceasefire includes gender-awareness
provisions, identifies violations related to gender-based
violence and provides arrangements for women to
monitor compliance with the ceasefire agreement.

Thirdly, the Constitution provides women and
men with equal rights in line with sharia and Islamic
principles. The Constitution was agreed upon by women
and men across Afghanistan at the Constitutional Loya
Jirga. It is imperative that those voices be respected and
that the gender-equality provisions of the Constitution
be maintained.

Lastly, violence against women and girls remains a
serious concern in Afghanistan. Despite the introduction
of new laws, there remain persistent obstacles to the
implementation of the law, with women and girls as
well as the broader community not being fully aware of
their rights and protections under the law. As we look
forward, we must ensure that all conflict-resolution
processes, including the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programme, equally involve women
as both participants and beneficiaries. They must also
improve protection and ensure access to justice for all.

Let me conclude by stressing what practice and
evidence has taught us. An inclusive approach to
peace and reconciliation that promotes and protects
the rights of women is critical for the effectiveness and
sustainability of peace.

