The President (interpretation from French): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on the agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force, document S/l995/398.
Members of the Council also have before them document
S/ 1995/430, which contains the text of a draft resolution
prepared in the course of the Council's prior consultations.

It is my understanding that the Security Council is
ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
(S/ 1995/430) before it. Unless I hear any objection, I shall
put the draft resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by ShOW of hands.

In favour:
Argentina, Botswana, China, Czech Republic, France,
Germany, Honduras, Indonesia, Italy, Nigeria, Oman,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America
The President (interpretation from French): There
were 15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 996 (1995).

In connection with the resolution just adopted on the
renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force, I have been authorized to
make the following complementary statement on behalf of
the Security Council:

"As is known, the report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (S/ 1995/398) states, in paragraph 18:
'Despite the present quiet in the Israel-
Syria sector, the situation in the Middle East
continues to be potentially dangerous and is
likely to remain so, unless and until a
comprehensive settlement covering all aspects
of the Middle East problem can be reached:

That statement of the Secretary-General reflects the
View of the Security Council."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/l995/29.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.40 pm.

