Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, for his very detailed and
informative briefing and for his quarterly report on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016).

We are extremely concerned about the deteriorating
security situation in Gaza. The clashes last week once
again highlight the fragility of the ceasefire.

After the f lare-up in early May and as Gaza remains
in a critical situation, we must do everything we can
to prevent an escalation that could turn into a new
conflict. We therefore call on the parties to exercise the
utmost restraint. In that regard, I would like once again
to commend the de-escalation efforts of Egypt and the
Special Coordinator.

These developments are taking place in the context
of a serious humanitarian and political crisis in Gaza.
The humanitarian situation is dire. In that context, I
reiterate France's full support for the work of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and we call on all
donors to maintain their level of financial commitment
this year at the Organization's donor conference to
be held on 25 June. For its part, France has already
announced a doubling of its contribution to UNRWA
in 2019. Ultimately, there will be no solution in Gaza
without the lifting of the blockade accompanied by
credible security guarantees for Israel.

Politically, Palestinian unity is now more important
than ever. There is therefore an urgent need to relaunch
the intra-Palestinian reconciliation process. As we
know, there will be no lasting stability in Gaza without
a political solution, including the full return of the
Palestinian Authority. Ultimately, the future of Gaza
cannot be separated from the objective of establishing
two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in
peace and security. There will be no Palestinian State
without Gaza and no lasting political solution in the
region without a Palestinian State.

That brings me back to the intensification of
the settlement policy in the West Bank, which is
undermining the foundations and the viability of the
two-State solution. Since the beginning of the year,
more than 4,500 new housing units have been approved
in the West Bank. France is also concerned about the
announcement on 30 May by the Israeli authorities
of tenders for the construction of settlements in East
Jerusalem, including more than 800 housing units.
With more than 600,000 settlers, including 200,000 in
Jerusalem, we are close to the point of no return. The
various initiatives to implement Israeli law in the West
Bank are part of a de facto annexation policy. We take
those developments all the more seriously as they have
been accompanied by worrying statements about the

annexation of all or part of the occupied territories.

In that regard, I would like to recall that, in
accordance with international law and Council
resolutions, beginning with resolution 242 (1967),
France does not recognize any Israeli sovereignty over
any of the occupied territories. And in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, we consider it illegal
to acquire territory by force, be it in Jerusalem, the
West Bank or the Golan Heights.

If those trends were to continue, it would mean
the Palestinians abandoning their national aspirations,
which require the establishment of a State, and the
Israelis renouncing the democratic nature of the State
of Israel. In addition, it is crucial to put an end to
hate speech and incitement to violence, which, as the
Special Coordinator just recalled, continue and which
France condemns.

In that context, it is now more necessary than ever
to reaffirm the parameters for the two-State solution
agreed by the international community. In the absence
of any political perspective, there may be a temptation
to break away from the agreed framework, based on
international law and the resolutions of the Council,
and to replace it with unilateral decisions. We must all
fully appreciate the danger of that temptation.

We noted the holding of an economic workshop
in Manama on 25 and 26 June, at the initiative of the
United States and Bahrain. As we said, France stands
ready to support any effort, including economic, as long
as it is in line with the approach that we have defined
together: the establishment of a viable and independent
Palestinian State, genuine conditions for Palestine's
economic recovery and, beyond that, the construction
of a stronger and more integrated regional economy. But
economic peace cannot replace the pursuit of a genuine
political settlement, based on the two-State solution
and on all the internationally agreed parameters, which
are themselves anchored in international law and the
resolutions of the Council. Any attempt to deviate from
those collectively defined parameters would be doomed
to failure. There is no viable or realistic alternative. The
solution to this conflict is above all a political one.

France, which is a friend ofboth the Israelis and the
Palestinians, has only one objective: the implementation,
through negotiations, of the two-State solution and the
establishment of fair and lasting peace on the basis of
parameters agreed by the international community. We
will assess any initiatives taken on that basis.

