Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China welcomes the presence of Mr. William Hague,
Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth
Affairs of the United Kingdom, to preside over today's
meeting. I also wish to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his statement.

The situation in the Middle East is undergoing
unprecedented changes. In some countries the situation
is turbulent. That has of course caused widespread
concern throughout the world. Developments in the
situation in the Middle East have a major impact on
world political and economic affairs. Without stability
and development in that region, the recovery of the
world economy will remain elusive and world peace
will remain in serious jeopardy.

At a time when the consequences of the
international economic and financial crisis are still
being felt, the people of the Middle East and North
Africa, like the people of other regions of the world,
also have demands for change and for the safeguarding
of their self-interests. The reasons for the turbulence
and changes in the Middle East and North Africa are
multifaceted. In order to properly address those
changes, we must engage in rational thinking and adopt
a comprehensive and integrated approach to ensure the
peace and stability of the region, in order that the
people's demands will be met in a better and more
orderly fashion.

I should like to focus on four points. First, we
must respect the desires and demands of the peoples of
the countries concerned for change and development,
as well as respect their ownership over the
management of their internal affairs and selecting their
political systems and routes to development. The
primary responsibility for resolving issues in the
Middle East lies with the people of the Middle East
themselves. They are the masters of their own destiny.

Secondly, we hope that countries of the region
will express their political aspirations through legal
and non-violent means, resolve their differences
through dialogue, consultation and other peaceful
means, and achieve proper solutions through inclusive
political processes. We call on all parties to avoid
violence and military conflict and to restore stability
and normal social order as soon as possible.

Thirdly, we must adhere to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the
basic norms governing international relations, and
respect the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of the countries of the region. The
international community can provide necessary
constructive assistance for the efforts of countries to

solve their internal crises through political means.
China is against any attempt by external forces to
engage in military intervention or push for regime
change. Sanctions or the threat thereof are not
conducive to a proper solution of these problems.

Fourthly, Security Council resolutions must be
strictly and comprehensively implemented. No party is
to interpret them in any way it wants, let alone take
action that exceeds Council mandates. The protection
of civilians must follow international humanitarian law
and other related international law, without any
political motivations or purposes. China is against any
interference in internal affairs in the name of
humanitarianism.

As always, China remains firmly committed to
just Arab causes, including the just demands of the
Palestinian people for the restoration of their legitimate
national rights. China supports the establishment of a
Palestinian State on the basis of the 1967 borders, with
full sovereignty and independence, with East Jerusalem
as its capital and with eventual peaceful coexistence
between the two countries of Palestine and Israel.

The peace process in the Middle East is currently
at a stalemate. There was another increase in tension in
Gaza last week. China is deeply worried about that
development. Any stagnation or setback to the
Palestinian-Israeli peace talks can only bring about
more turbulence and conflict. The more conflict there
is and the more grim the situation becomes, the more
that the international community should intensify its
diplomatic efforts and push for an early resumption of
talks between the two parties. China appreciates the
efforts made by the Middle East Quartet. We support a
greater role by Mr. Annan in achieving peace in the
Middle East.

China recently put forward a six-point proposal
for a solution to the Syrian issue. We call on the Syrian
Government and all parties concerned to cease all
violence, immediately launch an inclusive political
dialogue, and adopt through consultations, and put into
practice as soon as possible, a detailed and
comprehensive reform road map and time frame. The
parties concerned in the international community must
respect Syria's sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity, and create conditions for talks
among the Syrian political parties.

The crisis in Syria is very complex. Political
mediation efforts will not succeed overnight. But we
must persevere with tireless efforts. To that end, China
has repeatedly deployed special envoys to engage with
Syrian parties and to push for political talks.

China supports a constructive role by United
Nations-League of Arab States Joint Special Envoy
Annan in finding a political solution to the Syrian
crisis. We support the vigorous efforts by Arab
countries and the Arab League in promoting a political
settlement in the Syrian crisis. We value and welcome
Mr. Annan's recent visit to Syria. We call on the
international community to create and support
favourable conditions for Mr. Annan's good offices.

No Chinese self-interests are involved on the
issue of Syria. We do not favour any particular party,
nor do we go out our way to oppose any party. China
adheres to the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and respects Syrian's sovereignty
and the choices of the Syrian people. No external
parties should engage in military intervention in Syria
or push for regime change.

China supports a leading role by the United
Nations in coordinating humanitarian relief to help to
alleviate the humanitarian situation in some regions of
Syria. Through the International Committee of the Red
Cross, China will provide $2 million in emergency
humanitarian relief to the Syrian people.

As a permanent member of the Security Council,
China stands ready to shoulder its full responsibilities,
engage in patient and full consultation with all sides on
an equal basis, and push for an early political
settlement of the Syrian crisis.

