Mr. Camilleri (Malta): Malta fully aligns itself
with the statement delivered earlier by the observer of
the European Union.

We would like to add a few remarks in our
national capacity.

Time and time again, we have seen countries
descend into chaos, owing to a peace process that did
not give reconciliation the attention it deserved. A peace
agreement must primarily unite all sides to the conflict,
as well as the victims, and instil in them the willingness
and conviction to invest in a common future. Imposing
solutions, especially from the outside, will most likely
lead to resentment and deepen divisions. On the other
hand, understanding and addressing the grievances
of all sectors of society greatly increases the odds of
achieving lasting peace.

Reconciliation is an integral part of maintaining
and, more important, of building peace. While we all
know that there is no magic formula for that, we also
know that there are elements that apply in all cases.
Giving women a central role in the peace process is a
case in point, and no country or community can hope
to achieve just and comprehensive peace if half of its
population is excluded. Youth also has a crucial role to
play. Apart from being the future, every generation has
its own unique perspective. Those elements, too, should
be adequately reflected.

Accountability is an integral part of reconciliation.
The consequences of atrocities committed during
conflict leave indelible scars on victims and societies.
Unfortunately, accountability does not turn back time
and erase such actions. It does, however, strengthen and
legitimize institutions and serves as a reminder that
justice will ultimately prevail. Furthermore, it gives
communities solace in knowing that past atrocities will
not be forgotten and that history will not be manipulated
or rewritten.

The international community has a fundamental
role to play in helping conflicting States and societies
find common ground on which to build a stable and
peaceful future. We fully appreciate the fact that that is
by no means an easy feat, especially when taking into
account the level of distrust that years of fragmentation
and conflict bring with them. Nevertheless, history has
shown us that, through reconciliation, humankind has
the ability to take the ashes of conflict and transform
them into the seeds of peace and cooperation, often
against all odds.

