Mr. Akbar (Pakistan): As the Pakistan delegation is
taking the floor for the first time under your presidency,
allow me to begin by extending our congratulations to you
for your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
this month.

Coming to the subject which is under discussion
today, the Security Council is considering the issue of
Afghanistan at a time of significant and far-reaching
developments in that country.

The noble Afghan people had hoped to see the
restoration of peace after a decade of Soviet occupation of
their country. They wanted to rebuild their nation from the
rubble of destruction caused by prolonged foreign
occupation. Unfortunately, the fulfilment of their dream still
remains distant and elusive due to internal strife among
Afghans following the withdrawal of Soviet forces. Indeed,
the suffering has gone on too long for a valiant and resolute
people who have been instrumental in drawing a new
course for international politics at the twilight of the cold
war. They deserve a respite. There must be an end to
their despair and misery.

It is a fact that no other country has suffered more
from the conflict in Afghanistan than Pakistan. As a
consequence of continued instability in Afghanistan,
Pakistan today continues to host more than 1.5 million
refugees. We stand almost single-handed in looking after
these refugees, in the face of donor fatigue and the
indifference of the international community to their plight.
Pakistan has also been the victim of terrorism, drug
trafficking and arms smuggling as a result of conditions
inside Afghanistan.

Like the Afghans themselves, our dream is to see
peace established in Afghanistan without any further
bloodshed. Pakistan's consistent policy has been the
promotion of a peaceful and negotiated settlement in
Afghanistan. Pakistan has been the only country which
has engaged with all the sides in the conflict.

Soon after assuming office in February 1997, the
Prime Minister of Pakistan, Muhammad Nawaz Sharif,
launched an Afghan peace initiative. This culminated in
the meeting of a steering committee in April this year at
Islamabad for the purpose of working out the modalities
for an ulema convention that would discuss the problems
of Afghanistan in accordance with the shariah and the
traditions of the country. While significant progress was
made by the steering committee, the process was derailed
by minor differences among the Afghan parties.

Not discouraged by this setback, we subsequently
made a number of efforts, together with Iran, under the
aegis of the Organization of the Islamic Conference and
the United Nations. Unfortunately, those efforts did not
yield any positive results.

I now turn to some recent developments in
Afghanistan. Pakistan firmly believes that while the
military fortunes or misfortunes of any of the parties are
purely an internal affair of the Afghan people, the new
ground realities cannot be ignored by the international
community. We must be pragmatic in our approach to
and understanding of the situation of profound magnitude
that has emerged.

Pakistan believes that there is now a distinct
possibility of the restoration of peace in Afghanistan. We
are encouraged by the positive pronouncements made

 

recently by the Afghan authorities in Kabul that, first, they
would grant amnesty to all who surrender; secondly, their
agenda was purely domestic and posed no threat to any
neighbouring country; and thirdly, the local commanders
were under strict instructions not to indulge in revenge
killings.

It is our earnest hope that the countries sharing a
border with Afghanistan, instead of raising alarms over an
imaginary threat, will join Pakistan in promoting peace and
harmony in Afghanistan. We must shed our biases and avail
ourselves of the window of opportunity in seeking a
realistic and practicable solution to the conflict in
Afghanistan.
The recent air strikes by the United States in
Afghanistan against alleged terrorist targets are likely to
complicate the situation. This action has caused deep
indignation, irrespective of the motives behind the air
strikes. The violation of the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Afghanistan cannot but be a matter of grave
concern.

Terrorism, and the suffering that is caused by the loss
of innocent lives, is a heinous crime. We condemn the
terrorist acts against the United States embassies in Kenya
and Tanzania, and feel the deepest sympathy for the
bereaved families. Pakistan itself has been a victim of
repeated acts of terrorism, including State-sponsored
terrorism planned and executed from across the border.
Therefore, we stand shoulder to shoulder with the rest of
the world in the firmest condemnation of terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations and in calling for its total
eradication.

In dealing with terrorism, recourse to any means other
than established principles and international norms is likely
to have a negative effect. It could spiral out of control and
further complicate matters in a vicious circle of action and
retaliation.

It is a historical fact that the people of Afghanistan
have never tolerated foreign interference in their internal
affairs. Nor have they ever pardoned those who have
violated their sovereignty and territorial integrity. The result
of any adventurism or mis-adventurism, therefore, would be
no different from that of the earliest invasions.

Pakistan has always respected the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Afghanistan. Some countries and
Government-controlled media have recently launched an
orchestrated campaign of vilification against Pakistan,
which is unfortunate. We have repeatedly and
categorically rejected any involvement in the internal
affairs of Afghanistan. I should like to reiterate our
rejection of these allegations as ridiculous and baseless.

We reject any finger-pointing aimed at deflecting the
ground realities. In the recent past, our diplomatic
missions and personnel in Kabul and Mazar-e-Sharif have
come under severe attack. The Pakistan Embassy in
Kabul was burnt, and the Consulate in Mazar-e-Sharif
was ransacked. We lost one of our Embassy personnel.
Our Ambassador in Kabul was manhandled. We did not
point an accusing finger at any country. Similarly, we
deplore any vilification campaign targeted at Pakistan.

Pakistan is deeply concerned over the reported
disappearance of some Iranian diplomats from Mazar-e-
Sharif. At the request of Iran, we have approached the
Kabul authorities at the highest level. However, I must
stress that Pakistan's role and ability to ensure the safety
of the Iranian diplomats must not be overestimated,
particularly because we did not have any presence in
Mazar-e-Sharif at the time it was captured by the Kabul
forces.

The time has now come for the international
community to engage with the authorities in Kabul. The
United Nations must come to terms with the ground
realities in Afghanistan. It must increase its credibility as
a mediator. Hence, there is now an urgent need for the
opening of an effective channel of communication with
the true representatives of Afghanistan and its people.
Their views must be heard.

The people of Afghanistan are in need of substantial
humanitarian supplies to sustain their lives. The
international community must listen to the cry of the
distressed people of that country. The United Nations
agencies and the Member States must provide, on a
priority basis, all possible financial, technical and material
assistance without any preconditions. In this regard, we
welcome the recent agreement between the Kabul
authorities and the United Nations facilitating the
resumption of the activities of the United Nations
agencies and the international organizations in most parts
of Afghanistan, including Kabul.

The international community also has a
responsibility in helping the Afghans to rebuild their war-
ravaged country. We must contribute generously to the
reconstruction efforts in Afghanistan and to the

 

rehabilitation of the refugees, as this would demonstrate to
them the dividends of peace.

In conclusion, Pakistan appeals to the international
community to accord formal recognition to the Government
in Kabul. The Afghanistan seat at the United Nations must
be assumed by the true representatives of the people of that
country. The non-existing regime of northern Afghanistan
should cease to occupy the United Nations seat forthwith.

