Mr. Corr (Ireland): I would first like to join
others in thanking you, Mr. President, for arranging
today's public meeting of the Council on protection of
civilians in armed conflict and also to express warm
appreciation for Norway's work, not only in advancing
agreement on the aide-memoire we will be adopting
later but for Norway's emphasis on this issue over the
recent period.

The remarks made by Under-Secretary-General
Oshima in his briefing emphasize the crucial
importance of the issue of protection of civilians in
armed conflict. Ambassador Levitte rightly made the
point that in the First World War, 95 per cent of victims
were soldiers. In recent decades, the casualty toll in
wars in many parts of the world predominately relates
to civilians. This therefore makes it all the more
important that the issue of protection of civilians in
conflict situations become a matter of the greatest
importance to the Council.

For that reason, Ireland very much welcomes the
aide-memoire we will be adopting later today. It is
rightly noted in the document's introduction that this is
not intended to be a blueprint; it is, instead, as has been
said by previous speakers, a tool box. We also agree
that it is important - Under-Secretary-General
Oshima, I think, made this point also - that it be
periodically reviewed in the light of our own
assessments and in the light of our experience with
peacekeeping mandates. Nonetheless, it is a synthesis
of the central steps that may need to be considered by
the Council in dealing with this critical issue.

In recent decades, we have constructed an
elaborate edifice of international human rights and
humanitarian law. Now, the issue of protection of
civilians in armed conflict is at the forefront of our
consideration. At the same time, we still have to make
the transition to the implementation and creation of
what the Secretary-General has called in his reports a
culture of prevention and a culture of protection.

My delegation welcomes the comments made by
the Under-Secretary-General this morning on the road
map and on the reorganization of the 54
recommendations from the Secretary-General's reports.
We feel that the round-table discussions have been very
helpful and we think that it is important that, in this
area, we also achieve a strong level of coordination
between our own assessment and consideration of the
aide-memoire and its objectives and what will emerge
in terms of the road map.

There are three or four very general points of
emphasis I would like to make as regards Ireland's
View.

First, it is clear that the Security Council, the
General Assembly, other United Nations agencies and
the international financial institutions need to work
more closely together in this area. It is also true that
national Governments, of course, have the central
responsibility, but the issue of coordination and
ensuring that there is a broad symmetry in the
approaches taken is of critical importance. For that
reason, I would like to pay special tribute to the work
that the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) has been doing in this area. It is at the
normative level not merely in strengthening awareness
of the issues, but also in terms of the practical
implementation of important objectives in this area.
Much has already been done and we appreciate that.

Secondly, on the point of justice - on which we
had a very useful meeting between the Council and
special representatives from the field a few weeks
ago - this is an important issue that is rightly
highlighted in the aide-memoire. Bill Berkeley, in his
book The Graves Are Not yet Fall - a study of wars in
Africa published last year - rightly said that justice is
not only an answer to tyranny, but a window on it. We
therefore regard this issue as important. Ireland, for its
part, fully endorses the exclusion of genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes from amnesty
provisions and would like to see emphasis given to the
issue of justice in the aide-memoire.

The issue of humanitarian access has, of course,
to remain a key priority. I was grateful for the update
given by the Under-Secretary-General on this and for
the working group study on the issue of engagement
with armed groups.

On the plight of internally displaced persons, this
is also an issue of importance that is highlighted in the
aide-memoire. An overriding concern remains the dire
humanitarian circumstances in many countries. The
Under-Secretary-General mentioned a figure of 4.6
million internally displaced persons in Angola. He also
referred to the situation in the Sudan and the recent
attacks. In terms of how we approach the objectives in
the aide-memoire, this will therefore be an important
issue in the period ahead.

Finally, women and children almost always are
the principal victims of armed conflict. Therefore, as
issues for consideration in the aide-memoire, we
welcome the inclusion of a number of issues relating to
the effects of armed conflict on women and children.
We welcome the references made to special protection
measures, activities within the United Nations system
and mainstreaming of the gender perspective, including
the integration of gender advisers in peace operations
and expanding the role of women in United Nations
field operations.

Last year's report of the Secretary-General noted
that no peacekeeping or peace enforcement mission has
yet been authorized to close down the assets of hate
media. My delegation considers action regarding hate
media as important. It is referred to in the aide-
memoire; like all aspects of the aide-memoire, this is
not a prescription for every circumstance. Freedom of
the press is, of course, fundamental to democracy, but
we feel it fully right that this issue has been referred to
in the aide-memoire.

In conclusion, let me again thank Under-
Secretary-General Oshima for the work that OCHA is
doing in this area. This is a critical issue. We believe
that it should be kept highly and firmly on the
Council's agenda and look forward to the Secretary-
General's next report towards the end of the year.

