Mr. Granovsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We associate ourselves with the words of
gratitude addressed to Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello for
his informative and most useful briefing. This time,
unfortunately, our customary consideration of the work
of the United Nations Transitional Administration in
East Timor (UNTAET) is taking place against the
backdrop of a deteriorating situation in that area. Here
I am referring not only to the recent incidents around
the refugee camps in West Timor, but also to instances
of militias becoming more active in the eastern part of
the island as well. We are particularly concerned at
news reports dated 26 September indicating that militia
members were armed with automatic weapons and
were wearing Indonesian uniforms. We understand that
there might be a number of explanations of how the
militias acquired such equipment, but in our view this
simply highlights the need for the Indonesian
authorities to take decisive action to put an end to the
criminal activities of the militias.

No less disquieting is the fact that, while militia
members were armed with automatic weapons, most of
the arms they have turned in have been home-made. In
that connection, we would like reliable information
about how the weapons handover is being conducted,
and about what assessments the Secretariat is relying
on.

I wish also to stress that, as far as we are
concerned, the efforts of the Indonesian authorities
with a view to normalizing the situation in West Timor
have not gone unnoticed. We hope that those steps will
have a real impact in the very near future. We note that
an Indonesian Ministry for Foreign Affairs press
release dated 25 September has reaffirmed the
Indonesian Government's readiness work with the
Security Council to establish a plan and a timetable for
a visit to Indonesia by a Council delegation.

I cannot fail to note in conclusion that, as in the
past, we highly commend the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor for its work,
and Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello for his able leadership.
We hope that the next time we consider the question of
East Timor it will be in a more favourable atmosphere.

As this is the last meeting of the Security Council
for the month of September, Sir, I wish on behalf of
Ambassador Lavrov and of the entire Russian
delegation to thank you most warmly for your able and
very tactful guidance of the work of the Council as its
President.

