Mr. Prosor (Israel): I would like to congratulate
you, Ambassador Menan, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month,
as well as to thank you for convening this important
meeting. I would also like to express my appreciation
to the Chairs of the Committees for their informative
briefings earlier and for their professional work.

Israel remains under constant threat from terrorist
organizations. Rockets rain down on our towns and
cities, launched by Hamas in the south. On our northern

border, Hizbullah is exploiting the crisis in Syria to
further undermine regional stability.

Israel has confronted terrorism since well before
its founding. For years, terrorism was an abstract
concept for many in the international community. They
believed acts of terror were a limited problem best
dealt with locally. Today we know that terrorism can
strike anywhere at any time. It is a growth industry
working around the clock to expand into new markets.
Its mission is to undermine democracies, and its vision
is to instil fear through violence.

Like an industry, terrorism has a business
development arm devoted to money laundering and
fundraising. Terrorist organizations frequently have a
foot in the global narcotics market, operating networks
that span from West Africa to the Middle East to Latin
America.

Terrorism has a human resources division that
actively recruits new members. Across the Middle East,
terrorism and martyrdom are being glorified through
incitement that is disseminated in schools, mosques and
media outlets.

Terrorist organizations also have a well-funded
marketing arm. It uses the Internet to promote every
branch of the industry, from recruitment to instruction
and from financing to public relations.

And of course, there is the operations division
that equips followers with hateful ideology and deadly
weapons.

It takes an industry to defeat an industry. Israel
is working closely with many States and regional
organizations to advance counterterrorism cooperation.
That reflects our beliefthat terrorism can be effectively
confronted only through international cooperation. No
State should stand alone in that mission.

The counter-terrorism Committees are essential
to global efforts to isolate terrorists. Israel appreciates
their dedicated work, as well as that of other relevant
United Nations agencies. We support all four pillars of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
which should be treated as a whole.

Israel commends the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate (CTED) for its ongoing contributions to
coordinate action against terrorism. I want to thank
CTED's departing Executive Director, Mike Smith, for
his many years of excellent service and leadership. We
also extend congratulations to CTED for concluding
its review of Member States' implementation of
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005). Israel supports
every effort to make the dialogue between CTED and
Member States more simple, transparent and effective.

Israel closely followed CTED's March briefing
on protecting non-profit organizations from terrorist
financiers. We are painfully familiar with the
exploitation of seemingly charitable funds by terrorist
groups. Hamas manages a wide array of groups that
claim to be social services organizations. I suppose
that if one considers laundering money to be a way of
cleaning up the neighborhood, then that is accurate.

Israel fully supports resolution 1540 (2004) and
the renewal of its mandate. Export-control systems and
appropriate national counter-terrorism legislation are
critical to preventing the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and dual-use items.

Finally, we welcome the recent extension of
the mandate of the Ombudsperson of the Al-Qaida
Sanctions Committee and are encouraged by the recent
improvements introduced in resolution 2083 (2012).

Israel is committed to sharing the knowledge
and experience that comes from years of combating
terrorism. Through our ongoing technical cooperation
and capacity-building projects, we seek to further
contribute to the international community's counter-
terrorism efforts. Each year, Israel invites counter-
terrorism specialists from other nations to learn about
the latest technological advances and operational tactics
in combating terrorism. Those efforts establish strong
ties between responsible law enforcement agencies
worldwide. Countering violent extremist groups
requires ongoing collaboration among all of us.

In too many corners ofthe planet, all ofthe elements
are in place for extremists to grow the next generation
of terrorists. In this very Council, many States offer
justification for certain terrorists while condemning
others.

In Gaza, Iran is funding, training and arming
Hamas, Islamic Jihad and other terrorists. Iran has
helped Hizbullah build its arsenal to unprecedented
levels in Lebanon, amassing 50,000 deadly missiles.
Iranian agents have been involved in attacks from
Azerbaijan to India and from Thailand to Kenya. Earlier
this week, a Kenyan court sentenced two Iranians to
life in prison on terror-related charges.

Now we face the frightening possibility - and I
wouldliketoemphasizethisveryclearly-thatHizbullah
could soon get its hands on Syria's vast stockpiles
of chemical weapons. The threat of game-changing
weapons reaching Hizbullah is substantiated by
Nasrallah himself, who yesterday said "Syria will give
the resistance special weapons it never had before".
The Council must act today, not tomorrow. We will not
allow Hizbullah to test our resolve. Numerous judicial
findings from around the world attest to the magnitude
and gravity of Hizbullah's global reach. Yet, that still
isn't enough for some European Union members to call
Hizbullah what it is: a terrorist organization. It operates
with impunity on European soil, yet some European
lawmakers continue to insist that it is a social-services
organization.

Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations
sets out the Security Council's powers to maintain
peace. There is no greater threat to international
stability than those who use fundamentalism to advance
their personal ideologies and agendas. It is time for the
international community to unite and put terrorism out
of business. The Security Council must further utilize
Chapter VII to force terrorist groups to file for Chapter
7 bankruptcy. The failure to do so would be nothing
less than moral bankruptcy.

