Mr. Eick (Germany): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General O'Brien and Executive
Director Fedotov for their comprehensive briefings, as
well as the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP), the United Nations Office for Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) and the United Nations Political
Office for Somalia (UNPOS), which have all
contributed to the Secretary-General's report
(S/2012/50). We greatly appreciate this detailed, hands-
on compilation of issues and requirements relevant to
establishing specialized anti-piracy courts in Somalia
and other States of the region.

Germany has a long-standing commitment to
combating piracy off the coast of Somalia and in the
region, including through our participation in
Operation Atalanta and our contribution to the work of
the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia.
Germany has provided substantial support to the efforts
of UNODC and UNDP in strengthening the capacities
of Somalia and States in the region in the areas of
prosecution of suspected pirates and imprisonment of
those convicted, both directly and through the Trust
Fund of the Contact Group.

But despite these efforts and progress achieved,
there is a long way to go. Piracy off the coast of
Somalia remains an issue of utmost concern. While we
take note of a declining trend in 2011 both in the
number of attacks and in the numbers of hostages and
ships held, the persistent threat of piracy and of armed
robbery remains as grave as ever. Despite the decrease
in instances of successful attacks, mainly as a result of
the concerted efforts of the international community,
the geographical reach of pirate operations now
extends into the entire western Indian Ocean. This
poses new challenges for those committing resources
to combating piracy in that region.

The Security Council has long recognized the
importance of prosecuting suspected pirates and
imprisoning those convicted as an essential component
of international efforts to combat piracy and to end
impunity. We continue to hold the view that it must
ultimately be in Somalia that pirates are prosecuted and
imprisoned. The urgent establishment of adequate
structures in Somalia, in line with the rule of law of
human rights standards, is crucial to reaching that goal.
The report of the Secretary-General is very useful in
that regard, assessing the legal and administrative
measures, as well as the international assistance
necessary for realizing that objective.

We also join the Secretary-General in welcoming
the joint efforts undertaken by the authorities of the
Transitional Federal Government, Puntland and
Somaliland, with United Nations assistance, to draft
and agree upon legislation relating to piracy, prisons
and prison transfers. We strongly urge the Transitional
Federal Institutions to adopt such legislation before the
end of the transitional period, as foreseen in the road
map.

At the same time, it will be essential to continue
and enhance support for the efforts of States in the
region, in particular Seychelles, Kenya, Mauritius and
Tanzania, to try and to prosecute pirates. As to the
specific requirements of regional States, including
international assistance, to be able to increase the
caseload capacity of each of the jurisdictions
concerned, we believe that the present report is a solid
national-based needs assessment that provides an
excellent basis for advancing the realization of that
objective.

In that context we would welcome, in principle,
the establishment of a regional prosecution centre to
act as a focal point for regional and international
support for the prosecution of piracy suspects. We
would support further study on that proposal.

Germany fully supports the recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General. In
particular, we encourage all regional States that have
not yet done so to conclude agreements with naval
States and organizations for the transfer of piracy
suspects. We urge States and the shipping industry to
make further donations to the Trust Fund of the
Contact Group, since those contributions are essential
for enabling UNODC and UNDP to go ahead with the
assistance as outlined in the report.

The report of the Secretary-General is an
important step in enhancing international efforts to
prosecute suspected pirates and imprison those
convicted. We strongly call upon UNODC and UNDP
to use the report as a basis for their further work in this
area. In particular, information contained in the report
should be taken into account when presenting projects
to the Board of the Trust Fund of the Contact Group for
funding.

Finally, concerning the idea of an extraterritorial
Somali court in a third country in the region, as
previously proposed by Special Adviser Jack Lang (see S/2011/30, annex), the Secretary-General's report again
describes existing challenges with regard to the
establishment of such a court. While we take note of
those challenges, we believe that the option should be
retained among the options at hand, since it could
constitute an important element of support to a nascent
Somali legal andjudicial system.

I should like to conclude by reiterating
Germany's strong commitment to continue constructive
cooperation with partners in the Security Council and
the Contact Group.

