Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We would like to
thank you, Sir, for convening today's meeting. We
would also like to thank and pay tribute to Ambassador
Joanna Wronecka for her briefing and leadership on
this portfolio. And we welcome our colleagues from the
Sudan to the Council today.

South Africa welcomes the improvements in the
security situation in Darfur. The situation has improved
dramatically over the past few years and the role of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) should be commended. We
salute Ambassador Jeremiah Mamabolo, Head of
UNAMID, and his colleagues - all the Blue Berets
and civilian components - for a job well done in
Darfur. Notwithstanding its expected drawdown, as set
out in resolution 2429 (2018), UNAMID must continue
to ensure the protection of vulnerable civilians,
especially the internally displaced and those in camps,
and to prevent gender-based violence. South Africa
also welcomes the gains made in advancing the Darfur
peace process and in the implementation of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur, and calls on all parties
to continue their commitment to the negotiations
process, under the auspices of the African Union High-
level Implementation Panel.

Through resolution 1591 (2005), the Council aimed
to put pressure on the parties that were impeding the
peace process, which we recognized as constituting
a threat to stability in Darfur and the region. It also
targeted those who had committed violations under
international humanitarian law or human rights law,
or other types of atrocities, or those who had violated
measures agreed on in resolution 1556 (2004). Equally,
as the Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan said,
we should also respond to the progress that is being
registered on the ground in normalizing the situation
in Darfur, which has driven the drawdown of the
contingent numbers in the UNAMID mission from
17,000 to 4,000. With those positive developments in
this area of the Sudan, it is important that the Council
be able to recognize and acknowledge that progress
has been made, thanks to the measures imposed in
resolution 1591 (2005). The Council should be able to
relax some of the previously imposed sanctions, and
in that regard we welcome the recommendation of the
Chair of the Committee.

That does not mean that there are no more elements
that require our attention. We remain concerned about
the continued violations ofthe arms embargo, including
the transfer of weapons to Darfur, which destabilizes
the situation on the ground. In that regard, we urge
UNAMID, in accordance with resolution 2429 (2018),
to continue to provide technical and logistical assistance
to the Sudan Disarmament, Demobilization and
Reintegration Commission. We also remain concerned
about the growing presence of Darfuri armed groups
in Libya, as further violations of the embargo could
potentially fuel the conflict in the region, undermining
any progress towards stability and lasting solutions
for peace and sustainable development. And women
and children are the most affected by sexual violence,
which has also increasingly become a weapon of war,
affecting the long-term prospects for peaceful and
prosperous communities. In that regard, we would like
to commend the Government of the Sudan for its efforts
to combat sexual violence in conflict.
In conclusion, South Africa hopes that as UNAMID
continues to scale down its operations and vacate stable
regions in Darfur, the Sudanese Government will
establish administrative services and ensure normalcy
in the hitherto troubled region of the Sudan. The Council
should do everything possible to ensure that the 30 June
cut-off and withdrawal of UNAMID is realized, since
it would be a major boost to Africa's call for silencing
the guns by 2020.

