Mr. Djinnit: I am honoured to present to the
Security Council the sixth report of the Secretary-
General (S/2010/6l4) on the activities of the United
Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA).

When I briefed the Council six months ago
(see S/PV.6358), I underscored that West Africa
presented a mixed picture of positive trends and
negative developments. I also observed that there were
unfortunately more concerns about regional peace and
stability than reasons to celebrate. Members may recall
that the situation in Guinea was then very uncertain. In
Mauritania, there were unfulfilled hopes for
constructive political dialogue, and post-election
anxiety was high in Togo. The political transition in
Niger was still in its early stages, and the country was
facing one of the worst famines in recent history.

Since then, the situation in West Africa has
recorded some positive developments. The transition in
Niger continues to be a work in progress. Evidence
from the ground shows promising prospects for a swift
return to constitutional order, despite a recent wave of
high-profile arrests indicating divisions within the
military leadership. The acute food crisis in Niger has
been efficiently curbed thanks to the efforts of the
Government of Niger, assisted by the United Nations
and the wider international community. In Mauritania,
2

the Government has initiated a process of political
dialogue with the opposition. I hope that this dialogue
will be maintained and lead to improved relations
between the main national political actors. In Togo,
while the atmosphere remained strained after the
March 2010 elections, there is an increasing awareness
among stakeholders that the prevailing stalemate does
not serve the cause of democracy and development of
the country. I was especially encouraged, during my
last mission to Togo a few days ago, by the will
expressed by key stakeholders, including the President
of the Republic, to strengthen reconciliation.

Six months ago, Guinea was one of our deepest
concerns in West Africa. Today, the country should
rank among our best hopes. The strong commitment of
the Guineans to restoring peace and democracy,
combined with the relentless efforts of the international
community - especially the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), the African Union and
the United Nations - have ultimately succeeded in
pushing back the frontiers of political scepticism and
despair in that country.

Although we have not yet reached the ultimate
goal of democratic governance in Guinea, we remain
confident in the feasibility of the democratic project in
that country. The situation in Guinea, which is still
fragile, needs the continued support of the international
community. In this context, the President elect
conveyed to me that he is expecting Guinea's partners,
in particular the Bretton Woods institutions, to urgently
lend the required support to his country in the
framework of the usual assistance and facilities granted
to countries emerging from crisis. I wish to seek the
backing of members of the Security Council to the
legitimate expectations of the Guinean authorities in
support of a swift recovery and the delivery of peace
dividends in Guinea.

As the dust settles on a most demanding electoral
process in Guinea and a new legitimate President is
about to assume office, it is appropriate to commend
the Guinean people and leaders for this historic
achievement and to congratulate the new President,
Mr. Alpha Conde'. It is also fitting to pay tribute to
Cellou Dalein Diallo for conceding defeat in the
interest of democracy and national reconciliation. I
hope that this positive example will be emulated
elsewhere in West Africa as the subregion continues to
consolidate its democratic gains.
10-69917

As elections, particularly presidential elections,
continue to generate tensions in West Africa, there is a
need for innovative thinking on this most sensitive and
controversial issue. UNOWA will remain engaged in
supporting democratic transition in the subregion,
including through electoral processes, so that elections
are seen as an effective tool for strengthening
democracy and national cohesion and creating
conditions for development. UNOWA will also pursue
its efforts towards strengthening institutions and
mediation mechanisms in the subregion, especially
those related to electoral governance and post-election
mediation.

The security sector in West Africa, where a
number of security forces have emerged as a main
factor of insecurity, will continue to receive UNOWA's
attention. In liaison with the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, the Office will continue to mobilize
political will for preventing and combating drug
trafficking and organized crime and to support the
implementation of the ECOWAS action plan. The
Office will also provide support for the enactment of
resolutions and frameworks of action pertaining to
respect for human rights and the mainstreaming of the
gender perspective in conflict prevention and conflict
management initiatives in West Africa.

UNOWA will continue to support subregional
efforts and initiatives aimed at promoting peace and
stability in the Sahel, building on encouraging efforts
10-69917
under way to enhance regional cooperation, to address
common security threats, including terrorism, and to
promote economic and social development.

UNOWA will also continue to pursue its
partnership with ECOWAS, the African Union and
other regional stakeholders as the most effective way
to assist in conflict prevention and peace consolidation
in West Africa. It will also continue to promote
synergies within United Nations entities in the
subregion with a View to enhancing the contribution of
the United Nations to peace and development.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate my commitment
and that of the United Nations Office for West Africa
to continuing to support and consolidate hard-won
achievements in West Africa and to help preserve the
subregion from further conflict so that the energies and
resources of its people can be channelled towards
deepening democratic gains and enjoying social and
economic peace dividends.

