Mr. Mackay (New Zealand): It is a great
pleasure to see you in the Chair, Mr. President. I want
first to compliment you and the Singapore delegation
for convening today's meeting on this important topic,
as well as for your innovation in permitting non-
members to speak first. Hopefully, this initiative will
indeed promote greater interactivity.

Ambassador Mahbubani has asked us to keep our
statements short and punchy, and I will try to oblige. I
want to explain briefly why New Zealand takes a
particular interest in this subject and what we would
like to see by way of an outcome.

As Ambassador Listre of Argentina has
mentioned before me, New Zealand and Argentina,
while serving together on the Security Council in 1994,
were perhaps pioneers in seeking the
institutionalization of procedures to provide for
appropriate consultation with Members outside the
Council. Our joint letter to the President of the Council
on 18 September 1994 (S/1994/1063) got the ball
rolling and led to the institutionalization of the
procedures set out in the presidential statement of
4 November 1994 (S/PRST/l994/62).

We sought these improvements because of our
commitment to the key United Nations role in the
maintenance of international peace and security and
because of our concern to see the Organization do
better in the face of some very great challenges at the
time. That commitment has never diminished. New
Zealand has been a willing contributor to United
Nations operations for half a century. Our current level
of contribution to United Nations peacekeeping is the
highest ever. Over 30 per cent of the New Zealand
army is at present involved in peacekeeping. We are
represented in operations in Asia, Africa and Europe,
with our biggest single contribution being a battalion
group in East Timor.

We approach the question of strengthening
cooperation with troop contributors, therefore, with
strong credentials, we believe, and from the
perspective that the Charter guarantees, under Article
44, those troop contributors who are not members of
the Council the right to be heard by the Council, at the
very least. As others have noted, the Charter speaks of
troop contributors being invited to participate in the
decisions of the Security Council concerning the
employment of their contingents. This must be our
starting point in considering the possible establishment
of new mechanisms and the procedural issues that flow
therefrom. We firmly believe that this Article must be
given due weight in United Nations peacekeeping in
the twenty-first century.

On paper, things have come a long way since
1994. Resolution 1327 (2000), adoptedjust two months
ago by way of follow-up to the Brahimi Report, speaks
of strengthening significantly the existing system of
consultations through the holding of private meetings
with troop-contributing countries. Even before that
resolution was adopted, we were greatly encouraged by
the private meeting between the Council and troop
contributors to the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL), which was held on 4 October last
year. We very much hope that the format of this
meeting might serve as a model for the implementation
of private meetings in accordance with resolution 1327
(2000).

Among the key features of that 4 October meeting
were the provision of an excellent briefing by Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno on the current political
framework, a first-class military appreciation of the
situation facing UNAMSIL, presented by Major-
General Ford, and the readiness of the Council
President at the time, Ambassador Andjaba of
Namibia, to see a free and frank exchange of views
among the participants. The content of troop-
contributor meetings must be well prepared, as it was
in this case. In particular, if the Council is to consider
any proposals to alter significantly the mandate or the
size of a force, we, for one, would expect a fuller
military appreciation to be provided to Council
members and to troop contributors in just such a
meeting, and we have heard here today from a number
of other troop contributors who very clearly share this
View.

Timeliness is also an essential requirement if
meetings between the Council and troop contributors
are to have value. May we applaud your efforts, Mr.
President, for the way in which you have scheduled
troop-contributor meetings for the four operations
whose mandates expire this month - the United
Nations Mission of Observers in Prevlaka, the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor, the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the
United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia - well in
advance of Council consideration.

The strengthening of cooperation with troop
contributors is of very great importance to our capitals,
especially as United Nations operations grow more
complex and more hazardous. We must be able to
demonstrate to our parliaments and to our publics that
we have an avenue to contribute to decisions that affect
our servicemen and women. Equally, in these days
when only a few Council members can be counted
among the major troop-contributing countries to United
Nations operations, there would seem to be an
imperative for Council members to seek the views of
troop contributors, especially on issues concerning the
safety and security of United Nations peacekeepers. As
my delegation argued in the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations as far back as April 1994,
there is a direct correlation between the willingness of
Member States to commit personnel to United Nations
operations and the level of comfort with mechanisms in
place for consultation.

Finally, comment has been sought on the idea of
establishing a special subcommittee of the Council on
peacekeeping operations. We recall that the Brahimi
report indeed suggested, in paragraph 61, that troop-
contributor advice to the Security Council might
usefully be institutionalized through the establishment
of ad hoc subsidiary organs of the Council. We believe
that a formal committee should in fact be established.
The committee, chaired by the President, should
comprise all the members of the Council and every
Member State which is contributing formed units to the
peacekeeping operation on the committee's agenda.
The committee would have a regular cycle of meetings,
as well as being convened to discuss new deployments,
new mandates and other significant changes to an
operation, including troop reductions. There might well
be scope for an informal subcommittee, perhaps
meeting at the expert level with officials of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, to assist the
committee. We hope these ideas can be taken further.
In sum, we congratulate you, Mr. President, on
using your office this month to focus on an issue of
very great interest to the wider membership. You have
shown by example how the Council's business can be
managed in a way which provides for the interests of
troop contributors to be properly taken into account.
We look forward to contributing further where we can
to concrete recommendations which will lead to a
better relationship between the body charged with
maintaining international peace and security on our
behalf and those countries that predominantly provide
the means to carry out its decisions.

