The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Albania, Japan, the Netherlands
and Serbia and Montenegro, in which they request to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Security Council, I extend a
warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Zoran Loncar,
Minister of Public Administration and Local Self-
Government of Serbia.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Loncar
(Serbia and Montenegro) took a seat at the
Council table; the representatives of the other
aforementioned countries took the seats reserved
for them at the side of the Council Chamber

The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Hedi Annabi, Assistant Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Annabi to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2004/613, containing the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. He'di Annabi, Assistant Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations. I now give him
the floor.


