Mr. Wolff (United States of America): I should
like to thank each of the Chairmen for their briefings.
Their dedicated leadership is central to the
effectiveness of the 1267, 1373 and 1540 Committees.
Today we have an opportunity to focus on the
accomplishments of the three Committees over the past
several months.

The United States supports the important role the
United Nations plays in reinforcing national and
regional counter-terrorism efforts. As President Obama
said in his address of 23 September to the General
Assembly,

"[The United States has] set a clear and focused
goal: to work with all members of this body to
disrupt, dismantle and defeat Al-Qaida and its
extremist allies - a network that has killed
thousands of people of many faiths and nations
and had plotted to blow up this very building."
(A/64/PV.3, p. 9)

Ambassador Mayr-Harting, the United States
appreciates the leadership and personal commitment
you have displayed as Chair of the 1267 Committee.
We also commend the work of the Analytical Support
and Sanctions Monitoring Team, which has played a
vital role as an independent and objective fact-finding
body. Countering the threat posed by Al-Qaida and the
Taliban remains one of the most important challenges
facing this Council. Without the efforts of Member
States to work collectively, the world would be much
more vulnerable to terrorist attacks.

What can we do to ensure that the 1267 regime
remains a vital and effective multilateral tool to
respond to this threat? First, we can reaffirm the
international community's commitment to full
implementation of the 1267 measures. The 1267
regime can only function well if States actively
participate in the regime, such as by proposing new
names for listing. Secondly, we should continue our
efforts to ensure that the consolidated list is as accurate
and up-to-date as possible, ensuring that our
procedures for imposing sanctions are fair and clear.
Resolutions 1735 (2006) and 1822 (2008) introduced
new measures to help the Committee confirm the
accuracy of the list. The Committee has worked to
implement what is perhaps the most significant
measure of resolution 1822 (2008). The review of
every name on the consolidated list by June 2010 will
continue in the coming months. The United States is
committed to ensuring that that review is meaningful
and is working with Member States to finish the review
on time.

Thirdly, we should continue our efforts to ensure
that the sanctions are applied in a fair and transparent
manner. Resolution 1822 (2008) and its predecessors
introduce significant enhancements to ensure fairness.
In the coming weeks, the Council will negotiate a new
resolution to renew the mandate of the Monitoring
Team of the 1267 Committee and will take the
opportunity to enhance the regime and to improve our
ability to counter the Al-Qaida and Taliban threats. The
United States believes that the new resolution should
take additional steps to ensure that the process for
listing and de-listing individuals is as fair and
transparent as possible. We believe that there is room
to improve the way in which the 1267 Committee
decides to list individuals and how it considers requests
from those seeking to be removed from the list.

Regarding the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), I would like to thank Ambassador Vilovie for
doing an exceptional job of guiding the Committee's
work. Ambassador Vilovic' fostered greater efficiency
in the Committee's work. As this is the last time that he
will report on his Chairmanship, we wish him well and
thank him for his leadership.

The United States welcomes the significant
improvement in the performance of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
under the leadership of Mike Smith. We are pleased to
see more engagement by CTED outside of New York in
capitals and with experts in the relevant ministries on
the ground. That is where the United States would like
CTED to place even more emphasis. We applaud
CTED's work in South Asia and we encourage CTED
and the wider United Nations to explore similar
opportunities in North Africa.

The United States welcomes efforts to develop a
more holistic United Nations counter-terrorism
programme that is more integrated with the wider
United Nations effort to promote international peace
and security. That involves working with States around
the world to build the capacities needed to confront a
range of interrelated transnational security challenges,
including terrorism. That effort involves not just the
Security Council, but also the General Assembly and
other relevant United Nations bodies. In that context,
the United States looks forward to further participation
of the Security Council Committees and their expert
groups with the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force. We welcome the recent visit by United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
Ms. Pillay to the CTC and her constructive
recommendations for strengthening existing
approaches to underscore the role of human rights in
the fight against terrorism in the work of the CTC and
the CTED.

Regarding the 1540 Committee, I would like to
take a moment to praise Ambassador Urbina for his
leadership and enthusiasm in guiding the work of that
important Committee. As Chair of the 1540
Committee, Ambassador Urbina has promoted greater
transparency and supported a range of ideas to make
the Committee's work more effective and relevant.
Since the Ambassador too is making his last
appearance in that capacity today, we wish him well
and thank him for his leadership. He will leave behind
a Committee with a strong mandate and a clear vision.

In the six months since those three Committees
addressed the Council, the world has seen a growing
interest in the work of the 1540 Committee. With the
unanimous adoption of resolution 1887 (2009) on
24 September, this Council sent a loud and clear
message that resolution 1540 (2004) is an essential tool
for building the non-proliferation regime. Resolution
1887 (2009) affirms the need for full implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), welcomes the work that the
1540 Committee has done to date on funding
mechanisms, and reinforces the Security Council's
commitment to ensuring effective and sustainable
support for the Committee's activities, including
capacity-building. Within a week of adopting
resolution 1887 (2009), the Committee conducted its
comprehensive review of the status of implementation
on resolution 1540 (2004). That three-day event
offered an inclusive forum in which all States and
relevant intergovernmental bodies could share
experiences and express their views on various aspects
of implementation of the resolution.

The success of the 1540 Committee lies in its
ability to move forward with its work programme to
fully implement the provisions of resolution 1540
(2004). We urge the Committee to streamline the
assistance request process in order to make requests
more transparent and to ensure that requests are
answered in a timely and efficient manner. As part of
that effort, the United States is committed to the
establishment of a voluntary fund to help provide the
support and expertise necessary to facilitate
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

In conclusion, regarding all three counter-
terrorism related bodies, there needs to be more cross-
fertilization among them. Good practices in one should
be adopted more regularly by the others. That does not
happen often enough. We would especially like to
commend the successful outreach efforts of the 1540
Committee, including through the unprecedented three-
day open meeting that the Committee organized this
fall as part of its comprehensive review, as well as its
successful efforts to reach out to civil society and to
involve it in the Committee's work. All the Council's
counter-terrorism related committees should remain
mindful of the need to enhance the transparency of
their work and make it more accessible to the wider
United Nations community, national actors, regional
organizations and civil society. We encourage further
engagement by the three Committees with Member
States on a broad of range of issues to ensure that the
Committee's work is fully understood and relevant to
Member States' own efforts to combat terrorism.

