Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): Mr. President, I wish
to express our appreciation to you for convening this
public meeting on a fundamental issue such as complex
crises, which call for a United Nations response. We
are also pleased to have among us Under-Secretary-
General Jan Egeland, head of the United Nations
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
and Ambassador Marjatta Rasi, President of the
Economic and Social Council.

We believe that our response to crises throughout
the world has not been entirely appropriate - the
military approach to security has been superseding the
human approach, and as stated in your non-paper of 18
May, we consider that "the intrinsic link between peace
and development must remain at the core of UN
response" to complex crises.

The President has laid down a series of questions
that this debate on complex crises should attempt to
address with clarity and objectivity. My comments
shall focus on two of those topics: preventive
diplomatic action and post-conflict peace-building.

Concerning preventive diplomatic action - or
what we could call conflict avoidance - we believe
that a much more energetic and consistent role must be
played by the whole collective security mechanism
provided by the United Nations Charter. That actually
means a rededication of our Organization and all its
Members to the resolve of "the peoples of the United
Nations" made clear in the Charter's Preamble. That
also means a renewed commitment to the lofty aims of
the Purposes and Principles contained in the Charter.
The sixtieth anniversary of the United Nations in 2005
represents a golden opportunity that must not be
missed. It should be the culmination of the many
efforts now being carried out in the field of peace and
security.

International realities are changing at an alarming
pace, thus requiring institutional change in the
Organization, including a reform of the Security
Council, as its composition and procedures have
clearly become inadequate for current needs related to
its primary responsibility - the maintenance of
international peace and security.

A revitalization of the General Assembly is also
required. Along with updating its work methods, it
must make full use of the potentialities envisaged in
Articles 10, 11 and 13 of the Charter.

In that connection, the General Assembly should
play a larger role in considering the general principles
of cooperation in the maintenance of international
peace and security and in drawing the attention of the
Council to situations that are likely to endanger peace
and security. The Assembly should also significantly
increase its role in promoting cooperation in the
political field, thus enhancing its contribution to the
strengthening of international peace and security.
Appropriate recommendations should be made to that
effect.

The instrumentalities relating to the pacific
settlement of disputes, and actions with respect to
threats to the peace, breaches of the peace and acts of
aggression, as well as regional arrangements, should be
urgently revisited. I refer to Chapters VI, VII and VIII
of the United Nations Charter.

Regional organizations have an increasingly
important role to play in the overall international effort
for peace and security. Some weeks ago we had
examples when we were briefed by the Chairman-in-
Office of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe.

But we see the primary role of the regional
organizations as one of a preventive nature. Their
particularly important contribution lies in addressing
the root causes of conflict and violations of human
rights before they escalate into major conflicts. Smaller
regional organizations are more flexible and are closer
to the sources of conflict than the United Nations. They
are in a better position to detect the early symptoms
and act promptly, thus preventing intrastate differences
from evolving into intolerance, prejudice, hatred and
conflict.

Moreover, the root causes of conflict are often
region-specific: in Kosovo they might be very different
from those in Darfur, which might in turn widely differ
from the Haitian question. Preventive diplomacy
should be consistently taken up by regional
organizations. We believe that partnership between
those organizations and the United Nations ought to be
expanded.

We welcome the periodic meetings with regional
organizations promoted by the United Nations and
aimed at optimizing the use of resources and avoiding
duplication. In many cases, the international
community must provide assistance to enable regional
organizations to shoulder their responsibilities.

Needless to say, when prevention fails and
enforcement actions are needed, military action should
remain the prerogative of this Council. The Council
may, as well, empower regional arrangements to
enforce action, as stated in Article 53 of the Charter,
when such possibility is foreseen in their constitutive
act.

Underdevelopment and under-education are
found at the root of most conflicts in the world.
Economic inequalities and poverty exacerbate
differences and intolerance and invariably kindle
friction and, ultimately, conflict. From a strictly
academic perspective, it is worth noting that the root
causes of conflict will recur after any peacekeeping
intervention if sufficient attention is not paid to
sustained development, thus creating a very vicious
circle.

This brings me to the second topic: peace-
building, in the sense of post-conflict efforts that must
follow a peacekeeping operation. As we have seen in
our recent debate on the issue, among the 15
peacekeeping operations now being deployed by the
United Nations, eight are considered complex.

In complex crises, the State and society have
eroded. Therefore, the United Nations cannot limit
itself to military security. A much broader concept of
security has to be applied to these situations: the
population must be protected, humanitarian assistance
delivered, reconciliation among factions forged,
combatants disarmed and reintegrated, interim
authorities put in place, law and order reestablished,
elections organized, Government institutions reformed,
and infrastructure and the economy rebuilt. That is a
long list, but it may not be a complete one.

We believe that the element of economic
reconstruction has not been underscored enough in our
resolutions. We need to apply more time and energy
and to spend our resources more effectively in quick-
impact economic programmes that could in a short
period of time transform the daily reality of individuals
and of small communities. We believe that the only
way to sustain peace is by enhancing the development
components of peacekeeping operations.

Since the Council is the primary organ for peace
and security in the world, it is therefore our
responsibility to ensure that peacekeeping operations
are effective. But they can be effective - and cost-
effective - only if we incorporate mechanisms of
sustained peace into our resolutions. Otherwise
countries and populations may easily fall back into
conflict. We have to be more creative in our common
objective of sustained peace, requesting direct
involvement of the Economic and Social Council and
of United Nations development agencies. Our concept
of exit strategies must primarily be linked to realistic
benchmarks, rather than observing rigid deadlines.

Successive recent events demonstrate that we are
likely to remain mired in a long-term struggle for peace
and security. They also lead us to believe that much
more must be done by the Security Council, the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council to ensure that the apparent risk of regional or
global systemic failure ceases to exist. Peacekeeping
operations are our established response to these events,
and their record shows many success stories. But
whenever peacekeeping is needed, conflict prevention
has been needed before and peace-building will be
needed afterwards.

We might evolve in the future to the
establishment of conflict-avoiding operations. While
we work within the current framework of
peacekeeping, however, we should be able to
implement institutional change in the United Nations
and to stimulate regional organizations to enhance their
reach for the root causes of conflict. We should also
incorporate ever more elements of peace-building and
post-conflict reconstruction, in particular development
and education capacities, into peacekeeping operations.

