Ms. Alfreosdottir (Iceland): Allow me to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this timely debate
on a matter of vital importance. I would also like to
pay tribute to the co-organization by Switzerland
and the United Nations of the Geneva Conference on
Preventing Violent Extremism in April. We also look
forward to the conclusion of the review of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the
discussions on the Secretary-General's Plan of Action
to Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674).

While it is clear that Africa and the Middle East
bare the brunt of terrorism, destabilization and the
corrosive effects on the lives of millions of individuals
and whole communities, there is virtually no country
left untouched. Underlying the violence are complex
webs of tacit and active support, sympathy and
encouragement, which are often hard to identify and
even harder to root out.

All our societies potentially harbour individuals
who instigate and nurture ideologies that can be turned
into a justification for violence and terrorism. What is
new in recent years are the powerful tools of modern
life that give such individuals tremendous leverage. To
give some examples, we know that YouTube has taken
down 14 million videos in the past two years. Facebook
receives and reviews 1 million user notifications per
week about violations of its rules, and Twitter has
closed down 2,000 accounts related to the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in recent months.

The Secretary-General's report on the threat posed
by ISIL (S/2016/92) paints a frightening picture of the
sophistication of ISIL and other similar movements in
manipulating young people through its use ofvisual and
social media. The same report makes the point that the
journey of each individual fighter into terrorist activity
involves a unique combination of factors. There is no
simple approach to identifying potential terrorists,
and even less a silver bullet to stop them from being
radicalized and recruited in the first place.

The impact ofterrorism fuelled by violent extremists
is clear to us all. The massive scope and complexity
of the task of addressing it are also clear in scale, if
not in detail. We must act together urgently as a world
community. We must improve coordination within the
United Nations on how to address terrorism and violent
extremism. We need to work for an internationally
comprehensive approach. I fully agree with the Foreign
Minister of Egypt on the imperative of confronting
narratives and ideologies, and we must do that together.
We need to be honest about identifying the internal and
external drivers of violent extremism and terrorism. It
is my firm belief that if we do not do this, then we will
be fighting with one hand tied behind the back.

