Mr. Celem (Turkey): My delegation has on
numerous occasions cited the position of the President of
the International criminal Tribunal that peace without
justice is no peace at all.

We strongly uphold this principle. The prospect and
promise of peace embodied in the Dayton Agreement,
which was signed in Paris on 14 December 1995, requires
full compliance. The commitments undertaken through
this Agreement should not remain on paper. They should
be implemented in good faith.

The report of the Secretary-General on the crimes
and violations of international humanitarian law
committed in the areas of Srebrenica, Zepa, Banja Luka
and Sanski Most by the Pale Serbs illustrates one of the
particularly disturbing and dark chapters of recent history.
The cruelty and magnitude of the crimes committed there
demonstrated once again how dastardly the so-called Pale
leadership could become. As is stated in paragraph 76 of
the report (S/1995/988) of the Secretary-General, the
International Tribunal issued further indictments against
Karadzic' and Mladie for their direct and individual
responsibilities for the atrocities committed against the
Bosnian people living in Srebrenica. They are charged,
inter alia, with crimes against humanity and genocide. It
is the commitment not only of the parties to the
Agreement but also of the international community to
bring these criminals to justice. Security Council
resolution 1031 (1995) reaffirmed this commitment. The
Implementation Force (IFOR) will detain any persons
indicted by the International Tribunal who come into
contact with it and will ensure their transfer to the
Tribunal.

 

We are appalled to learn that there are still attempts to
distort the facts in order to conceal the cruel crimes of the
indicted war criminals. Those concerned should bear in
mind that they can be considered as reliable parties to the
peace and reconciliation process only if they remain true to
their words and obligations. In this context, we reiterate our
call upon the Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) to start its cooperation
with the international criminal Tribunal without further
delay.

Those who lost their lives as a result of the atrocities
and horrors carried out in the name of "ethnic cleansing"
over the past four years should not, and will not, be
forgotten. If peace is to prevail, those who are responsible
for the cruellest crimes against humanity should not be
allowed to go unpunished, nor the victims denied justice.
Let us remember: for there to be a lasting peace, it must be
accompanied by a sense of justice in the minds of all
citizens - in particular, the victims of atrocities in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Therefore, the international community
must not fail, in the future, to effectively prevent the
recurrence of mass executions, concentration camps, "ethnic
cleansing", genocide and campaigns of rape and terror.

With this determination, we welcome the draft
resolution we are about to adopt and look forward to its full
implementation.

