I thank you, Mr. President, for personally presiding over this important debate on post-coronavirus disease (COVID-19) global governance. Also, I thank Secretary-General Guterres and the African Union Commission Chairperson for their insightful briefings. Since my last statement (see S/2020/799, annex 5), at the debate on pandemics and the challenges of sustaining peace, just one and a half months ago, COVID-19 has infected more than 10 million and claimed the lives of over 200,000 people globally. Yet that is just the tip of the iceberg. Many more, particularly those in vulnerable conflict and post-conflict situations, have been, and will be, severely affected due to the lingering impacts of this unprecedented crisis. The pandemic has laid bare the fragility of our world and "risks ignored for decades: inadequate health systems; gaps in social protection; structural inequalities; environmental degradation; the climate crisis", as assessed in the latest report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Organization (4/75/1, para. 5). Equally serious, faltering multilateral cooperation, excessive nationalism, political tensions and even the use of the pandemic to trigger discrimination and hatred have hampered our common response. It is important that we stand together against these obstacles and strengthen our commitments towards sustainable recovery from the pandemic and resilience in the face of possible future crises. Experience in many countries and regions, including Viet Nam and other members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), has demonstrated that good governance is the linchpin to cope with interconnected dimensions of COVID-19, particularly through a whole-of-government and people-centred approach, decisive and early response, social unity and cohesion and innovative financing for development. Viet Nam believes that good global governance should aim to deliver for all rather than a few. International efforts should prioritize economic recovery, with a special focus on assistance for developing countries, addressing inequalities and root causes of conflicts and protection and support for vulnerable groups such as women, children, refugees and internally displaced persons. We call for more intensified political and financial commitments, particularly from developed countries, to assist the most vulnerable people and countries in need. As no one wins until everyone wins, how the world emerges from the pandemic will depend on each and every nation's ability to build trust, nurture commitments and work together to champion multilateralism, with the United Nations as the coordination centre and regional organizations playing a more active role. Multilateral institutions, for their part, should seize this critical moment to spearhead concrete reform measures to adapt their relevance and efficiency to the evolving international context. The Security Council is no exception. To fulfil its primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, the Council needs to show the highest level of cooperation, while improving its responsiveness, adaptability and efficiency. To respond in a timely manner to global security challenges and non-traditional security challenges that can aggravate vulnerable political and security situations, it is important that the Council make the best use of available tools, particularly preventive diplomacy, conflict prevention, peacemaking and peacekeeping mandates. Viet Nam supports the implementation of resolution 2532 (2020) and urges all warring parties to earnestly heed the Secretary-General's call for an immediate global ceasefire. On 8 August, ASEAN Foreign Ministers issued a joint statement reiterating commitments to maintaining South-East Asia as a region of peace, security, neutrality and stability, and strengthening peace-oriented values in the region, in line with international law. Subsequently, at the fifty-third ASEAN Foreign Ministers' Meeting, held on 9 September, ASEAN members reaffirmed their resolve to expeditiously develop a comprehensive recovery framework to move forward ASEAN's COVID-19 recovery efforts and underscored the importance of strengthening cooperation with a view to mitigating the profound impacts of the pandemic. As 2020 ASEAN Chair and a member of the Security Council for the term 2020-2021, Viet Nam is strongly committed to joining global efforts to fight our common challenges and prevent them from undermining regional and international peace and stability.
