The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council condemns the failure of
Iraq to comply with its resolution 1060 (1996) of
12 June 1996 by refusing access to sites designated by
the Special Commission on 13 June 1996. Coming
after the denial of access on 11 and 12 June 1996, this
new dimension of non-compliance marks a serious
step backwards in Iraq's cooperation with the Special
Commission. The Council considers that these events
constitute a clear and flagrant violation of its
resolutions 687 (1991), 707 (1991) and 715 (1991).

"The Security Council reiterates its full support
for the Special Commission in the conduct of its
inspections and the other tasks entrusted to it by the
Council. The Council rejects attempts by Iraq to
impose conditions on the conduct of inspections by
the Special Commission.

"The Security Council demands once again that
Iraq comply with the relevant resolutions of the
Council and, in particular, allow the inspection
teams of the Special Commission immediate,
unconditional and unrestricted access to any and all
areas, facilities, equipment, records and means of
transportation which they wish to inspect.

"The Security Council requests the Chairman of
the Special Commission to visit Baghdad as soon as
possible with a View to securing immediate,
unconditional and unrestricted access to all sites
which the Special Commission wishes to inspect,
and to engage in a forward-looking dialogue on
other issues under the Commission's mandate. It
further requests the Chairman to report immediately
afterwards on the results of his visit and on the
impact of Iraqi policies on the mandate and work of
the Special Commission."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1996/28.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 5.35 pm.
