Australia welcomes the timely holding of this open debate by Estonia, in its capacity as President of the Security Council, and commends its approach to the Council's working methods. Australia would also like to commend Kuwait on the work it undertook in its capacity as Chair of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and other Procedural Questions. That work enabled the Group to secure the adoption, in late December 2019, of eight notes by the Council President on issues that enhance the Council's working methods and constructively build on note presidential note S/2017/507. Australia recognizes the need for the Council to be efficient and flexible in responding to crises, but transparency is crucial to ensure confidence and, therefore, effectiveness. The Security Council can appear opaque to those who cannot participate in meetings and determine outcomes, including the wider membership and various stakeholders in the machinery of the United Nations and civil society groups. Greater visibility of Council deliberations would assist those groups in targeting inputs appropriately. Australia firmly believes that this will improve decision-making and perhaps even implementation, monitoring and evaluation. Australia also supports greater use of public meetings, open debates, Arria Formula meetings, monthly wrap-up sessions and timely reporting to the General Assembly as a mean to enhancing transparency. At a time when members are looking for ways to retain public confidence in the multilateral system, those reforms should be considered as a priority. To achieve its core function of maintaining international peace and security, Australia encourages the Council to use all the tools at its disposal to enhance its ability to prevent and not just respond to conflict, in line with the sustaining peace agenda. The Security Council should request more horizon-scanning and situational awareness briefings, including with input from the Peacebuilding Commission, which should be viewed as a key partner. The Council should work to ensure that diverse voices are heard from people in countries on its agenda, especially women and civil society representatives. Crises demand agility - the capacity to adapt and respond to extraordinary circumstances. We recognize the Council's continued efforts to improve its working methods while the coronavirus disease restrictions are in place. However, we recommend that the open and closed video-teleconferences be considered formal meetings and recorded by the Secretariat. That would increase transparency in the longer-term. Further, allowing non-Council members to speak in open discussions, as they are able to do during in-person meetings, would ensure that the Council continues to benefit from a diversity of views. In conclusion, we must all remember that these discussions and the ensuing reforms are, above all, aimed at improving the Council's effectiveness, to which we are all deeply committed. During this challenging time in New York and around the world, Australia stands ready to contribute to discussion and action, as appropriate.
