Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to thank Special Representative Zerrougui
and Special Envoy Djnnit for their briefings.
Members of the Council recently visited the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, enabling us to gain
a first-hand and more in-depth understanding of the
situation in the country. Through that visit, we have
come to realize that the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is firmly determined to take
ownership of the process for maintaining international
peace and stability and has achieved good progress
in election preparations, the political process and the
governance of the Kasai region. It is the Government
and the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
who best understand the situation they face and the steps
they want to take. The Council and the international
community should fully respect and acknowledge the
desires and efforts of the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and further encourage them
to realize their potential and take on the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
stability. Meanwhile, the international community
should continue to provide the necessary assistance,
based on the country's needs.

First, we must push for further dialogue and
communication among all parties in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the effective implementation
of the political agreements reached on 31 December
2016 and the smooth holding of elections. Secondly,
we must bring the role of the African Union, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and other regional and subregional organizations fully
into play, enhance regional coordination, effectively
implement the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region and focus on addressing the problem of
armed groups in order to promote regional peace and
stability. Thirdly, we must improve the efficiency of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
and enhance consultations with the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in order to improve
MONUSCO's fulfilment of its mandate. Fourthly, we
must further expand the humanitarian relief efforts
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and help
control Ebola.

As always, China is firmly committed to the peace
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to
the United Nations peacekeeping efforts there. We have
provided the country with humanitarian assistance such
as medical supplies and food and are actively engaged
in its economic and social development. China is ready
to join hands with the international community and to
continue to play a constructive role in supporting the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in taking ownership
of the responsibility for its national peace, stability
and development.

