Mr. Wittig (Germany): Thank you, Mr. President,
for giving Germany the opportunity to participate in
this important debate. I would like to join my
colleagues and extend my special thanks to the
Secretary-General for his report on the situation of
Afghanistan (S/2010/l27). I would also like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Le Roy for his briefing and
Ambassador Tanin for his remarks. We noted with
interest and appreciation their remarks on the rather
encouraging decisions by President Karzai on fighting
corruption and on the preparation of the elections.

Germany fully aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of the European Union.

My country enjoys a close relationship with
Afghanistan and its people. We are a major contributor
to the International Security Assistance Force and to
development aid and assistance to Afghanistan.

The London Conference has strongly reaffirmed
the partnership of the international community with the
Afghan people and Government. The upcoming Kabul
conference will be an important next step to review
implementation and agree on further specific
implementation steps, in particular in the field of
economic and social development.

The emphasis on Afghan ownership and the
concept of transition of responsibility should be
adequately reflected in the resolution of the Security
Council and the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). In the
context ofthis Afghan-led process, we strongly support
an extension of the UNAMA mandate as recommended
by the Secretary-General.

The parliamentary elections are an important step
for a democratic Afghanistan. As requested by
President Karzai, the United Nations, including
UNAMA, should assist with the electoral process and
with the urgently needed work on long-term electoral
reform. This assistance should be based on the
understanding that all parties concerned will work hard

and constructively to overcome the shortcomings of the
recent past. In this context, we would like to echo the
Secretary-General in urging the Afghan Government to
ensure that appointments of members of the relevant
Commissions are made in an inclusive and transparent
manner and with the broadest possible consultation
across the political spectrum, including the opposition
and civil society.

The London Conference decided to explore a new
approach to promoting peace through dialogue.
UNAMA should be ready to assist in that process with
good offices upon request, including through the Trust
Fund. Again, that approach will prove successful only
as an Afghan-led process based on the broad support of
the Afghan people. We therefore welcome President
Karzai's intention to win political approval for his
concept of peace through dialogue from the Peace Jirga
later this spring.

The questions, fears and concerns raised by many
Afghans with regard to the reconciliation and
reintegration approach should be taken seriously and
must be reflected in the design of programmes. We
support the idea of confidence-building measures, as
indicated in the report of the Secretary-General, and
would like to encourage all Council members to
constructively support that process in the work of the
Council's committees as well.

The overwhelming majority of Afghans want to
continue to enjoy their rights as enshrined in the
Afghan Constitution, including human rights and
women's rights. Those rights should not be bargained
away.

With regard to the coordination and effectiveness
of aid, we fully share the view expressed in the
Secretary-General's report. Indeed, additional emphasis
should be put on capacity-building within the Afghan
Government. The Joint Coordination and Monitoring
Board (JCMB) should continue to play a central role in
aid coordination. The working methods of the JCMB
and its subcommittees can and should be further
improved.

Under the umbrella of the United Nations,
Germany will continue to contribute substantially to
the efforts of the international community in
Afghanistan. We will raise to 5,350 the number of
German personnel in ISAF missions operating under
the mandate of the Security Council. We will double
the number of our police trainers on the ground. We
will increase our bilateral development aid to
Afghanistan up to a total of $580 million per year. That
is in addition to our contribution through the European
Union. Finally, we are prepared to support the political
process with a substantial contribution to the
reintegration trust fund.

With the new UNAMA leadership team
appointed, the budget increase approved and the
granting of special delegation of recruitment authority
to UNAMA, the Security Council, the Secretary-
General and the General Assembly have set important
parameters and have paved the way for re-energizing
UNAMA on the ground. At the same time, our
expectations should remain realistic and focused on
key priorities. We warmly welcome the new leadership
of Staffan de Mistura and his team and look forward to
cooperating closely with them.

