Mr. Burleigh (United States of America): An
enormous amount of patience and hard work went into
shaping this resolution over the past year, and its adoption
today marks a profoundly important moment for the
Security Council.

Every member of the Council made important
contributions to this resolution, including those who did
not vote in favour. The resolution was adopted with a
large majority of Council members voting in favour, and
it has the full authority of the Security Council behind it.
It was adopted under Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter, and Iraq is obliged to comply with its provisions.
The United States looks to Iraq to act without delay to
facilitate the implementation of this resolution.

What is required of Iraq could not be more clear:

First, that it cooperate fully with the oil-for-food
programme in order to maximize and optimize its benefits
for all the people of Iraq; secondly, that it cooperate fully
in meeting the humanitarian obligation to account for
missing persons and return stolen Kuwaiti property; and
thirdly, in the disarmament area, that it allow weapons
inspectors to return, re-establish ongoing monitoring and
verification and fulfil key remaining disarmament tasks.

These derive from the unmet requirements set by the
Security Council in resolution 687 (1991) nearly nine
years ago. In fact, this resolution represents nothing less
than a reaffirmation by the Council, after a period of
assessment and review, of its fundamental consensus on
Iraq. The vote today was not unanimous, but no member
asserts that Iraq has met its obligations under the

 

Council's resolutions. N0 Council member argues that Iraq
has disarmed as required. No Council member would say
that Iraq has met its obligations to Kuwait or to the families
of the missing. We expect all members of the Council,
regardless of their vote on this resolution, to join in
pressing Iraq for full and immediate implementation.

The United States supports this resolution because it
provides a serious response on a serious issue. It is
consistent with past resolutions. It is clear, it is reasonable
and it can be implemented. As in the past, the United States
will closely monitor Baghdad's response to this new
resolution. Compliance or non-compliance with this
resolution will be simple for the Council to measure.
Before commenting on a few key provisions of the
resolution, I would like to acknowledge, on behalf of the
United States, several individuals whose extraordinary
contributions helped make this resolution possible.

First, as many other colleagues have done this
morning, we commend the leadership of Brazil's former
Permanent Representative, Ambassador Celso Amorim,
whose able management of the assessment panels provided
the Council with not a blueprint, but a valuable point of
reference. Many of the provisions of this resolution are
drawn directly from the recommendations of those panels.
We thank Ambassador Amorim and his colleagues in the
mission of Brazil for this important contribution.

Ambassador Peter van Walsum of the Netherlands
earns our admiration every day for his expert management
of the Iraq sanctions Committee. As one of the two initial
co-sponsors of the Anglo-Dutch draft, he played a crucial
role in sustaining the resolution as it evolved towards
today's vote.

We also wish to recognize the early contribution of
Ambassador Danilo Turk of Slovenia, whose intellectual
creativity provided some of the key concepts embodied in
this resolution.

The United States also acknowledges the strong,
positive role played by the five elected members that will
depart the Council at year's end: Bahrain, Brazil, Gabon,
Gambia and Slovenia. By becoming early supporters of this
measure, they exercised leadership on a challenging issue
of overriding international concern. It is fitting that the
Council was able to bring this complex resolution to
fruition during the present Council term.

Similarly, we note the role of the other early
supporters - Argentina, Canada and Namibia - that
were profoundly important in establishing and supporting
the overall structure and approach of this new resolution.

Finally, we commend the extraordinary contribution
you, Sir, and your Government have made in steering this
resolution through months of complex debate and
negotiation to a successful outcome today. We thank you
for that. Many observers thought it could not be done.
Without Ambassador Greenstock's professionalism and
fair-minded leadership, it would not have been done.

I would now like to turn to some of the key
provisions of this resolution and briefly relate why the

United States supports them.

Overall, we support the resolution because it will
advance central objectives - objectives of the Council
which the United States fully shares - in three main
areas: arms control, humanitarian assistance and the issues
relating to Kuwait.

Let me start with Kuwait, the victim of Iraqi
aggression and destruction on a staggering scale. This
resolution will initiate a redoubled United Nations effort
to achieve satisfaction and closure on missing persons and
stolen property. We look forward to cooperating in every
possible way to support the efforts of the special envoy
whom the Secretary-General will appoint to address these
issues.

On humanitarian issues, the United States has
demonstrated a sincere and enduring interest in the
welfare of Iraqi citizens living under the tyranny and
misrule of Saddam Hussein. We took a leading role in
formulating the oil-for-food programme from its original
conception shortly after the liberation of Kuwait in 1991.
We take satisfaction in the success of this important
humanitarian effort, which has brought about a significant
improvement in living conditions for the civilian
population in Iraq. We recognize and appreciate the
United Nations Secretariat's management of the oil-for-
food programme, the largest humanitarian assistance
effort in United Nations history. In particular, Mr. Benon
Sevan and his colleagues in the Office of the Iraq
Programme deserve our gratitude for their
accomplishments in a very demanding situation. We fully
support the Council's continuing effort to make the
programme more efficient and more effective and it is for
that reason that we support the humanitarian measures
included in this resolution.

 

The oil-for-food programme is based on a simple
principle. Iraq is authorized to export oil in order to
generate United Nations-controlled revenue used primarily
to benefit the Iraqi people. The measures in this resolution
retain, at every step in the Council's consideration of this
issue, that fundamental linkage between Iraqi oil exports
and humanitarian benefit to Iraqi civilians.

Similarly, measures intended to improve Iraq's ability
to produce and export oil remain linked to the documented
need for assistance to the Iraqi people. Bearing in mind the
need to be vigilant regarding dual-use items, the United
States is prepared to accept such measures, particularly in
the areas of safety and environmental impact, on the basis
of that humanitarian standard.

The Council has never put any prohibition on the
religious practices of the Iraqi people and we fully support
the provisions in this resolution to exempt from sanctions
air travel by Hajj pilgrims. No measure in this resolution
should be seen as a step towards any broader relaxation of
the air embargo imposed under resolutions 661 (1990) and
670 (1990), however. The United States continues to
oppose easing the strictures on air travel, as this would
greatly complicate the task of sanctions enforcement.

The area of arms control is central to this resolution,
just as it is central to the entire Iraq issue. That is because
the fundamental problem remains. Iraq has not complied
with the disarmament requirements of the post-Gulf-War
resolutions. The unimpeded operation of United Nations
arms inspection teams on the ground in Iraq is essential.
Accordingly, the United States attaches great importance to
the provisions in this resolution calling for establishment of
a reinforced monitoring and inspection effort in Iraq. The
resolution creates the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) to
implement an existing mandate which remains robust and
fully consonant with the line established by the Council in
resolutions 687 (1991), 707 (1991), 715 (1991) and others.
We call upon Iraq to cooperate fully with early resumption
of the complete range of mandated disarmament and
monitoring activities, which have been in abeyance due to
Iraqi non-cooperation and non-compliance.

We look forward to the Secretary-General's
appointment of a suitably qualified candidate, with Council
support, to become the Executive Chairman of UNMOVIC.
He or she will have big shoes to fill. Ambassador Rolf
Ekeus built the United Nations Special Commission
(UNSCOM) from the ground up, harnessing the highest
level of technical proficiency in service of the Council's
mandate. During his tenure, Iraq's concealed biological
weapons programme was brought to light. Ambassador
Richard Butler sustained the operation and logged
enormous successes - including documentation of Iraq's
previously undisclosed programme to weaponize VX
nerve agent - despite growing Iraqi interference and
disruption.

At this juncture, let me express appreciation to the
entire UNSCOM. staff, who have rendered an invaluable
service to the international community over the last eight
years. They have remained hard at work over the past
year despite Iraq's refusal to permit in-country inspections
and monitoring. The new Executive Chairman will be
fortunate to inherit a sound and seasoned organization,
with an irreplaceable database and an expert staff who are
ready to return to work and complete their mandate. We
also thank Charles Duelfer for his years of commitment
to UNSCOM's important achievements.

Under this resolution, the Executive Chairman of
UNMOVIC will remain the fully responsible and
independent head of an organization which is a subsidiary
organ of the Security Council. As with Ambassadors
Ekeus and Butler, the Council has afforded the new
Executive Chairman flexibility to seek expertise and
advice from many sources; but he, or she, also like those
two predecessors, will exercise full authority over the
composition, structure, operation and critical judgements
of UNMOVIC, subject to policy direction which this
Council may decide to give.

As in the past, we expect UNMOVIC to employ
objective and fully qualified experts in relevant fields,
without undue reference to nationality or past
organizational affiliation. As in the past, we expect
UNMOVIC to act on the Council's behalf in providing a
strong and independent voice requiring punctilious
cooperation and compliance from Iraq.

The United States will provide full support to the
new Executive Chairman, whose role as the head of an
independent and professional UNMOVIC will be central
to the future of Council-mandated disarmament activities
in Iraq.

Similarly, we will offer our full cooperation and
support to the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) as it resumes its Council-mandated activities in
Iraq in tandem with UNMOVIC.

 

Today's resolution does not raise the bar on what is
required of Iraq in the area of disarmament, but it also does
not lower it. The Council set an exacting, but reasonable
and realistic, standard in resolution 687 (1991), and Iraq
must meet that standard. The United States will support no
resolution which alters that fundamental principle.

This omnibus resolution commits the Security Council
to take certain steps if there is compliance from Iraq. And,
again, there is no lack of clarity in this resolution about the
sequence of events. Iraqi compliance must precede all else,
as the Security Council has stated in the many resolutions
on arms control and disarmament in Iraq which it has
adopted since Iraq's brutal occupation of Kuwait in 1990.
That is the standard which we will look to the new
Executive Chairman of UNMOVIC to uphold.

Among the important responsibilities which the
Executive Chairman will need to address early on is
articulation of the "key remaining disarmament tasks"
which Iraq must complete. Obviously delineation of the
tasks will draw heavily on the previous work of UNSCOM,
the most comprehensive and authoritative work to date on
the status of Iraq's compliance with its arms control
obligations. Equally obvious is the fact that these "key"
tasks comprise a subset of the full range of disarmament
obligations which Iraq would have to fulfil in order for the
Council to consider permanent lifting of sanctions.

Let me state, as clearly and simply as I can, the basic
United States position. If Iraq fulfils the key remaining
tasks and meets the requirements set forth in this resolution,
then the Council, including the United States, can decide
whether to recognize that cooperation and compliance by
suspending sanctions.

Similarly, if Iraq meets the full range of obligations
mandated in the Council's resolutions, the Council can
make a decision regarding the lifting of sanctions. We are
not seeking an excuse to use force. We would welcome a
favourable Iraqi response to this resolution.

It should be clear to all that Iraq holds the key to its
own re-entry to the community of nations. Iraqi compliance
with the Security Council's resolutions, at any time between
the liberation of Kuwait and today, would have prompted
the Council to reconsider sanctions. Instead, Iraq has hewn
to the path of concealment and prevarication and non-
compliance.

At the same time, we have no illusion that the Iraqi
regime is likely to change its spots in order to reap the
proffered benefits of cooperation and compliance. In fact,
the United States has, on many occasions, expressed its
view that compliance is highly unlikely as long as
Saddam Hussein remains in power in Baghdad.
Nevertheless, we join our Council colleagues in
introducing the principle of sanctions suspension based on
the requirements set forth in this resolution. The Council
has acted in good faith. Let us see whether Iraq can
respond in kind.

What would it mean to "suspend" sanctions against
Iraq? First of all, let me recall what it would not mean. It
would not alter the import of food and medicines to Iraq,
since the flow of such items has never been restricted by
United Nations sanctions. It would not mean the end of
inspection and monitoring activities in Iraq by
UNMOVIC and the IAEA. And it emphatically would not
mean that the Council would turn Iraq's purse strings
over to Saddam Hussein and walk away.

Under a suspension scenario, the Council would
decide exact terms for lifting prohibitions on exports from
Iraq and civilian imports to Iraq. United Nations oversight
of such transactions would continue, however. Indeed,
before voting to suspend sanctions the Council is required
under this resolution to decide on effective financial and
other operational measures, which would remain in effect
during suspension and prevent any revenues from being
diverted for prohibited purposes.

Before considering suspension, the Council would
also need to set guidelines on the means of delivering
civilian imports during suspension. The present resolution
does not define the details of those measures or stipulate
what means of delivery will or will not be authorized. I
would stress, however, that the United States attaches the
utmost importance to this requirement for effective
control measures, and will work to ensure that those
eventually adopted by the Council are rigorous, thorough
and effective, as this resolution requires.

It is also important, in our view, that the Council has
decided suspension would be temporary and would
require an affirmative Council decision for renewal.
Renewal, thus, would not be automatic. Furthermore, if
Iraqi cooperation with UNMOVIC or the IAEA ceased
during suspension, then suspension would automatically
end. For that reason, the regulatory measures referred to
above must be reversible, in order to facilitate reversion
to the status quo ante should Iraqi non-cooperation trigger
the termination of suspension.

 

The Council has placed the onus squarely on Iraq to
demonstrate that it is continuing to satisfy the
requirements set by the Council in this resolution and its
predecessors. That is as it should be. Iraq's history of
"cheat-and-retreat" with weapons inspectors means there
can be no benefit of the doubt for Iraq.

Former United States Permanent Representative Adlai
Stevenson once said "You will find that the truth is often
unpopular and the contest between agreeable fancy and
disagreeable fact is unequal." In addressing the Iraq
situation, the Security Council must continue to be guided
by the facts, however unpopular they might be with
some - for example: the fact that the Security Council set
a reasonable standard for the lifting of sanctions in
resolution 687 (1991), and the fact that Iraq has manifestly
failed to meet that standard; the fact that both the IAEA
and the Special Commission reported to this Council one
year ago that Iraq had not fulfilled its obligations with
respect to weapons of mass destruction, and the fact that
Iraq has taken no action to fulfil those obligations in the
intervening 12 months; the fact that Iraq has failed to meet
its obligation to account for more than 600 persons,
presumed imprisoned or murdered at Iraqi hands, who have
been missing since the invasion of Kuwait, and the fact that
Iraq last year severed its cooperation with the Red Cross
and the Tripartite Commission established to resolve this
most elemental of humanitarian issues; the fact that massive
and systematic abuse of human rights remains a pervasive
fact of daily life for the civilian population of Iraq,
including children, as Max van der Stoel, the Special
Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on the
situation of human rights in Iraq, documented in his deeply
disturbing October report; and the fact that the Government
of Iraq has demonstrated that it would rather manipulate the
suffering of innocent civilians for propaganda purposes than
take full advantage of available assistance under the oil-for-
food programme.

Those are the facts that must inform the Council's
judgement as it faces the follow-on decisions which
implementation of this resolution will require over coming
weeks and months. In adopting this resolution today, the
Council's forty-ninth resolution on the Iraq issue since the
August 1990 invasion of Kuwait, the Security Council has
sent a strong message to Baghdad. This resolution reflects
the critical judgement of the Security Council, acting on
behalf of the international community, that Iraq has not
fulfilled its obligations under the previous resolutions, that
sanctions must and will remain unchanged until Iraq does
so and that the Council, acting to uphold peace and security
in accordance with the United Nations Charter, will
accept no other outcome.

In adopting this resolution today, the Security
Council has demonstrated that it has the patience and the
resolve to uphold the requirements it set in resolution 687
(1991). Now we await the response from Baghdad.

