Mr. Terence (Burundi): First of all, it is my duty to
acknowledge the special treatment you have shown me,
Mr. President, during the many meetings I have had with
you. This was traditional, refined British diplomacy:
courtesy, civility and availability, which are the key
qualities of any professional diplomat. I also recall my
meetings with your predecessor, Ambassador
Sergey Lavrov, to whom I am grateful for the same
treatment, from which I benefited last month.

Since this is the first time this year that I have
addressed the Security Council formally, it is my pleasant
duty to congratulate the new members: Chile, Egypt,
Guinea-Bissau, Poland and the Republic of Korea. We
believe that Egypt, the only Arabic-speaking member of
the Council, can as usual be counted upon to speak
Africa's political language.

(spoke in French)

For almost two years now, the Security Council has
been thinking long and hard about Burundi. Many reports
have been submitted on my country. This is the first time
that there has been a public debate about Burundi, and so
I take this opportunity to give my Government's version
of the facts.

First, with regard to the draft resolution, I should
like to say that the Government of Burundi has every
right to find out from the sponsors exactly what that text
means, and it appears to us that paragraph 8 (a) causes
some confusion and is open to various interpretations.
Before speaking in depth on the text, I would request
members to prepare their responses during my statement,
so that there is no room for doubt. I therefore leave the
matter there for the moment.

In fact, while the general situation is indeed serious
and cause for concern, the security situation has
noticeably improved compared with previous months;
there are many facts to support this conclusion. Formerly,
grenades were being thrown at passers-by in the markets,
not in defence of any political cause, but, rather, by
people indulging in banditry. The forces of law of order
put a stop to this several months ago. For a long time,

 

armed bands terrorized several districts of the capital. On
the orders of the Head of State and Government, the Army
has smashed and routed these terrorists.

The sanctuary of the armed bandits in the forest
surrounding the capital, who habitually created havoc in the
suburbs and killed travellers or held them to ransom, was
assaulted and taken by the national Army.

Three groups of terrorists - armed Burundi bandits,
former Rwandan troops and the Interahamwe, their secular
arm in the macabre deeds of 1994 - had earlier converged
near the Province of Cibitoke, bordering on Zaire. In recent
weeks the Army has rendered impotent this devilish trio of
troublemakers. These desperate individuals are now only
capable of engaging in sporadic attacks - not in a gallant
last stand, but merely to pillage in order to survive in
certain areas where there are no forces to impose order.
The population is strongly demanding a military presence,
as a Minister who visited the Province last week reported.

Hidden in two refugee camps in the north-east of the
country, assailants have tried to sow terror by opening fire
on the security forces, but the security forces within the
camps in question have neutralized or put to flight the
aggressors. This episode in the Burundian crisis has
unfortunately resulted in a massive exodus of Rwandan
refugees towards Tanzania. The commander of that military
region and the representative of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) have
published a joint statement, attesting to their efforts to
persuade the refugees to return to their camps.

The leader of the armed groups, Nyangoma, is
vociferously disavowed in his own commune, by his own
associates, who urge radio and television to announce that
they are no longer in solidarity with him. This collective
request at the commune level was officially made to the
Government.

For two weeks now the entire Government - that is,
the President of the Republic, the Prime Minister and 25
Ministers, have been travelling through the country's 15
Provinces and 114 communes to rally the population to the
side of the Administration and the security forces in their
campaign against the violent fanatics. The most striking
proof that security is guaranteed throughout the Republic is
the fact that none of the hundreds of political,
administrative and military authorities involved have been
confronted by any of the armed bands. In short, no danger
has been reported in their journey or during their public
meetings throughout the 114 communes.

In the crusade by the whole Government against the
armed bands, President Sylvestre Ntibantunganya held a
public meeting in the Province of Kirundo, in the north of
the country, on Sunday, 28 January 1996. His message
focused on
"the immediate need for cooperation between the
population, the Administration and the forces of law
and order".

He took this opportunity to reiterate his gratitude to the
forces of law and order for their efforts in fighting the
enemy in the area. He was accompanied by the President
of the National Assembly and by the President of the
Frodebu Party, the leader of the presidential movement.

International opinion has been polarized regarding
the dangers to the security of international humanitarian
organizations. A technical mission is to hasten to Burundi
to evaluate the risks to United Nations personnel and
facilities. During the 28 months that this crisis has lasted,
no United Nations personnel have been victims of lack of
security, no office in the many buildings of the United
Nations system in Burundi has been damaged.

International opinion in general, and the Security
Council in particular, are flooded with information about
an imminent cataclysm in Burundi. As is clear from the
introductory paragraph of the letter of 18 January 1996
communicating to the President of the Security Council
the official position of my Government in answer to the
three letters of the Secretary-General, of
29 December 1995, 3 January 1996 and 17 January 1996,
the seriousness of the crisis is a reality. Nevertheless, it
is far from having culminated in an apocalyptic summit.
Certainly, armed bands have threatened to jeopardize the
work of humanitarian organizations.

In answer to the letters from the Secretary-General
to the President of the Security Council, an avalanche of
media fantasies has descended on Burundi. The article by
Thomas L. Friedman published by The New York Times
on 24 January 1996 constitutes the archetype of this type
of systematic propaganda campaign directed against my
country. In his sensationalism, the author headed his
article:

"The next Rwanda - Burundi on the edge of
an abyss".

Behaving like a new explorer of terra incognita,
exactly 125 years after the historical meeting between

 

Livingston and Stanley in 1871 in the outskirts of the
capital of Burundi, he studs his article not only with
falsehoods, but with monstrosities. Thus he claims that
there are 15 per cent Tutsis and 85 per cent Hutus, while in
living memory Burundi has never, unlike other States, had
such a census of its national make-up. In another paragraph
he claims that Hutu rebels occupy parts of the territory,
while in fact these rebels and armed bands do not even
occupy a single square kilometre. In yet another paragraph
he claims that Mrs. Albright - when one speaks of the
sun, one sees its rays, and I see her coming into the
Chamber now - met with generals of the Burundi Army.
I declare to the entire world that the Burundi Army has no
general, unless someone was promoted in honour of
Mrs. Albright's visit.

I turn to the question of political disturbances.
Imputing continued lack of security to a lack of firmness on
the part of the Government, several opposition political
movements withdrew their confidence in the President of
the Republic and several trade unions called a strike in the
capital. These initiatives call for the resignation of the Head
of State. On the other hand, three opposition political
parties have withdrawn their backing for the attacks against
the President of the Republic, and the strike had only weak
support and lasted for only a few working days.

Thanks to the redoubled vigilance and effectiveness of
the forces of law and order, those who wanted the President
of the Republic to step down and the organizers of the
strike faced the impossibility of implementing their plans.
All acts of violence were nipped in the bud, and no major
incidents occurred.

With respect to the analogy between Rwanda and
Burundi, in certain national and international circles the
tendency to raise the spectre of genocide has taken
precedence over the determination or ability to root out its
causes. A fundamental distinction needs to be made
between the perpetrators of the genocide carried out in
Rwanda and the followers or authors of that scourge in
Burundi. In Rwanda, the Government and the Rwandese
armed forces conceived, planned, organized and carried out
the genocide against the Tutsi community. In Burundi, the
country's army and the coalition Government, which
represented national communities and 12 political parties,
banded together against the terrorist groups that were
determined to carry out Rwandese-style genocide.

However, a parallel does exist between the techniques
used by the former Rwandese regime to remain in power
and those employed by Burundi terrorists in their quest for
such power. The favourite targets of these terrorists are
the State's Convention on Government, which stipulates
the division of power, the coalition Government itself and
all other political institutions stemming from this
multipartite agreement. The Government and the army of
Burundi have together been actively working to thwart the
access to, and the use of, power through the revolting
practice of genocide. United Nations troops are described
in glowing terms, and credence is given to the notion that
they are working for the salvation of the people of
Burundi. Meanwhile, however, the obvious truth is
ignored: that the genocide in Rwanda was carried out in
the presence of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Rwanda (UNAMIR), which not only stood by, powerless,
but then hastened to pack up and leave.

In his letter contained in document S/l996/36 of
16 January 1996, the Secretary-General refers to a certain
difference of opinion within the Government of Burundi
regarding the deployment of military contingents. This
sentiment was echoed by a number of foreign dignitaries,
following their separate meetings with several high
officials of our country. However, the envoys of States
and of international organizations must place in their
proper context preferences and opinions that are merely
personal in nature, when they are expressed during
informal conversations - even by Heads of State or
Government, their Ministers or political leaders. These
differ from the collective positions of the Government,
which bear an official seal. Moreover, would it not be
unjust to demand of the Government of Burundi the same
political miracle that has failed to materialize in all the
other countries facing crises that are just as horrendous
as, or even more so than, ours? According to the great
German philosopher Hegel, history teaches us that man
learns nothing from history. By taking the opposite tack,
by affirming that man learns everything from history,
each member State of the Security Council will recall a
universally accepted reality.

At one time or another in the course of their
historical development, all countries have had to cope
with internal conflicts, with civil wars, even with inter-
State or world wars. Never has full unanimity been
achieved within Governments or among chiefs of staff
called upon to decide on policies to be adopted or
strategies to be used. In most cases, positions were so
entrenched and cacophony so dominant that, even with
the survival of their nations at stake, political and military
leaders were forced to resign or go into exile, or were
even executed. Compared with such cases, many in
number, Burundi could rather be put forward as a model.

 

Although politically heterogeneous, since it is made up of
12 political parties, our Government has been able to retain
the essential elements of solidarity. A few key facts
illustrate this.

Under the aegis of the President of the Republic and
the leader of the Executive branch, all Government
members joined together against the warmongers. Following
the example of the Head of State and the Prime Minister,
every Minister has travelled all over the country in order to
alert the people to the imperative need to work hand in
hand for peace, together with the security forces and the
public administration, against armed bands. By means of
this campaign devoted to peace and security, the
Government is sending the same message throughout the
country. So too - contrary to certain prognostications
made privately by certain foreign parties - the coalition
Government unanimously rejects military intervention in
Burundi, as attested to by its second message sent to the
President of the Security Council on Sunday,
28 January 1996, which I transmitted to him by fax at
approximately 7 p.m. yesterday.

What is the situation regarding the political parties?
Through various ups and downs, the relationship between
the presidential sphere of influence and the opposition since
the eruption of the crisis has been uneasy, to be sure, but
it has never reached breaking point or a point of no return.
In fact, the parties can even be credited with a number of
positive joint actions: the negotiation and conclusion of the
Convention on Government; the coalition Government;
negotiations between various conventional bodies; the
follow-up committee; and the framework for concerted
action.

It is no small accomplishment to have been able to
involve political enemies in negotiations. It took six months
to bring them together at the same negotiating table, as the
Secretary-General rightly commented when addressing the
joint meeting of the opposition parties and the presidential
movement on 16 July 1995 in Bujumbura. In Burundi,
political leaders, regardless of ideological allegiance, meet,
talk and participate side by side at public and social events,
stand next to each other and socialize at official receptions,
and are often invited to visit each other in their offices and
in their homes, in a mutually respectful and convivial
atmosphere.

The conciliatory judgment that I am expressing
regarding the political protagonists in my country is in no
way designed to whitewash all of them. Unfortunately,
some of them, deliberately and even viciously, out of
political blindness or professional inexperience, have
stood in the way of peace and the democratic process. On
the other hand, the overwhelming majority of the political
class, of civil society, of the business world, of youth, of
the university community - in short, the elite of
Burundi - is in fact working for their common destiny
and for national reconciliation.

By highlighting the major common denominators
shared by the protagonists in the political arena in
Burundi, my delegation can prove that, despite
appearances, the crisis has by no means reached a point
of no return.

There is another reason I am dwelling on the
positive aspects of the Government, the parties and their
leaders: timeliness and a wish to show that the Security
Council, the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative, the Organization of African Unity (OAU),
the European Union, Presidents Julius Nyerere, Jimmy
Carter and Amadou Toumani Toure, Archbishop
Desmond Tutu and all the other facilitators have achieved
successes. They need only put these successes to good
use, with good intentions, to fulfil the noble and wise
mission the Security Council will assign in the draft
resolution before it today:

"to facilitate a comprehensive political dialogue with
the objective of promoting national reconciliation,
democracy, security and the rule of law in Burundi".
(S/Z 996/56, para. 2)

The paramount role among the facilitators falls to
the States of the Great Lakes region. Paradoxically, in
foreign circles, a certain new political approach threatens
to deprive Burundi and our region of the statesman in the
best position to make a broad contribution to settling the
intra-Burundi conflict: His Excellency Mr. Mobutu Sese
Seko. Owing to his personal prestige and his great
political stature and vast political experience, President
Mobutu is a true adept at regional, African and
international affairs alike - whether or not his detractors
agree. Hence, to try to ostracize or marginalize a political
leader of Mr. Mobutu's stature - a leader who,
furthermore, heads so vast a country blessed with such
exceptional resources, despite its temporary problems -
is both unrealistic and contrary to the norms of
international law. It is unrealistic because the best rule for
converting political leaders and countries to democratic
ideals is to give them access to the international hubs of
democracy and to facilitate their direct personal contacts
with foreign figures who are steeped in and who practice

 

the ideas and principles of this political system. It is
contrary to international law because no Government has
the right to demand that all countries copy foreign
democratic procedures: the hard realities on which
democratization is based vary from nation to nation. Let us
consider the hypothesis that the Government of Zaire, by
the principle of reciprocity, were to react by forbidding
access to its territory by the nationals of States that had
enacted similar measures. This would be a harsh boomerang
against the very authors of the measures.

In conclusion, Burundi favours the primacy of a
judicious democracy. In my letter dated 18 January 1996,
by which I communicated to the President of the Security
Council the official position of the Government of Burundi,
I stressed the need to protect the honour and prestige of the
United Nations. I must reaffirm today that the primary task
facing the bodies that devise and propose initiatives and
those that take the decisions is to serve the United Nations
as a strong shield against failure and its attendant criticism.
It is therefore most important to the major actors in the
United Nations hierarchy that one of the sine qua non
conditions for ensuring the world Organization's success is
the ability to give diplomacy pride of place over military
action and to devise solutions commensurate with the
problems. The priority concern must be to protect the
United Nations and its most prestigious organ, the Security
Council, against any diminution in value resulting from
setbacks.

To defuse the crisis in Burundi it is important to stress
the pre-eminence of judicious diplomacy over military
intervention: such intervention, in nearly all cases, is
nothing but a mitigation of the failure of diplomacy, which
is to say, an admission of diplomatic capitulation. In broad
terms we can say that it is completely in the interest of the
Security Council to opt for diplomatic solutions and
therefore to reinvent figures like Talleyrand, Ralph Bunche,
Nelson Mandela, Henry Kissinger, Yasser Arafat, Yitzhak
Rabin: in other words, prodigies who are able when
necessary to work political and diplomatic miracles.

I wish to note that I shall be obliged to ask to speak
on the draft resolution if the way it is interpreted should
appear to penalize Burundi or undermine its national
sovereignty.

