Mr. Annabi: I am pleased to have this
opportunity, as you requested, Sir, to provide the
Security Council with a briefing on developments
which have occurred in Kosovo since Mr. Michael
Steiner, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, last briefed the Council on 30 July.

During this period, the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) has
continued its efforts to uphold the rule of law. It has
moved forward in its preparations for the municipal
elections to be held on 26 October and has also
continued to work on creating conditions conducive to
the return of minority communities. I will now deal
with each of these aspects successively.

As regards efforts to uphold the rule of law, I
should like to begin by recalling UNMIK's efforts in
this regard over the past few weeks. Last month,
investigations that had been under way for some time
led to the issuance of indictments and to the arrest by
UNMIK Police of several former members of the
Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) - including some
prominent ones ~ on charges of crimes committed
against fellow Kosovo Albanians in 1999.

On 8 August, an international prosecutor indicted
seven former KLA members held in detention since
their arrest on 18 June on charges of unlawful detention
and inflicting grievous bodily harm against Kosovo
Albanians in the Pec region back in l999.

In addition to these charges, one suspect was
charged with murder. Those indicted included Daut
Haradinaj, the suspended Chief of General Staff of the
Kosovo Protection Corps and brother of Ramush
Haradinaj, leader of the Alliance for the Future of
Kosovo.

Several days later, five of the suspects were
indicted on additional but separate charges of
endangering public safety during an incident in which
gunfire was exchanged in July 2000. That indictment
also covered Ramush Haradinaj. Due to the relatively
minor nature of the charges against him, however,
Mr. Haradinaj has not been arrested. He has said that
he will answer the charges against him in a court of
law.

On the 11 of August, United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) police
arrested Rrustem Mustafa, also known as Commander
Remi, a former high-ranking officer of the Kosovo
Liberation Army (KLA), on suspicion of illegally
detaining, torturing and murdering five Kosovo
Albanians in 1998 and 1999. This indictment stemmed
from an investigation that led to the arrest of three
former KLA members in January this year. Rrustem
Mustafa remains in custody after an international judge
ordered his detention for a further 30 days on 13
August.

During the same period, on 8 August, UNMIK
police and KFOR attempted, albeit unsuccessfully, to
arrest Milan Ivanovic, the leader of the Serb National
Council of Mitrovica, on charges of attempted murder
during the violent demonstrations of 8 April in
Mitrovica in which 22 UNMIK police officers were
injured. On 20 August, UNMIK requested the Serbian
Ministry of the Interior to take the necessary steps to
arrest Mr. Ivanovic, who is still at large, should he be
found in Serbia proper. We understand that
Mr. Ivanovic has demanded certain guarantees from
UNMIK and the authorities of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia regarding the judicial handling of his case
as a condition for submitting to the Kosovo judiciary.

KFOR carried out several arrests of its own
during the period under review. On 8 August, KFOR
arrested 19 Kosovo Albanians in the anilane region in
the context of its efforts to prevent armed extremist
activities along the border with the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia. Three days later, 17 of those
19 Kosovo Albanians were subsequently released due
to lack of evidence.

On 12 August, KFOR arrested three Kosovo
Albanians in Pristina on suspicion of recruiting other
Kosovo Albanians for armed activities in the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. Three more were
arrested the following day. KFOR has said that most
individuals thought to be seeking to recruit for, or
organize, any armed activity related to the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia will be kept in
detention until the elections, scheduled for 15
September, are over.

At the beginning of August, KFOR also arrested
three Algerian nationals on charges of photographing
KFOR installations in the anilane region; two more
were arrested on 16 August. The Algerian Embassy in
Belgrade has been informed of the arrests.

Prime Minister Rexhepi expressed full support
for KFOR's actions, and reiterated that violence in
Kosovo or against the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia could not be tolerated.

The reaction to UNMIK's arrests of former KLA
members was, however, predictably more adverse. A
number of organized public demonstrations were held
in different locations to protest the arrests. These
demonstrations largely occurred without incident. One
protest, however, turned violent. In Decani, on 15
August, around 150 demonstrators had to be dispersed
with tear gas by UNMIK police and a number of
injuries were incurred by both UNMIK police and the
demonstrators. President Rugova spoke out
immediately against this violence against the
international community, and used his influence to
calm down the situation.

Reflecting the sentiment in some Kosovo
Albanian quarters, Mr. Rexhepi issued a statement on
19 August, calling on UNMIK to stop the arrests,
characterizing those arrested or indicted as "political
prisoners and hostages to the political process". The
statement also questioned UNMIK's jurisdiction over
crimes committed prior to its establishment in June
1999.

The Kosovo Serb community in Kosovo and the
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia also
characterized the indictment against Milan Ivanovic as
political in nature, and there have been protests in the
northern part of Mitrovica.

UNMIK has acted to calm down emotions and to
dispel the idea that it was intentionally targeting former
KLA members. It issued a measured statement,
focusing on its commitment to the rule of law. It also
briefed representatives of Member States in Pristina,
and statements in support of UNMIK were
subsequently made by the United States, the Russian
Federation and the European Union.

The Principal Deputy Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Charles Brayshaw, together
with the commander of KFOR, Lieutenant-General
Valentin, explained the details behind the arrests to
Prime Minister Rexhepi, to President of the Kosovo
Assembly Nexhet Daci, and to members of the Kosovo
Serb Return Coalition. During these discussions,
UNMIK emphasized the independence of the judiciary
in Kosovo, which has full authority to act on crimes
committed prior to the adoption of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999).

Since then, the reaction of Kosovo Albanian
leaders and the media has been toned down. Prime
Minister Rexhepi called for the immediate cessation of
protests against the international community,
intimating that the response should be an institutional
one rather than street protests, and in a meeting with
Mr. Steiner on 1 September he reaffirmed the
Government's commitment to continued cooperation
with UNMIK.

The leader of the Democratic Party of Kosovo,
Hashim Thaci, has also spoken against the use of
violence, and stated that immunity did not apply
automatically to all who participated in the war. The
head of the Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC), Mr. Ceku,
predictably condemned the arrests of former KLA and
KPC members, but also advocated peaceful debate and
discussion as the way forward. The protests that have
continued - with a few hundred demonstrators on
average - have been well controlled.

I would like to turn now to developments in other
priority areas, including the building of functioning
democratic institutions and the preparation of the
upcoming municipal elections. On 8 August,
Mr. Steiner convened a special panel, headed by an
international legal expert, to consider Kosovo Serb
objections to the higher education bill adopted by the
Assembly in July. This was the first time that this
mechanism, which is provided for by the Constitutional
Framework to protect the rights of minority
communities, has been invoked. On 9 August the
special panel recommended the licensing of the
University of Northern Mitrovica and urged the
Kosovo Serb community to take measures to integrate
its establishment into a unified education structure.
These recommendations will be presented for the
Assembly's consideration when it reconvenes after its
summer recess.

Work has continued on building a professional
civil service. The Senior Public Appointments
Committee has approved the appointment of Permanent
Secretaries to five of the 11 ministries. Efforts are
under way to complete the recruitment to these
important positions.

Seventy thousand people have now applied for,
and 21,000 beneficiaries from all communities have
started to receive, a basic pension, following the
promulgation by Mr. Steiner of the law on basic
pensions passed by the Kosovo Assembly at the end of
June.
Turning to the municipal elections, preparations
for them are proceeding smoothly. The voter service
operation, which is the process of updating the voters
list, came to a close on 23 August. By that date, around
3,400 new voters had registered in Serbia proper and in
Montenegro. Although this number may appear low, it
is partly attributable to the fact that for last year's
Assembly elections, approximately 104,000 people
registered to vote in person from outside Kosovo. An
important aspect of this year's voter service operation
was the transfer of electoral responsibilities to local
institutions. The municipal election commissions have
had an expanded role and taken the lead in carrying out
voter service activities.

As of the end of August, the Central Election
Commission had certified 500 out of a total of 5,500
candidates from all communities, with the remaining
candidates slated for certification by the end of this
week. The candidates come from a broad range of
political entities, including 25 political parties, 23
citizens' initiatives, nine independent candidates and
one coalition. Of these entities, 21 are Kosovo
Albanian, 26 are Kosovo Serb, five are Roma,
Egyptian or Ashkali, five are Bosniac or Gorani, and
one is from Kosovo's Turkish community.

The electoral campaign is scheduled to begin on
10 September. Despite divisions in opinion regarding
the recent arrests, political leaders from all
communities have called for the elections to be
inclusive and to take place in a peaceful and calm
environment.

The Serbian authorities have requested that
Kosovo Serbs in Kosovo be enabled to vote in the
Serbian presidential elections, which are scheduled for
29 September. As was the case with the federal and
Serbian elections in September and December 2000,
respectively, UNMIK will not stand in the way of the
Kosovo Serbs' exercising their right to vote.

I now wish to turn to the return of internally
displaced persons. In August, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
arranged the first go-and-see visit, as they are called, of
Kosovo Serb internally displaced persons in Serbia
proper to the town of Pristina. The group was given a
warm reception by the Kosovo Albanian Vice-
President of the Pristina Municipal Assembly, among
others. There are plans to continue such visits to
Pristina on a regular basis.

The anilane region has seen a considerable
increase in spontaneous returns over the summer.
While return is of course welcome, unorganized return
can have adverse consequences. This was unfortunately
seen in Klokot, in the anilane region, the day after
Mr. Steiner briefed the Council at the end of July. On
31 July, there was a series of five explosions in an area
primarily inhabited by Kosovo Serbs, in which two
KFOR soldiers were injured. UNMIK has established a
fund to support inter-ethnic community improvement
projects in the affected village and is working to
establish a mechanism to handle spontaneous returns
more effectively.

In this context, recent statements by Kosovo Serb
internally displaced persons that they are planning to
block the crossing points on the administrative
boundary line with Kosovo later this month if they are
not allowed to return en masse are cause for concern.
Although the impatience of internally displaced
persons is understandable, given the still delicate state
of inter-communal relations, any action along those
lines would only be counterproductive and would be
harmful to the returns process.

There cannot be artificial mass return. UNMIK's
return policy is based on the right of individual return
in an organized way so that it can be sustainable. This
requires careful preparation on the ground to ensure
that the physical infrastructure - meaning houses,
employment and access to public services - is in place
to welcome the returnees. It also requires a careful
handling of relations with the neighbouring Kosovo
Albanian communities to diminish the potential for
return-related security incidents.

The incident in Klokot illustrates the fragility of
the reconciliation and confidence-building process and
underlines the importance of inter-communal dialogue.
There were several other incidents against Kosovo
Serbs during the period under review that have also
caused concern. On 29 August Kosovo Serb
woodcutters in the Pec region reported being attacked
and shot at by unidentified gunmen. UNMIK police
and the Kosovo Police Service responded and were
forced to call for KFOR reinforcements as the situation
escalated and the firing continued. It is suspected that
the situation occurred as part of ongoing protests in the
area by Kosovo Albanians regarding the amount of
timber being collected by Kosovo Serbs.

One of the greatest obstacles to the
implementation of returns-related projects is the lack of
funding. In order to address this, UNMIK had
extensive contact with the donor community in Kosovo
during the past month and took representatives of
donor countries and organizations on a visit to potential
return sites.

I would like to say a word on relations with the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. UNMIK has
continued discussions with the authorities of the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia to find practical ways
of addressing the concerns of Kosovo farmers in the
border area. A decision was reached in principle to
open two new border crossing points through which the
farmers would have access to the affected lands on the
basis of an UNMIK travel document. The location of
these new border crossing points is still under
discussion.

Turning now to the energy situation in Kosovo,
Council members will recall the unfortunate lightning
strike that resulted in extensive fire damage at the
power plant in Obilic, near Pristina, in July. Since then,
the investigation has revealed that the extent of the
damage was attributable to negligence in the
management of the site. As extensive repairs to the
damaged section of the station began, Mr. Steiner
appointed an international expert to manage the
situation. The appointment of a temporary Managing
Director is intended to depoliticize the issue and to
place the emphasis on the practical issues that need to
be addressed.

The damage means that Kosovo - yet again,
unfortunately - faces critical energy shortages as we
approach the winter. A speedy response from donors,
supplemented by the Kosovo consolidated budget, has
enabled repairs to begin on one part of the facility,
which will, it is hoped, be completed by the beginning
of December. Another part of the station, however,
cannot be operational until the summer of next year at
the earliest. The Government is pursuing a strategy to
reduce public consumption and to encourage
conservation through an energy savings campaign.

In conclusion, as I have tried to show in this
briefing, there was some tension over the past month as
a result of the arrests that have taken place. UNMIK
believes that the Kosovo Albanian leadership now has
a better understanding that those arrests were the result
of lengthy investigations carried out in accordance with
well-established judicial procedures, and took place
without regard for ethnic or political affiliation. In
addition, Prime Minister Rexhepi has assured UNMIK
of the leadership's continued support for the firm line
taken by UNMIK and KF OR in their efforts to uphold
the rule of law. I would like to take this opportunity to
express our appreciation for the statements of support
issued by Council members and by the European
Union, which UNMIK found very helpful. UNMIK
will continue to rely on the Council's support in its
efforts to consolidate the rule of law in Kosovo.

As the provisional institutions return from the
summer recess, they will face a formidable list of tasks
that need to be accomplished: coping with the energy
situation, finishing the recruitment of candidates to
fulfil important civil service functions, and passing
legislation on a whole range of other issues. We look
forward to their productive engagement in tackling
those issues together with UNMIK. At the same time,
as the election campaign nears, UNMIK will be
looking to the elected representatives to ensure that the
lead-up to the second round of municipal elections is
free of violence and is conducted in an atmosphere of
inclusion and tolerance.

