Mr. Amayo (Kenya): I congratulate you, Sir, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the Month of July and commend the initiative to hold
this open debate on children and armed conflict. This
forum provides all Member States with the opportunity
to deliberate on the challenges facing children
affected by or involved in armed conflict and seeking
solutions on how to protect children today to prevent
conflicts tomorrow.

I thank the Secretary-General and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, as well as the Executive Director
of UNICEF, for their current report (S/2018/465),
which informs us of the grave violations committed
against children in armed conflict and reminds
us that preventing such violations is a collective
responsibility of the international community and the
primary concern of Member States. We take note of
the recommendations, and, in that regard, I reiterate
Kenya's commitment to continue supporting their
implementation aimed at strengthening the protection
of children in armed conflict.
To effectively protect the rights of the child and
prevent conflicts, we need to address the triggers
of conflict and civil strife, which include poverty,
disenfranchisement and exclusion. Under the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, we outlined
17 Sustainable Development Goals, each of which
is important and relevant to the protection and
empowerment of children. For Kenya, His Excellency
President Uhuru Kenyatta has prioritized the attainment
of food security, nutrition, universal health care,
affordable housing and manufacturing as immediate
and critical to ending poverty, access to quality health
care, education and the creation of youth employment.

We can prevent and end many of those conflicts
in our lifetime by implementing the conventions and
agreements to which we have already subscribed. Those
agreements must be accompanied by the sustained
and flexible funding and development of national
action plans with clear road maps for the acceleration,
empowerment, protection and equal opportunities of
children. Child protection therefore should be part and
parcel of any comprehensive conflict-management and
-prevention policy. We are encouraged by the cases of
released child soldiers from armed groups who have
consequently been rehabilitated and reintegrated into
society by Member States and United Nations agencies,
particularly UNICEF. We should ensure that sustained
psychological and educational reintegration help break
the cycle of violence and promote sustained peace.

In conclusion, Kenya remains committed to
supporting regional and international efforts aimed
at ending conflicts and finding sustainable peace,
especially in the Horn of Africa and the Great Lakes
region.

