Lieutenant General Gaye (spoke in French): As
the outgoing Force Commander of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), I would like to
say a few words on the challenges faced by the Mission
and the progress it has made in the area of protecting
civilians.

As the Council is aware, it was in 2000 that the
task of protecting civilians first figured in the mandate
of what was then the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC). Of course, that undertaking was entirely in
line with the Secretary-General's statement during the
sixty-third session of the General Assembly in which
he recalled that the United Nations was the champion
of the most vulnerable (see A/63/PV.5). Quite clearly,
that statement in no way detracted from the primary
role of States in protecting their people, as was
reiterated at the 2005 World Summit. For the United
Nations, this is about helping countries to help
themselves by providing tailored support to meet
individual circumstances.

(spoke in English)

In MONUC, now MONUSCO, the protection of
civilians is the Mission's priority task. Although the
military was nearly at 20,000 in strength and possessed
some useful capabilities, including eight attack
helicopters, we had an operational area equivalent to
the size of Western Europe before expansion to the
east, as well as a population nearing 65 million people
and limited intelligence assets. In the eastern provinces
of the Kivus alone, the entire force could be spread out
to just one peacekeeper per 20 square kilometres.
Adding to those problems was the lack of roads and
infrastructure, which made it extremely slow and
difficult to get from one place to another. It is
undoubtedly a beautiful part of the world, but the
climate and terrain can be arduous, rendering many
places remote and inaccessible.

The threats to the population have also been
numerous and varied. They have faced the physical
threat posed by countless armed groups, as well as the
broader human security threats stemming from years of
poverty and underdevelopment. At the same time, our
partner on the ground - the Forces armees de la
Republique democratique du Congo (FARDC) - is
struggling to integrate and exercise command and
control over tens of thousands of former militia
combatants. We must recognize that, without proper
military training, equipment and communications, and
operating in a highly volatile political environment,
many of the members of the FARDC themselves
constitute a threat to the population. Our work with the
country's senior military command to help with
planning, military justice and logistical support must
be seen in the context of our protection mandate.

Our approach to this problem has been very much
an integrated one with our civilian colleagues in the
Mission. Together, we have identified the areas of
greatest risk, and have then set about deploying
peacekeepers to the most vulnerable sites. Our
approach is based on the premise that presence equals
protection. And in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, presence equals mobility. Each battalion has
been required to deploy to around six to eight separate
sites and to maintain a high profile and a robust
presence both day and night.

We cannot pretend to provide blanket protection.
We have attempted to overcome gaps by conducting
regular long-range patrols and temporary two-to-three-
day standing deployments. In parallel, there have been
deployments by the Congolese army. Admittedly,
however, not all units have a positive benefit, for the
reasons I have mentioned. In essence, that has been the
framework around which our approach has been built,
and, over time, improvements and enhancements have
been made.

I have mentioned presence and mobility; but
there is a third essential ingredient of our protection
effort: communication. The Mission's military and
civilian components have increasingly concentrated on
improving our communication with the population and
with key actors, both to understand the situation better
and to make ourselves better understood.
5

For instance, community liaison interpreters are
now deployed to many of the troop sites to improve
liaison and interaction with locals. A network of high-
frequency radios and mobile phones is being rolled out
to bolster the already established unit surveillance
centres. And multidisciplinary Joint Protection Teams
are now quickly dispatched to areas where there are
reports of problems, to advise on the best course of
action.

The Mission's Joint Military Analysis Centre has
also been a great help in pointing the Force towards
emerging areas of concern. In the very remote areas of
Bas-Uele, in northern Orientale province, where the
Lord's Resistance Army continues to prey on small
village communities, MONUSCO is also conducting
farming patrols, allowing villagers to work in safety in
their fields. And in parts of the volatile Kivus, we are
providing security escorts so that groups of up to 1,000
civilians can go to their weekly markets. Thus, we have
certainly made some advances and have become more
adept at tackling this task.

Managing expectations has been a major
challenge. Congolese see a relatively well-equipped
and well-organized team of Blue Helmets and cannot
understand why we cannot protect everyone,
everywhere. Well-motivated and concerned actors in
the international community often have high and, I
dare say, unrealistic expectations of the force. We have
not shied away from the challenge and have sought out
humanitarian and civil society actors, both Congolese
and international, to help us do a better job.

Ultimately, the protection of the population in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will depend upon
expansion of State authority and the rule of law across
the country. This is still a work in progress, and the
force has lent its support to this effort through the work
of engineering units and other specialists.

The protection of civilians is new ground for
many of the troops, and there is a need for in-depth
United Nations military doctrine and more
comprehensive individual and collective training on
the protection of civilians. The greater use of
interpreters is also vital to overcoming some of the
language and cultural issues, and operational reach and
responsiveness hinge on the United Nations ability to
muster sufficient and capable transport - particularly
aviation - assets.
Even then, try as we might, we will never be able
to offer a complete guarantee of security. There will
always be risks, and the Mission will always be
vulnerable to some form of criticism. But by adopting
this proactive, high-profile and - where necessary -
robust stance, the United Nations is able to show a
strong and effective commitment to the very important
task of championing the most vulnerable. I am
enormously proud of what our young soldiers, their
officers and civilian colleagues in the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and MONUSCO have managed to achieve
in this regard, and I have every confidence they will
continue to do so in the future.

