Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I should like to start by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo,
Ambassador Karel van Oosterom and Ambassador Vale
de Almeida for their briefings on the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015). I wish also to acknowledge the
presence here with us of our colleague the Permanent
Representative of Germany, whose country has a critical
role in the implementation of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA).

We note from the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/602) that the Islamic Republic of Iran continues
to adhere to its nuclear-related commitments and the
Secretary-General has not received any report on the
supply, transfer or export to Iran of nuclear or dual-use
items, materials, equipment, goods or technology.
We also note that the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) continues to monitor and verify the
implementation of the nuclear-related commitments by
the Islamic Republic oflran. The continued cooperation
of the IAEA with the Islamic Republic of Iran and
the JCPOA-participating States will also remain very
critical for the full implementation of the nuclear-
related commitments under the JCPOA.

We welcome the smooth cooperation between the
Security Council and the Joint Commission as indicated
in the report of the Facilitator (see S/2018/601). We also
welcome the continued work of the procurement channel

in approving the proposal submitted to it. The planned
open briefing to the wider United Nations membership
on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) by
the Facilitator is commendable as it will contribute
to fostering awareness particularly with the activities
set forth in paragraph 2 of annex B to resolution 2231
(2015) and the procurement channel.

We share the view of the Secretary-General that the
J CPOA is

"a major achievement in nuclear non-proliferation
that has contributed to regional and international
peace and security." (5/2018/602, para. 3)

However, we recognize the challenges and difficulties
in the broader implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), particularly the reported activities allegedly
undertaken by the Islamic Republic of Iran contrary to
the restrictive measures set out in annex B to resolution
2231 (2015) and the key findings included in the
reports of the Secretary-General and the Facilitator.
While awaiting further information on those reported
activities allegedly undertaken by the Islamic Republic
of Iran, we share the view expressed by the Secretary-
General that the Islamic Republic of Iran needs to
carefully consider these concerns, as they have the
potential to impact the context within which the JCPOA
is being implemented.

It is also worth noting the difficulty associated
with the withdrawal of the United States from the
JCPOA. We share the view of the Secretary-General,
highlighted in his report, that it is a setback to the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action. In that regard,
we appreciate the commitment of the remaining
participating countries, including the Islamic Republic
of Iran, to fully implement the JCPOA. It is critical
for the remaining JCPOA participants to continue to
address challenges associated with the withdrawal and
contribute to the full implementation of the JCPOA and
the satisfactory conclusion of the issue.

I would like to end my remarks by encouraging
the remaining participating countries to continue to
work together to address some of the challenges aimed
at ensuring the full implementation of resolution 2231
(2015).

