Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the convening of today's open meeting and
thanks the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Mr. De Mistura, for his briefing.

The Syrian conflict has been going on for six years
now, resulting in considerable civilian casualties and
destruction of the State. China is deeply sympathetic to
the suffering endured by the Syrian people and strongly
appeals to all Syrian parties to proceed with the future
of the country and the welfare ofits people in mind, and
to find an appropriate solution to the conflict as soon as
possible through dialogue and consultation. Recently,
the relevant parties made joint diplomatic efforts,

launched the Astana talks on Syria, maintained the
overall momentum of the Syrian ceasefire and created
the conditions to resume the Geneva talks. China hopes
that the Astana talks continue to play an important role
in maintaining the ceasefire and advancing the Geneva
talks to achieve progress.

A political solution is the only way out of the
Syrian impasse. Military means will not solve the
problem. In the last round of Geneva talks, all Syrian
parties negotiated political governance; constitutional
issues, elections, counter-terrorism, security and
confidence-building measures. That gave expression to
their attitude towards ownership and participation and
enabled encouraging progress in the political process
in Syria.

In the current situation, all relevant parties should
continue diplomatic efforts, prevent the deterioration of
the situation in Syria, continue to support the United
Nations as the main channel for good offices and
support the work of Special Envoy Mr. De Mistura. The
Security Council should prioritize the interests of Syria
and its people and play its constructive role in advancing
the Syrian political process. China appeals to all Syrian
parties to continue to maintain the ceasefire, follow the
Syrian-owned and Syrian-led principle to gradually
develop a comprehensive and durable solution through
dialogue and negotiation that is acceptable to all.

The fight against terrorism is an important and
pressing issue in the solution to the Syrian issue. The
counter-terrorism situation in some parts of Syria
has taken on new complexities in recent times. The
international community should be highly vigilant
about related developments, strengthen coordination
and cooperation, unify standards and combat all
terrorist organizations listed by the Security Council.
China welcomes the Brussels international conference
on Syria that was convened recently. China would like
to work with the international community and continue
to play a positive and constructive role in advancing the
political solution to the Syrian issue and in easing the
humanitarian situation in the country so as to advance
a comprehensive, just and appropriate solution to the
Syrian issue as soon as possible.

