Mr. Taula (New Zealand): We congratulate you,
Mr. President, and your Mission for your efficient and
professional leadership of the Council in May. We
thank you also for the concept note that you provided
for this session.

We were very pleased to participate in the mission to
Kenya, Somalia and Egypt. In Somalia in particular, as
other speakers have noted, we saw immediate, positive
impact from the Council's face-to-face engagement with

the President, regional leaders and other stakeholders
in this critical period as arrangements for the elections
were being finalized. We welcome the decree issued
three days after the visit by the President setting
out the electoral process, and we urge all Somalis to
work within those parameters in re-establishing a
representative Government in Somalia.

We see Council missions such as these as a very
valuable tool to advance peace and security objectives.
They can also assist the Council in meeting its conflict-
prevention responsibilities.

That is why New Zealand has been a strong
supporter of such visits during our term, including to
Guinea-Bissau, where Council engagement alongside
regional and international stakeholders remains
critical, and to Burundi, which we would have liked
to have seen the Council visit earlier, when, we feel,
quiet diplomacy could have had more of a chance of
shaping developments.

Visiting missions take time and money, including
from United Nations mission budgets, so we should use
them judiciously. We should be flexible about timing
and configuration. In some cases, we do not see the
need for all 15 Council members to travel, necessarily,
in order to convey the views of this body, especially
in conflict-prevention situations. We think that the
Council's visit to Timor-Leste in 2012 was a good
example of a mini-mission. It was led by South Africa;
six members, all elected, took part in that visit.

We face major conflict-prevention challenges in
the year ahead, including in the Great Lakes, and we
should be flexible about how we use the Council's tools
to address those issues.

We were very pleased that the Council hosted the
African Union for the annual joint consultative meeting
last week. The meetings were symbolic, coming at the
lO-year anniversary, and continuing to deepen the
exchanges between the two Councils is an even more
critical issue for us. We thought that the discussion in
Addis earlier this year on the way back from Bujumbura
was a very helpful informal exchange that enhanced the
Councils' mutual understanding. It was highly topical,
and delegations were ready to engage on the core issues.

As discussed last week, we think that more regular
discussions, including teleconferences between the
presidencies of the two Councils, would be one useful
and low-cost way to maintain those linkages and, more

importantly, to support a shared analysis of conflicts
and how we can both best address them. There are other
ways in which we can work better together, including
through joint visits, and we would be happy to discuss
those ideas further.

The month began on a very encouraging note, with
the adoption of resolution 2286 (2016), as others have
noted. The resolution condemned attacks on health-
care workers and health-care facilities. It recalled key
international humanitarian law and the principles of
distinction and precaution, and the prohibition against
indiscriminate attacks. And, importantly, it requested
the Secretary-General to brief the Council annually on
the implementation of the resolution.

We would like to reflect briefly on some of the
working methods behind the adoption of the resolution,
to which Spain referred to as well. New Zealand was
very pleased to play a significant role, working together
with our partners in the Council, in developing the
resolution, which was supported by all 15 members and
sponsored by 85 Member States.

Key stakeholders, including the International
Committee of the Red Cross and Medecins Sans
Frontieres, were closely engaged, as were stakeholders
not on the Council. We see the development of
this resolution, over many months, as a strong
model for inclusive and considered discussion and
decision-making. New Zealand would like to see this
approach taken more often by the Council to improve
its outcomes.

Finally, in the area of working methods, I would
like to comment on the discussions under way on the
appointment process for the chairs of subsidiary organs.
These issues are of great interest to us, because they
are important for the way the Council works and have
implications for the wider United Nations membership
and for all States that will serve as elected members
on the Council. It is elected members that serve as
chairs of the Council's subsidiary organs, including
the sanctions committees. The appointment process
of these chairing roles is notoriously opaque, and we
believe that this should change.

The Security Council elections will be held next
month, and the earlier timing provides us with more
time to reflect on which members are best suited to
chair which subsidiary bodies. And, most importantly,
this allows more time to consult with the new members.

Accordingly, New Zealand is a strong advocate of
all Council members being involved in this process,
not just the permanent members, and we propose that
successive Presidents of the Security Council are best
placed to facilitate the chair allocation process after the
incoming members have been elected.

Overall, New Zealand wants to see more inclusive
decision-making, less micromanagement and less
control in the hands of few, and better efforts to prepare
new chairs for their roles. Given the importance of
these issues, and working methods discussions more
generally, we would see value in holding regular
briefings for interested Member States on the work of
the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions, as I think was mentioned
in the presidential statement adopted after the open
debate late last year.

In closing, let me say that we all benefit from
greater transparency and greater engagement with the
United Nations membership as a whole.

