Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation supports the Arab Group's
request to hold an emergency Security Council
meeting. Like the majority of countries, we strongly
deplore the fact that the Israeli Government has
decided to continue to build a separation wall and
expand settlements. Israel's actions are not acceptable.
As an occupying Power, Israel must abide strictly by
international law, including the Fourth Geneva
Convention.

The root cause of the situation in the Middle East
is Israel's occupation of Arab lands. Israel's building of
a separation wall, in violation of international law, will
not bring true security for Israel; it will only lead to
more violence and hamper efforts aimed at achieving
peace between Israelis and Palestinians.

The current situation in the Middle East is deeply
troubling. The peace process is once again at a
crossroads. The question of how we can break out of
this impasse deserves our serious consideration. The
urgent task at hand is to break, as soon as possible, the
vicious circle of using violence against violence, and
both the Israelis and the Palestinians must make efforts
to that end. Israel must stop building the separation
wall and stop expanding settlements; end its policy of
targeted killings; stop its sieges and blockades against
Palestinians; respect the Palestinian people's basic
rights; and take measures to improve the humanitarian
situation of the Palestinians.

The Palestinians must also take effective
measures. They must halt suicide bombings against
civilians. Suicide bombings do not help the Palestinian
people's just cause of recovering their occupied lands
and establishing an independent State as soon as
possible.

The history of the situation in the Middle East
demonstrates that using violence against violence is not
the way out; hope lies only in dialogue and
negotiations. We hope that both Palestinians and
Israelis will face reality and consider their long-term
interests and the bigger picture. They must take bold
steps to create conditions for a return to negotiations
and for continued implementation of the road map.

In order to break the vicious circle of using
violence against violence, the Quartet must shoulder its
responsibilities. At the same time, the rest of the
international community must employ creative efforts.
In the general debate at the current session of the
General Assembly, a number of countries have
proposed the deployment of an international protection
force between the Israelis and the Palestinians, other
countries suggested that the Security Council dispatch
a fact-finding mission; and still others advocated the
holding of an international conference on the situation
in the Middle East. All those suggestions deserve our
serious consideration. The United Nations can and
must play a greater role in helping the Israelis and the
Palestinians to achieve peace.

China, as a permanent member of the Security
Council, is willing to join the rest of the international
community in helping to promote the process aimed at
a peaceful settlement of the situation in the Middle
East.

