The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Somalia, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Duale
(Somalia) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Haile Menkerios,
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs.

It is so decided.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Raisedon Zenenga, Director of the Africa II
Division of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Zenenga to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, the provisions of
resolution 1816 (2008) of 2 June 2008 and the
agreement with the affected coastal States, I shall take
it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
2
procedure to Mr. Efthimios Mitropoulos, Secretary-
General of the International Maritime Organization.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Mitropoulos to take a seat at the
Council table.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 11 November 2008 from the
Permanent Representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, in which he requests that the Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations,
Her Excellency Ms. Lila Ratsifandrihamanana, be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item,
in accordance with rule 39 of the Council's provisional
rules of procedure. If I hear no objection, I shall take it
that the Security Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Ms. Lila Ratsifandrihamanana.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Ms. Ratsifandrihamanana to take a seat at
the Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Somalia, document S/2008/709.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Haile Menkerios, Assistant Secretary-
General for Political Affairs; Mr. Raisedon Zenenga,
Director of the Africa II Division of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations; and Mr. Efthimios
Mitropoulos, Secretary-General of the International
Maritime Organization.

I now give the floor to Mr. Menkerios, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs.


