Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, I would like to congratulate Mexico on
its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of April. The Chinese delegation
will fully support the presidency in its work. We are
fully confident that under your leadership,
Mr. President, the Security Council will deal
successfully with the challenges it faces. The Chinese
delegation is also grateful to Ambassador Traore and
the other members of the delegation of Guinea, who
did outstanding work in historic and very difficult
circumstances.

I also thank you, Sir, for presiding over this
public meeting. As well, my thanks go to Sir Jeremy
Greenstock, Chairman of the Security Council's
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), for his statement
on the Committee's work.

In the 18 months since its establishment, the CTC
has worked to promote States' implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). At present, States either have
adopted legislation on counter-terrorism and
established mechanisms against terrorism or are in the
process of doing so. All agree that remarkable progress
has been made. On 6 March, the CTC successfully held
a special meeting with international, regional and
subregional organizations. Participants in the meeting
exchanged views on how to further strengthen
international cooperation to prevent and combat
terrorism. It was a useful attempt towards establishing
an international network against terrorism.

We support the seventh 90-day work programme
that the CTC has adopted (S/2003/387, annex). I would
like to take this opportunity to make two points on the
next stage of the Committee's work. First, work on
providing assistance on counter-terrorism should be
further strengthened. Effective practical measures
should be taken to help developing countries to build
their counter-terrorism capacity so that they can better
implement resolution 1373 (2001). In that regard, the
CTC should urge developed countries to increase
counter-terrorism assistance to developing countries.

Secondly, as mandated by resolution 1373 (2001),
the CTC should continue to monitor the
implementation of that resolution by States. We
associate ourselves with Sir Jeremy Greenstock's
statement that the CTC will have to move ahead with
both sensitivity and firmness in the field of monitoring
and implementation. The CTC can actively make
proposals on how countries can further implement
resolution 1373 (2001). Those proposals should be
effective, and practical and a tailored approach should
be taken.

The plan of action to follow up the special
meeting of the CTC refers to the Committee's intention
to seek ways and means to alleviate the burden of
reporting on countries. That is a common concern of all
countries. We hope that the CTC and its experts will
study that issue.

I would like to highlight the tireless efforts that
Sir Jeremy Greenstock, as the first Chairman of the
CTC, has made to carry out and promote international
counter-terrorism. Under his leadership, the CTC has
achieved significant results and has been praised by
Member States. The Chinese delegation also highly
appreciates the contributions made by the Vice-
Chairmen and the support teams of the Chairman and
the Vice-Chairmen.

Ambassador Arias will take over the
chairmanship of the CTC. The Chinese delegation will
fully support him in his work and is convinced that
under the leadership of Ambassador Arias, the CTC
will make further progress on the basis of lessons
learned from its past work.

