Ms. Rice (United States of America): I want to
thank the Secretary-General and Executive Director
Steiner for their excellent and very important
statements this morning.

The United States welcomes today's debate, and
we are grateful to Germany for its leadership in
convening this critical and timely discussion, which
aims to place climate change squarely on the global
security agenda.

President Obama was clear at the
Secretary-General's summit on climate change nearly
two years ago when he said that the security and
stability of every nation and every people are in
jeopardy. Our prosperity, health and safety are in peril.
Time is not just moving ahead; time is running out.
Climate change has very real implications for peace
and security. Its effects are as powerful as they are
complex, and many of them are already upon us. In
many regions, climate change is already reducing the
availability of food and water, threatening biodiversity
and disrupting sea levels and weather patterns. As more
powerful and frequent storms and floods lash
coastlines and uproot populations, climatic changes can
put even more pressure on scarce resources and expose
vulnerable communities to greater instability.

As too often happens, the most vulnerable will be
the hardest hit. Post-conflict countries already struggle
to rebuild their infrastructure, strengthen their
institutions and overcome instability. Now, they must
often grapple with extreme weather and protracted
drought, which can drive already strained systems to
buckle. Climate change can also slow or even reverse
crucial development gains for ordinary citizens trying
to break free of the shackles of poverty.

Climate change can further erode State capacity,
especially in fragile States already vulnerable from past
conflict, poverty, upheaval or disaster. As sea levels
rise, small island States may well see their territory
quite literally drowned, raising the spectre of new and
previously unimagined forms of statelessness.

We have just witnessed the birth of the world's
newest nation, the Republic of South Sudan. South
Sudanese leaders now tell us that agricultural
production is one of their highest priorities as they
work to consolidate peace. Yet that challenge is
magnified by the unfolding humanitarian disaster
caused by severe drought in the wider Horn of Africa.
Let us remember that in the Sudan a decade ago,
drought and rapid desertification are widely thought to
have contributed to the conflict and the humanitarian
crisis in Darfur, as they did a decade earlier in Somalia,
where drought contributed to the crisis that eventually
prompted the deployment of United Nations forces,
with results that we all recall.

To be sure, the mechanisms are complex and
some effects of climate change are long-term, but the
Security Council needs to start now, today, and in the
days to come to act on the understanding that climate
change exacerbates the risks and dynamics of conflict.
And we need to sharpen and adapt our instruments to
prevent and respond to such conflicts. The United
States itself is taking important steps through a range
of initiatives to work with our partners to confront the
growing challenges of global poverty, food insecurity,
disease, water scarcity and depleted natural resources,
helping lay the foundation for a more peaceful and
prosperous future for all.

Let me now address the role of the Security
Council in this issue. While we recognize the essential
work of the wider United Nations system and other
partners in tackling the broader dimensions of climate
change around the world, we also strongly believe that
the Council has an essential responsibility to address
the clear-cut peace and security implications of a
changing climate.
In the Council, we have discussed and addressed
many emerging security issues, from the links between
development and security to HIV/AIDS. Yet, this week
we have been unable to reach consensus on even a
simple draft presidential statement that climate change
has the potential to impact peace and security in the
face of the manifest evidence that it does. We have
dozens of countries represented in this body and in this
very Chamber whose very existence is threatened.
They have asked the Council to demonstrate our
understanding that their security is profoundly
threatened. Instead, because of the refusal of a few to
accept our responsibility, by its silence the Council is
saying in effect "tough luck". That is more than
disappointing; it is pathetic, short-sighted and, frankly,
a dereliction of duty.

The Council needs to keep pace with the
emerging threats of the twenty-first century. Old
threats have not disappeared, but new threats are upon
us, and they demand more of us than business as usual.
The Council has shown an impressive ability in the
past to embrace its responsibilities to combat new
peace and security threats, as it has done over the past
20 years in adapting traditional peacekeeping tools to
address new and more complex political and security
crises around the world.

Climate change is no different and demands
nothing less. We need improved early warning systems
to increase our lead time to take action. We need
greater collaboration on the effects of climate change,
especially at the local and regional levels, and better
information about basic human needs - water, food,
livelihood and energy - so that we can anticipate and
prevent resource-driven conflicts. We also need to
become better equipped to anticipate and prevent the
risk of conflict, including by building local and
national capacities to respond to climate-related threats
and to prevent them through diplomacy that helps
Governments manage potential disputes over scarce
resources.

Our goal is clear. The Council needs to be
prepared for the full range of crises that may be
deepened or widened by the effects of climate change.
The question is not whether we will be faced with
climate-related threats, but when and how to respond.
We need to be much better prepared to tackle one of
the central threats of our age. It is past time for the
Security Council to come into the twenty-first century
and to assume our core responsibilities.
