Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Today
we are urgently meeting at the request of the Permanent
Mission of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan and the
Permanent Observer Mission of the State of Palestine
to address the dangerous escalation of tensions in East
Jerusalem. We regret that the Security Council has to
deal once again with the situation of Israeli settlements
in the occupied Palestinian territory and the Temple
Mount, for, as we all know, that already has been decided
on. Among the measures taken with respect this issue
by the Council, we highlight resolutions 446 (1979), 452
(1979), 465 (1980) and 478 (1980). We attach particular
importance to resolution 478 (1980), which decides not
to recognize the basic law enacted by the Knesset or the
measures that, as a result of that law, "seek to alter the
character and status of Jerusalem" (resolution 4 78 (1980),
para. 5). However, 35 years on, we must stilll continue
to deal with what our predecessors in the Chamber had
already decided.

In that regard, Chile emphatically condemns Israel's
latest announcement that it will continue construction
of more than a 1,000 new settlement units in Ramat
Shlomo and Har Homa. Israel's flouting of Security
Council resolutions voids the viability and geographic
contiguity of the future Palestinian State, which must
have East Jerusalem as its capital.

Like other members of the international community,
we believe that such unilateral actions, as well as those
initiatives seeking to alter the character of the Al-Aqsa
Mosque compound, perpetuate discord and mistrust
between peoples. We are very concerned about the
tension we have seen in East Jerusalem since July,
including the action on Wednesday, 22 October, which
led to the death of an Israeli child and an Ecuadorian
migrant woman. All that makes us fear for a new
intifada.

We again urge and deem it necessary for the
Security Council to speak out and to continue making
every effort to facilitate the two-State solution and
to effectively exercise its responsibilities to preserve
international peace and security.

