Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): We thank Under-
Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his briefing on the
report before us and the representative of the United
States, Ambassador Khalilzad, for his briefing on the
activities of the Multinational Force in Iraq.

We view positively the rounds of talks,
negotiations and visits by the Iraqi Prime Minister to
neighbouring countries and further abroad in trying to
find lasting solutions to the problems of Iraq. We also
welcome the ongoing work of the International
Compact with Iraq and we note the commitment of the
participants, who work in partnership with the
Government of Iraq to ensure stability, security and
economic reconstruction.

Notwithstanding those positive developments, my
delegation remains gravely concerned that the security
situation in Iraq is still precarious. We reiterate that
any resolution to the conflict in Iraq must include an
all-inclusive political process and national
reconciliation and constructive dialogue with all
neighbouring States.

In that regard, we welcome the conference on
Iraq that is soon to be held in Istanbul and attended by
its neighbours. The role of regional actors cannot be
overemphasized, and my delegation supports all efforts
aimed at addressing the violence and the issue of
internally displaced persons and refugees. Regional
cooperation is necessary for ensuring stability not only
in Iraq, but in the entire region.

The continued humanitarian crisis is cause for
serious concern and requires urgent collective
attention. If unresolved, the issue of internally
displaced persons and refugees could have dire
consequences for the country and indeed the entire
region.

We were disturbed by reports of activities by
military contractors that have resulted in the deaths of
innocent Iraqi civilians. We therefore once again call
upon all those involved in Iraq to exercise extreme
caution and for tighter regulations governing the
actions of private security companies.

It should be noted that the recent human rights
report of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq
(UNAMI) indicated that UNAMI shares the View of the
International Committee of the Red Cross that

"private military firms must respect international
humanitarian law and that the increasing recourse
to their services 'risks eroding the fundamental
distinction between civilians and combatants'".
(UNAMI, Human Rights Report, 1 April-30 June 
2007, para. 22)

Resolution 1770 (2007) bears testimony to the
determination of the international community to assist
the Iraqi people in moving beyond the current crisis.
My delegation strongly supports an expanded United
Nations role in Iraq, in line with our commitment to
multilateralism and conflict resolution. The United
Nations has a particularly important role to play with
regard to national reconciliation in Iraq. As the
Secretary-General indicated in his report, the United
Nations not only enjoys good relations with all parties
across the political spectrum in Iraq, but also has the
advantage of relying on past best practices gained from
operating in other global conflicts. However, with
regard to a more direct role of the United Nations, as
resolution 1770 (2007) itself implies, an expanded role
can only be realized as "circumstances permit"
(resolution 1770 (2007), para. 2). The safety of United
Nations personnel must be an overriding consideration.

We reiterate that, notwithstanding the events that
led to the current situation, the Security Council has a
responsibility to ensure that the powers granted to the
Multinational Force in Iraq are exercised in a manner
consistent with the decisions of the Security Council,
that Iraq's natural resources and the funds in the
Development Fund for Iraq are used for the benefit of
the Iraqi people and that international law and human
rights laws are upheld and respected by all parties.

