The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Algeria,
Argentina, Bangladesh, Belgium, Botswana, Brazil,
Canada, Djibouti, Egypt, Estonia, Fiji, Germany,
Guatemala, India, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Mexico,
Morocco, Namibia, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, the
Philippines, Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Romania,
Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, South Africa, the
Sudan, Switzerland, Turkey, Uganda and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Sma'i'l Chergui, African Union Commissioner for
Peace and Security, to participate in this meeting.

Mr. Chergui is joining the meeting via video-
teleconference from Addis Ababa.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the following
to participate in this meeting: Mr. Gustavo Martin
Prada, Charge d'affaires ad interim of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations; and
Mr. Robert Mardini, Head of Delegation and Permanent
Observer of the International Committee of the Red
Cross to the United Nations.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/1004, which contains a letter dated
9 November 2018 from the Permanent Representative
of China to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note on the
item under consideration.

I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Antenio Guterres, and give him
the floor.

