Mr. Vukasinovie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, let me congratulate you, Mr. President, on our
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of May. I wish you and your delegation
every success.

We welcome the presence in the Council today of
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and have taken note of his report
(S/2017/379, annex) on the situation in the country,
which covers the period from 22 October 2016 to
21 April 2017.

Bosnia and Herzegovina further intensified its
efforts during the reporting period in the implementation
of the reform agenda and continued to work vigorously
to implement the socioeconomic reforms necessary
for integration into the European Union (EU). Bosnia
and Herzegovina's authorities at all levels have
synchronized their activities as they prepare answers
for the European Commission questionnaire.

In December 2016, Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
European Union signed the protocol on the adaptation
of the Stabilization and Association Agreement. The
signing of the protocol represents an important step
forward on Bosnia and Herzegovina's path towards
joining the European Union. The protocol begins a
new stage of trade cooperation between Bosnia and
Herzegovina and EU member States. In addition, the
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Mr. Denis Zvizdie, in his capacity as a
Chair of the EU-Bosnia and Herzegovina Stabilization
and Association Council, signed a decision on foreign
trade that will simplify trade with the EU and the wider
region. Specifically, the decision replaced bilateral
rules of origin with preferential rules of origin, in
accordance with the Regional Convention on pan-
Euro-Mediterranean preferential rules of origin. We
would like to express our appreciation to the European
Union for its unwavering commitment to Bosnia
and Herzegovina's membership in the EU. Bosnia
and Herzegovina has also enhanced its cooperation
with NATO.

One of the most important goals of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's foreign policy is the advancement of
friendly and constructive cooperation among the
countries of the region. The perspective of integration
into the European Union remains a crucial factor not
only in regional cooperation but also in the stability of
the Western Balkans. Cooperation within the framework
of the Berlin process, which provides assets for traffic
and energy infrastructure, is particularly important for
regional development.

Countries of the Western Balkans continue to hold
regular meetings at the highest level that generate a
positive political environment. At the last meeting of
Western Balkans Prime Ministers, held in Sarajevo
on 16 and 17 March, the States' Prime Ministers
expressed their full commitment to the prospect of
EU accession and welcomed the European Council's
unequivocal support in that regard. They stressed that
firm and credible EU prospects continue to drive the
transformation and modernization of the region through
political and economic reforms.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has intensified its efforts
to strengthen the rule of law in several key areas. In the
reporting period, Bosnia and Herzegovina continued
to fulfil its international obligations with regard to
countering terrorism and violent extremism. Bosnia
and Herzegovina, in accordance with provisions of its
amended penal code, continues to prosecute terrorist
fighters as well as those facilitating their recruitment.

Bosnia and Herzegovina's judicial and security
institutions have been implementing their strategy
for preventing and combating terrorism. In addition
to security measures, the strategy for preventive
activities for de-radicalization carried out by national
stakeholders, such as religious communities, educational
institutions, civil society organizations and the media.
In the same period, Bosnia and Herzegovina's rule of
law and security institutions have made progress in
combating organized crime, corruption and money-
laundering.

As for prosecuting war crimes in domestic courts,
we would like to reiterate that fighting impunity at
the local level is vital for Bosnia and Herzegovina as
a complex and multinational State. In that context,
implementing the National War Crimes Strategy,
regardless of the national or religious origin of
perpetrators or victims, is essential to reconciliation
and long-term stability.

With regard to the economic situation, I would
stress that Bosnia and Herzegovina's economy, like
other economies in the region, has been affected by the
global economic slowdown. Nevertheless, its economy
grew at a solid pace in 2016. In comparison to 2015,
Bosnia and Herzegovina's economy has grown 2.8 per
cent and its exports have increased by 3 per cent. The
inflation rate was -l.l per cent, which means that in
2016 consumer prices fell slightly by comparison with
the previous year.

The international migrant crisis still constitutes
a significant challenge to the States of the region and
their economies. Since the closure of the Western
Balkans route, we have witnessed a significant decrease
in the refugee and migrant flow through our region.
However, the States of the region continue to be on
the forefront of the international migrant crisis. In that
context, I note that Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities
have undertaken a set of comprehensive measures in
the humanitarian, security and other spheres. Bosnia
and Herzegovina has implemented its strategy on
migration and asylum, through its plan of action for the
2016-2020 period. That document specifies our policy
on migration and asylum, which is consistent with the
highest European and international standards.

The security situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
has remained peaceful and calm, as regularly reflected
in the reports of the European Union-led peacekeeping
force (EUFOR) Althea mission, as well as in the
relevant Council resolutions. We stress that Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as a host country, has had respectable and
fruitful cooperation with EUFOR Althea, particularly
in capacity-building and the training of the armed
forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is actively contributing to
international peace and security by providing military
and police personnel to United Nations peacekeeping
missions, currently deploying 42 peacekeepers worldwide.

Finally, we would like to express the readiness of
Bosnia and Herzegovina's authorities to continue their
work in securing a better and prosperous future for
its citizens. In that regard, we thank our international
partners for supporting us on that path.

