Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Allow me to join others
in congratulating you, Sir, on having assumed the
presidency of the Council for October. I wish you
all the best and assure you that you can count on our
support. At the same time, I would like to express our
appreciation for the excellent work of the United States
presidency in September, and we thank Ambassador
Nikki Haley for her leadership and the United States
delegation for their professionalism.

Allow me to thank you once again, Mr. President,
as well as your colleagues Ambassadors Kairat Umarov
and Gustavo Meza-Cuadra, for their informative
briefings, tireless work and active leadership ofthe three
Committees. The results of the work of the subsidiary
bodies determine the effectiveness of the Security
Council, as the organ entrusted with maintaining
international peace and security. I would also like
to commend the ongoing cooperation among the
respective expert bodies of the three Committees - the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
and the Group of Experts of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).

First, I would like to stress that rapid technological
advances in the dual-use domain continue to outpace
national and international regulations. Non-State
actors have become more creative in weaponizing
new technologies. The use by terrorists of weapons
of mass destruction and their means of delivery and
related materials is a dreadful reality. For more than
a decade, Poland has had a record of fruitful and
substantial cooperation with the 1540 Committee and
its Group of Experts. With the support of those bodies,
we undertook a number of initiatives at the national,
regional and global levels. We call on all States to
fully implement resolution 1540 (2004) by taking
national and international measures to strengthen their
capacities in countering the threats posed by terrorists
acquiring weapons of mass destruction, including
through the development of national action plans under
that resolution.

Secondly, Poland welcomes the achievements
of the Security Council Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities. Despite having
been defeated in Iraq and confined to small pockets
of territory in the Syrian Arab Republic, ISIL still
poses a significant challenge to international peace and
security. Al-Qaida is relatively strong in many parts
of the world, posing a long-term threat to stability and
sustainable development. In that regard, it is of crucial
importance to keep the sanctions list updated and stay
focused on the current threat. The issue of weapons
reaching ISIL, Al-Qaida and their affiliates should be
dealt with through a holistic approach, including better
border control.

Global challenges such as the threat posed by
terrorists should be addressed by the international
community as a whole. The tenth meeting of the
Counter-ISIL Finance Group, hosted by Poland in
September and co-chaired by the United States, Italy and
Saudi Arabia, was a good example of that attitude. By
sharing specific information on funding mechanisms,
52 Member States explored how to mitigate the risks
posed by terrorist organizations and the potential
exploitation of stabilization and reconstruction funding
into Iraq and other affected countries.

We appreciate the efforts made by the Secretariat
to address the needs of the end users of the sanction list
through the development of a more accessible search
engine and a mobile application. We call on States to
cooperate in the annual review ofthe 1267 sanctions list.

Poland welcomes Mr. Daniel Kipfer Fasciati
as the new Ombudsperson to the ISIL (Da'esh) and
Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee. We look forward to a
productive cooperation given his important role in the
delisting process.

Lastly, I would like to express our appreciation for
the work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee. Thanks
to its efforts, we know better how to combat illicit
trafficking, abuse of the Internet and the financing
of terrorism. The Committee's special meetings,
whether thematic or regional, such as the recent ones
on countering terrorist narratives, on human rights and
on Central Asia, are an excellent tool for keeping States
informed and a platform for galvanizing discussion.

In conclusion, I want to stress that beyond
States' efforts to counter terrorism, we should not
underestimate the effectiveness of the engagement of
international, religious and civil-society organizations,
as well as academia and the private sector. Only by
working together, and with respect for the rule of law
and human rights, can we fight this scourge.

