The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Security Council's provisional rules of procedure, I
invite the representatives of Iraq and the Syrian Arab
Republic to participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda. Members of the Council have
before them document S/2014/589, which contains the
text of a draft resolution submitted by Australia, Chad,
Chile, France, Jordan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Nigeria,
the Republic of Korea, Rwanda, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.

A vote was taken by Show ofhands.

Infavoar:
Argentina, Australia, Chad, Chile, China, France,
Jordan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Nigeria, Republic
of Korea, Russian Federation, Rwanda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and United States of America

The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 2170 (2014).

I shall now give the floor to members of the Council
who wish to make statements following the voting.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United Kingdom.

The United Kingdom welcomes the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2170 (2014). We are grateful
for the strong support from Council members for this
initiative and for the clear sense of unity that enabled
this strong Chapter VII resolution to be agreed so
quickly. Today, the Council has sent a clear political
message to the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), Jabhat Al-Nusra and other Al-Qaida-inspired
terrorists and has taken important practical steps to
combat the threat they pose.

That threat is growing. ISIL, Jabhat Al-Nusra and
other Al-Qaida-inspired terrorists are undermining the
stability and security of the people of Iraq and Syria.
They threaten the wider Middle East region. We have
watched with horror their brutal actions - attempts
to wipe out entire communities on the basis of their
religion or belief, indiscriminate killing, illegal and
savage executions, deliberate targeting of civilians and
appalling levels of sexual violence, especially against
women and children.

Resolution 2170 (2014) represents the international
community's comprehensive rejection of those terrorist
groups and expresses its determination to respond. The
Council has taken a firm and united stand. There is
already a strong response under way to the short-term
threat from ISIL, including military and humanitarian.
The United Kingdom is participating fully in the
humanitarian response in both Iraq and Syria. We are
supporting efforts to establish inclusive governance
and to strengthen moderate elements in both countries.

However, this resolution provides an additional
framework for a longer-term and strategic international
response to the threat. In particular, it sends a clear
political message that the international community
utterly condemns ISIL's brutal and mindless terrorist
acts, rejects its violent extremist ideology and is united
in its resolve to oppose and confront it. The resolution
contains measures to stifle recruitment and to target
the growing phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters.
It tackles the financing of terrorism, calling on all
Member States to immediately cease all trade and
materiel support that enables ISIL and other terrorist
groups to function. It sanctions six key ISIL and
Jabhat Al-Nusra individuals under the United Nations
Al-Qaida sanctions regime, sending a clear signal that
there is no impunity for those who seek to support
Al-Qaida or its splinter groups.

Today, the Council has shown that it will not
stand idle in the face of terrorism and violations of
human rights. The resolution is not the final word. The
framework that it provides will need to be developed and
refined, but the Council's unity on the text establishes a
strong basis for doing that. We must be resolute, active
and creative in considering what further measures
should be taken to tackle that terrorist scourge.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.


