Mr. McNee (Canada): Canada welcomes both
this open debate and the 2006 annual report
(S/2006/826) of the Secretary-General on children and
armed conflict.

Today is an opportunity once again for the
Council to focus on the severity of continued acts of
violence against children in violation of human rights
and international humanitarian law. The Council has a
central role to play in protecting children who suffer
from the horrific effects of armed conflict and in
holding accountable those responsible for the atrocities
committed against them.

The date of 9 November 2006 was a historic day.
It was the start of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) trial of Thomas Lubanga Dyilo, the former
militia leader from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo charged with recruiting children. Canada
welcomes this important first step in combating
impunity. We call upon the international community to
support the work of the ICC and national courts as they
bring to justice those who perpetrate serious
international crimes, including those committed against
children.

Of the 38 violators identified in the Secretary-
General's report as recruiting and using child soldiers,
16 have been listed in all reports since 2002. In order
to end this culture of impunity, it is essential that the
Security Council apply targeted measures against those
persistent violators.

The recommendations of the Council's Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict (see S/2006/724) with respect to the report of the Secretary-
General on children and armed conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2006/389) are a
good example of both cooperative measures and
targeted sanctions. The challenge now is for the
Council to turn clear recommendations - such as
strengthening the child protection framework of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo - into action.
Canada calls upon the Council, in the form of the
Group of Experts and the Sanctions Committee, to
implement the sanctions recommended, including
conducting expert-level missions to assess progress.

Canada commends the Working Group for
meeting an ambitions agenda. In addition to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, conclusions on the
Sudan have also been adopted. The situations in cote
d'Ivoire and Burundi have been considered, and will
soon be followed by those in Sri Lanka, Nepal and
Somalia. The Special Representative's Special Adviser
on Sri Lanka has reported that serious abuses against
children are ongoing in that country. We encourage the
Council to remain apprised of the deteriorating human
rights situation in Sri Lanka and to pursue
recommended action on the Sudan to combat impunity
there.

Canada applauds the work of the Secretary-
General and his team, in particular his Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict, for
the wealth of reporting done on children and armed
conflict over the past year. The Secretary-General's
2006 report recognizes some progress over the past
year, in particular in Uganda, where the hope for peace
has led to a decrease in abductions and "night
commuters". However, there are many situations that
have deteriorated, and new ones reported.

In particular, sexual violence against girls is still
widely reported by the Secretary-General. Further
progress will require the sustained attention of the
international community, comprehensive and effective
reporting and concrete responses by the Council that
protect affected populations in a sustainable way.

Canada congratulates UNICEF and the United
Nations country teams for their efforts in the
establishment of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism in seven initial countries. It is critical that
the Working Group continue to focus on the
establishment of monitoring and reporting in all
situations of concern and that it extend the mandate of
the mechanism to include all six categories of grave
violations against children beyond their recruitment
and use as soldiers.

(spoke in French)

We also eagerly look forward to the
comprehensive assessment of child protection advisers
in peace operations; their contributions have been
useful in monitoring and reporting efforts and in
combating sexual exploitation and abuse by
peacekeeping personnel.

Although the Council has on three occasions
requested the development of action plans by parties
recruiting and using child soldiers, those requests have
been heeded only by C6te d'Ivoire and Uganda.
Canada calls for full implementation of commitments
under those plans to ensure that no child is part of a
fighting force. With regard to all the other parties listed
in this year's report, it would be advisable for them to
draw on the lessons learned in Cote d'Ivoire and
Uganda. Of course, we also call on them to establish
their own time-bound action plans to end the
recruitment of child soldiers.

Efforts to address protection needs on the ground
must be mutually reinforcing. We should not utilize the
Council solely to express our concerns. States,
including members of the Security Council, must
demonstrate their willingness to ensure that
populations at risk always have access to the fullest
protection possible. In so doing, we must hold those
responsible accountable for their actions and ensure
that the defence of rights, monitoring and the
strengthening of capacities become the bywords of our
activities. In short, our multilateralism must bring
concrete results.

