Mr. Shinyo (Japan): I would like at the outset to
join my colleagues in thanking Mr. Joachim Rucker for
his comprehensive presentation. I would like to take
this opportunity to warmly congratulate him on his
appointment as the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. Kosovo is now at a crucial juncture,

and completing the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
has taken on even greater importance. Japan looks
forward to the leadership and efforts of Mr. Rucker in
that regard. I would also like to extend our appreciation
to Ms. Sanda Raskovic-Ivic, President of the
Coordination Centre for Kosovo and Metohija, for her
statement, and to welcome the presence in the Council
Chamber of Prime Minister Ceku of the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government of Kosovo.

Much attention is currently being given to the
status talks. In that connection, the Government of
Japan would like to express its continuous support for
the efforts of Mr. Martti Ahtisaari, the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Future Status Process
for Kosovo. Japan recognizes the importance of the so-
called bottom-up approach, which includes efforts to
take up status-neutral issues. This approach will
certainly contribute to confidence-building among the
parties. We also fully support the initiatives undertaken
by the Contact Group to promote the status process.
Reaching an agreement will be no easy task. However,
we sincerely call upon all relevant parties to engage in
the process in a flexible and constructive manner with
a view to finding a mutually acceptable formula. From
that point of View, we particularly welcome the holding
of high-level direct talks in Vienna on 24 July, and we
hope that that will be the starting point for the
acceleration of the process.

The implementation of the standards for Kosovo
is as important a challenge as the final status issue. In
the current report of the Secretary-General
(S/2006/707), concrete progress was reported on those
priority areas set by the Contact Group in June this
year. We welcome this progress and encourage the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government, under the
leadership of Prime Minister Ceku, to continue their
active and determined efforts towards the
implementation of the standards.

We must admit, however, to a certain degree of
concern regarding the implementation of the standards.
Apart from positive signs in many of the standards, a
gap in the level of implementation among the standards
has been shown to exist. The question of the
investigation and prosecution of cases relating to the
March 2004 riots is one example of the issues which
should be addressed immediately. We stress that point
because we believe that it is essential to improve the
credibility of the judicial system in order to establish a
stable, democratic and inclusive society.

Increasing outreach to minority communities by
Kosovo leaders is also essential in order to facilitate
the status process. The implementation of the standards
is an indispensable condition for the building of a
democratic and multi-ethnic society in Kosovo. Thus,
steady implementation is required, regardless of the
final status.

I would also like to mention one other, related,
matter: the question of the participation of Kosovo
Serbs in Kosovo's institutions. The Government of
Japan expresses its concern about the cessation of
contacts with the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government by three municipalities in northern
Kosovo. We urge those municipalities to resume their
contacts with the Provisional Institutions immediately.
In addition, I would like to note our serious concern
about the measures taken by Serbian authorities which
discourage the participation of Kosovo Serbs in the
Provisional Institutions, and our support for the report
of the Secretary-General in calling on the Belgrade
authorities to remove all impediments of that kind.

Before I conclude my statement, I would like to
add a final comment. Since the tension on the ground
continues to heighten as the status process advances, I
would like to express our sincere wish for all leaders of
Serbia and Kosovo to reaffirm their determination to
resolve the issue by peaceful means only, and for all
the people in the region to calmly support the
development of the status process.

