Mr. Djedje (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation extends its warm congratulations to
your country, Mr. President, on its assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of June, and
assures you of its full cooperation in fulfilling your
mission. We also congratulate Poland, in particular
Ambassador Joanna Wronecka, on the outstanding
conduct of our work during the month of May.

C6te d'Ivoire welcomes the convening ofthis debate
on the progress of the work of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, and thanks Judge
Theodor Meron and Mr. Serge Brammertz, in their
respective capacities as President and Prosecutor of the
Mechanism, for their briefings. Our congratulations
also go to Ambassador Gustavo Meza-Cuadra on his
work as Chairman of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals.

On 17 May, the Council held an open debate on
upholding international law within the context of the
maintenance of international peace and security (see S/PV.8262). On that occasion, almost all delegations
stressed the need for States to pool their efforts to fight
impunity in cases of violations of international law.
The letters of the President and the Prosecutor of the
Mechanism (see S/2018/347 and S/2018/47l) are in line
with that perspective.

The Mechanism - a small, temporary entity - has
made significant progress in implementing its mandate
in recent years. Indeed, the Mechanism has fulfilled its
mandate, in accordance with resolution 1966 (2010),
by ensuring the necessary continuity of the residual
functions transferred to it by the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda and the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia, as evidenced by the increasing
volume of its judicial activities, enforcement of
sentences, the protection of victims and witnesses, and
archives management.

My delegation commends the remarkable progress
made by the Mechanism, as noted by the Office of
Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) in the report it
published in March. Those include matching the budget
to the size and activities of the Mechanism, as well
as staff reductions. We encourage the President and
the Prosecutor to pursue their efforts to achieve the
objectives set by the United Nations in resolution 1966
(2010). cote d'Ivoire also reaffirms the importance of
the recommendations made by the OIOS in its review
of the Mechanism's working methods and welcomes
the steps taken to implement them. In that regard, my
delegation supports the staff morale survey, the review
of the survey results and the development of strategies
on managing institutional change.

Despite the progress made, we note that many
major challenges remain, including the cooperation
of States with the Mechanism and the strengthening
of national judicial capacities. With respect to States'
cooperation with the Mechanism, my country is of the
view that it is key in the search for, arrest and transfer
of fugitives and the enforcement of sentences imposed.
In that regard, my delegation appreciates the initiatives
taken by the States that support the Mechanism
by receiving persons who have been convicted,
acquitted or have served their sentences when they
renounce their return to their countries of origin.
We also encourage States to redouble their efforts to
apprehend fugitives and make them available to the
Mechanism for trial.

With regard to strengthening the judicial capacities
of national institutions, it is an important link in the
promotion of the principle of complementarity and the
assumption of responsibility by national authorities
following a conflict. In that connection, my delegation
supports activities to bolster national judiciary
capacities, enabling State institutions of beneficiary
States to take in the experience gained and the best
practices with regard to the Mechanism in order to
prosecute perpetrators of mass crimes.

We welcome the advanced training provided in
February by the Mechanism's Office of the Prosecutor
in Dakar on investigation and prosecution for
international crimes in Central Africa and West Africa.
Thirty prosecutors and investigating judges from C6te
d'Ivoire, Guinea, Mali, the Niger, the Central African
Republic and Senegal participated in this high-level
training. Cote d'Ivoire strongly encourages the Office
of the Prosecutor to take all necessary measures to
effectively hold the follow-up session in Abidjan.

Despite its supposed residual functions, the
Mechanism plays an undeniable role in the respect for
international law and the fight against impunity in the
regions of ex-Yugoslavia and Rwanda. Perpetrators of
mass crimes are still at large. The Mechanism should
pursue them, apprehend them and judge them.

In conclusion, C6te d'Ivoire invites the international
community and the Council to support the efforts of the
Mechanism and to provide it the necessary support and
cooperation to enable it to complete its tasks in order to
successfully discharge its mandate.

