Mr. Serbini (Brunei Darussalam): At the outset,
we would like to congratulate you, Mr. Minister, for
providing leadership to this meeting, and we thank the
Security Council for allowing us to participate in the
discussion of an issue that concerns us in the region.
We would like to congratulate Mr. Sergio Vieira de
Mello and his team for their commendable work. The
Government of Brunei Darussalam would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his excellent report on
the work of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET). We are very
happy to see the participation of Chief Minister Mari
Alkatiri in these discussions, and Brunei Darussalam
looks forward to welcoming East Timor as a member
of the international community in May of next year.

Brunei Darussalam supports the role of UNTAET
and is pleased with the way UNTAET has discharged
its mandate. We are seeing continued significant
progress after the election in East Timor. The presence
of UNTAET has greatly contributed to the continuous
peace and stability in the country. This is highlighted in
the Secretary-General's report.

Having said that, we feel that we still have a long
way to go to make East Timor a viable State. Its basic
requirements were made clear in Security Council
resolution 1272 (1999) and subsequent related Council
resolutions, as well as in the Secretary-General's
current report. Within this context, we fully support the
interventions by those who spoke before us calling for
a substantial international presence in East Timor after
independence.

As highlighted in the report, there are still a few
areas in which East Timor needs assistance. In view of
this, we feel that the continued presence of the United
Nations is essential. We also note that support is still
needed in building the East Timorese capacity for self-
government, despite the great improvement in this area.
Other areas in public administration, particularly civil
administration, continue to rely heavily on services
provided by UNTAET. We feel that the United Nations
should continue its support in this area, which also
includes development and training in the area of
information and communication technology.

We also note the shortcomings facing the newly
formed justice system. It will be supported by the
nascent East Timor Police Service and East Timor
Defence Force, but maintaining law and order in East
Timor would not be easy.

In conclusion, I would like to re-emphasize the
importance of building on the progress that we have
achieved so far and, hence, of the continued
international presence in East Timor. This is to ensure
the country's successful transition into the international
community. At the same time, we have to ensure
continued consultation and cooperation with the people
of East Timor in order to carry out UNTAET's mandate
in resolution 1272 (1999).

