Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): Ukraine welcomes
the unanimous adoption of resolution 2375 (2017) in
response to the sixth nuclear test conducted by the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. We commend
the strong leadership of the United States, which made
the adoption possible.

I would like to take this opportunity to express
Ukraine's solidarity with the people and the Government
of the United States as they commemorate the sixteenth
anniversary of 911. I am proud that Ukraine was able
to contribute to the Security Council's response to that
horrific terrorist act back in 2001 as a non-permanent
member of the Council, including by providing our
Permanent Mission's premises for the Council's
urgent consultations.

North Korea's advancing nuclear and ballistic
missiles programmes remain the most significant
proliferation global challenge at the global scale.
Moreover, the increasing militarization has already
severely impacted, and continues to threaten, the
livelihoods of the population of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea. Besides continuously
diverting resources from acute human needs to fuelling
its nuclear arsenal, the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea has succeeded in evading sanctions. We therefore
fully support imposing new robust measures against
the North Korean regime, along with strengthening the
existing conditions and restrictions. Our decision today
clearly proves that the Council remains united and
decisive in its response to the growing nuclear threat on
the Korean peninsula, as well as in its intention to avoid
affecting the people of North Korea.

I wish to reiterate the key importance ofthe full and
comprehensive implementation of all of the Council's
resolutions related to the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea, by all States Members of the United Nations,
in order to avert the risk of further provocations
and curb the rampant nuclear and missile ambitions
of Pyongyang.

Ukraine voted for this resolution, trusting that any
responsible member of the international community
must spare no effort in restoring respect for international
law and finding solutions to counter the greatest threats
to global peace and security.

