Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Allow me to extend a
warm welcome to the President of Serbia, Mr. Boris
Tadic'; the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
Mr. Jeremic'; and the Minister of Foreign Affairs of
Kosovo, Mr. Skender Hyseni. We are happy to see
them with us today.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2010/5) and Mr. Zannier for his
informative briefing and his leadership of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). Let me emphasize once again that we
commend the work of UNMIK. We are confident that,
in its reconfigured phase, UNMIK will continue to
provide valuable assistance.

We also welcome and support the expansion in
the role and functions of the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX). We remain
committed to continuing our contributions both to
EULEX and to the Kosovo Force (KFOR) in
accordance with the needs and requirements on the
ground. We are pleased to see that the positive
relationship between UNMIK and EULEX is further
strengthening. More effective cooperation and
coordination between the two and also with KFOR will
consolidate their efforts to achieve the desired ends,
while at the same time enabling each mission to
concentrate on its respective mandate.

The Secretary-General's report shows that
Kosovo has made considerable progress in a number of
areas, such as decentralization and the rule of law, and
that it is taking steps to make further progress in
others, such as returns and cultural and religious
heritage, where certain problems seem to persist. We
call on all relevant sides to do their best to achieve
satisfactory results. It is also encouraging to note that
both Belgrade and Pristina are pragmatically
cooperating in resolving the outstanding issues as
regards some practical arrangements. We hope that the
sides will make further efforts to reach agreements.

We are also pleased that the Kosovo authorities
have been carrying out their commitments to
solidifying their democratic institutions and
capabilities. In this connection and also with a view to
decentralization endeavours, the municipal elections
held on 15 November were an important milestone.
Therefore, we welcome the fact that the elections took
place in a calm and peaceful environment and in
accordance with international standards.

It is encouraging that there was greater
participation by Kosovo Serbs in the elections as
compared to 2004 and 2007, and particularly that the
mayors elected in some of the newly formed
municipalities were Kosovo Serbs. It is important that
all the communities of Kosovo actively exercise their
democratic rights and fulfil their duties to ensure their
effective and legitimate representation in State and
municipal structures. In this vein, the fact that the Serb
participation was very low in the northern part of
Kosovo and that the overall situation there remains
fragile is a cause for concern. We should all proceed
from the understanding that the future of the Serbs in
the north is tied to that of Kosovo, and refrain from
actions that will cause unnecessary burdens in their
lives.

Next month it will be two years since Kosovo
declared independence. We recognized Kosovo because
we believe that the situation was no longer sustainable
and that Kosovo's independence would ultimately
contribute to lasting peace, stability and prosperity of
the region. The fact that Kosovo has been recognized
by 65 countries has, we believe, contributed to regional
peace and stability.

Indeed, since Kosovo declared independence the
situation in the region has been largely calm and
peaceful, allowing all parties involved to concentrate
on important issues on their agendas, to the benefit of
all their peoples and communities. Kosovo has joined
the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund
and has shown its determination to become a full-
fiedged and responsible member of the international
community. Kosovo's participation, particularly in
regional cooperation mechanisms, is important. We
therefore agree with the Secretary-General's
observation that by putting aside status considerations,
Belgrade and Pristina show flexibility in order to
enable Kosovo's representation in regional and
international mechanisms and forums that are essential
to the economic and democratic development and long-
term stability of the region.

At the same time, a democratic and prosperous
Serbia is vital in the Balkans. The international
community should continue to encourage and support
Serbia in its efforts to integrate with European and
Euro-Atlantic structures. In that vein, we welcome and
support the developing relations between Serbia and
the European Union. For our part, Turkey is pleased to
enjoy close and cooperative relations with Serbia, and
we are determined to take them even further, to the
benefit of both of our countries and that of the entire
region.

