The President (spoke in Chinese): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among the members of
the Security Council, I have been authorized to make
the following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to the sovereignty, unity,
independence and territorial integrity of Sudan.

"The Security Council strongly commends
and supports the efforts of the African Union to
achieve lasting peace in Darfur. It reiterates in the
strongest terms the need for all parties to the
conflict in Darfur to put an immediate end to the
violence and atrocities. It reaffirms its concern
that the persisting violence in Darfur might
further negatively affect the rest of the country as
well as the region, including the security of Chad,
and expresses its utmost concern over the dire
consequences of the prolonged conflict in Darfur
for the civilian population. It further reaffirms the
right of the displaced persons to return to their
homes if they wish to do so.

"The Security Council reiterates its full
support for the African Union-led inter-Sudanese
peace talks in Abuja on the conflict in Darfur, in
particular the tireless efforts of the Chief
Mediator, Dr. Salim Ahmed Salim, and his team.
It welcomes the developments so far in the
negotiations and urges the parties to make speedy
progress in concluding a Darfur peace accord.

"The Security Council further reiterates its
endorsement of the decision of 10 March 2006 of
the African Union Peace and Security Council
that an accord must be reached by 30 April 2006
and strongly urges that all parties make the
necessary efforts to reach an accord by this date.

"The Security Council recognizes that an
inclusive political settlement is key to peace in
Sudan and that the talks provide a mechanism to
achieve such a settlement in Darfur. The Council
the

reiterates its call to all parties to the conflict to
fulfil their commitments to conclude a peace
accord in the interest of the people of Darfur, and
Sudan as a whole.

"The Security Council calls on and expects
the parties in Abuja to consider, in good faith,
proposals to be made by the Mediator, with a
view to reaching peace, security and stability in
Darfur, and Sudan as a whole. It emphasizes that
working towards a positive outcome is a
collective responsibility of all the parties in the
conflict.

"The Security Council commends the
various partners and stakeholders for their
support to the African Union-led Abuja peace
process and encourages them, in particular the
United Nations, to continue supporting the parties
in the implementation of the peace accord."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2006/17.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.
