Mr. Kamau (Kenya): We thank you, Sir, for
convening this important debate and for circulating a
detailed concept note (S/2017/574, annex) to guide us.
I take the opportunity to congratulate China for its
elevation to the presidency of the Council for July and
commend you, Sir, for the manner by which you have
conducted its affairs.

We thank the Secretary-General for his detailed,
informative briefing on the issue and previous speakers
for their illuminating interventions, and we welcome
the statement by Mr. Smail Chergui, Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union (AU).

Kenya fully supports current efforts to strengthen
the cooperation and partnership between the African
Union and the United Nations on peace and security
in Africa. The cooperation is anchored in the Addis
Ababa Declaration of 2016, which inter alia, established
a ten-year capacity-building programme for the African
Union, modalities for collaboration between the two
organizations and the establishment of a framework
and institutions to enhance the partnership. That is
how the United Nations Support Office for the African
Union, the annual joint consultative meetings, the A3
coordination group in the Security Council, the joint
framework between the United Nations Support Office
for the African Union and the Peace and Security
Department of the African Union, and the Joint Task
Force on Peace and Security all came into being.

Now more than ever before, both institutions,
the United Nations and the AU, have achieved more
coordinated response and complementary action in
dealing with evolving challenges to peace and security
on the continent, ranging from violent conflict,
humanitarian crises, violent extremism and terrorism.
However, much more needs to be done to tackle the
challenges, capitalize on available opportunities and
consolidate the gains achieved so far.

Kenya believes that a well-funded and efficient
African Peace and Security Architecture is not only
an essential African priority, but also a great global
strategic necessity. We would like to stress that the four
financing options indicated in the report ofthe Secretary-
General (S/2017/454) on options for authorization and
support for African Union peace support operations,
namely, subvention to exceptional or emergency
circumstances, joint financing of a jointly developed
budget, the establishment of a United Nations support
office and the joint financing of a hybrid mission all
provide a solid basis for further deepening the existing
relationship. We urge the Security Council to endorse
and take the necessary steps towards the financing of
the African Union peace support operations. We also
need to be open to explore other options to ensure
predictable, reliable and sustainable funding for the
peace support operations of the African Union.

Deepening the AU-United Nations cooperation
to enhance the African capabilities in the peace and
security sphere is only one ofthe necessary instruments
to achieve sustainable peace in Africa. But, more
needs to be done to harness available opportunities
to achieve sustainable peace and development
that will complement the existing mechanisms for
cooperation. We believe that the implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development is key to
sustaining peace in Africa. It is important to harness
international cooperation in order to provide adequate
means of implementation to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals. This is how quality health and
education, decent jobs and infrastructure and good
governance and democracy will be entrenched in
Africa to enable it reap the dividends of peace through
sustained economic development.

Kenya believes that important initiatives such as
the transformative Chinese One Belt, One Road on
infrastructure; Power Africa on clean, renewable energy
by the United States; the new German investment
compacts for Africa on trade, peace and governance;
and others are solid opportunities to create solid
partnerships for achieving rapid implementation of
the Sustainable Development Goals that would ensure
sustainable peace and development in Africa.

Similarly, the United Nations, including the
Council, should be at the forefront of ensuring that
illicit financial flows from Africa, which bleed over
$203 billion out of the continent, exacerbated by a few
banks in the developed world, is curtailed to ensure
African resources remain in Africa to fight poverty,
disease and ignorance and thus, sustain the peace.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate Kenya's support
for current efforts to enhance African capabilities in
the area of peace and security through the strategic
partnership between the African Union and the United
Nations. We shall continue to support peace efforts by
the African Union as attested in our role within the
African Union Military Observer Mission in Somalia
in Somalia.
We shall continue to collaborate with other
African countries to strengthen conflict prevention,
management and resolution capacity of the African
Union regional entities, such as the East African
Community, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region of Africa and the Common Market for
Eastern and Southern Africa, all of which complement
the cooperation between United Nations and the AU
in peace and security. We support and pursue these
efforts for we are convinced that our stability and
economic well-being is closely tied to peace, stability
and economic well-being of the rest of the continent
and, indeed, of the entire the world.

