Mr. Mitra (Bangladesh): We thank the Egyptian
presidency of the Security Council for organizing
today's open debate. We also thank the distinguished
briefers for sharing their insights and recommendations.

Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
envisioned strategic partnerships with regional
arrangements as a critical element in the maintenance
of international peace and security at a time when such
arrangements were largely non-existent or at a nascent
stage. Due to a number of factors, the dynamics of
regional cooperation have evolved in the last 70 years,
but they have done so in a more mature and pragmatic
manner in some contexts than in others. It is to the
credit of the States members of the African Union
(AU) that they have been able to forge a robust regional
cooperation mechanism with the aim of managing
the challenges they face and embracing the abundant
opportunities that have presented themselves. The
African Peace and Security Architecture is a sure
signpost in that direction.

The United Nations and the African Union have
already built a sound platform for engagement and
cooperation in the peace and security sphere. The
experience garnered in the last 10 years has resulted
in the formation of a number of arrangements that
have been instrumental in enhancing synergy in the
two organizations' peace and security efforts. The
recent reviews of United Nations peace operations,
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture and the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) have further
affirmed this strategic direction, based on evidence
and analysis.

There are indeed certain challenges inherent in the
existing cooperation arrangements between the United
Nations and the African Union. One ofthe fundamental
concerns over burden-sharing in financing remains
open for further dialogue. As we see it, in this regard,
a flexible yet predictable approach will be crucial in
response to specific situations, without our necessarily
opting for a straitj acket arrangement that could prove to
be self-defeating in certain cases.

Bangladesh has always been a strong proponent of
regional cooperation and integration, within our own
region and beyond. Within our means, we stand ready
to further contribute to United Nations-African Union
cooperation in peace and security and development. In
this respect, I wish now to draw the Security Council's
attention to five possible areas in which we can enhance
our contribution.

First, as a committed troop- and police-contributing
country, we shall continue to maintain our forces and
stand-by capabilities so that we can rapidly respond to
United Nations peacekeeping deployments in Africa
and elsewhere. We are willing to provide any possible
technical assistance to African stand-by forces and
transition peacekeeping missions, as appropriate. We
shall continue to offer training to African peacekeepers,
building on the encouraging response we have received
over the years.

Secondly,wehavereadilyrespondedtoopportunities
for our troops and police to serve as early peacebuilders
in places where they have left their footprints. In order
to draw on and share the lessons and experience we
have acquired in socioeconomic development, crisis
management and institution-building, our Government
has decided to establish a peacebuilding centre for
conducting specialized training and research on
sustaining peace. In this process, we look forward
to building an effective interface with relevant AU
initiatives, such as the AU centre for post-conflict
reconstruction and development.

Thirdly, as the traditional spokesperson for the
least developed countries, Bangladesh has remained
at the forefront of the promotion of the interests of
most African countries, including those in or emerging
from conflicts. We wish to further deepen our trade,
investment and development cooperation with African
nations, on the basis of our complementarities and
comparative advantages.

Fourthly, we see merit in further engagement
with Africa to learn from on another's experience in
promoting the role of women in peace, security and
development. As we see a paradigm shift in our society's
attitudes towards the role of women in the public
sphere, including in conflict prevention and resolution,
we believe we have much to contribute to the evolving
conversation on the contributions of women and girls as
active change agents in their respective communities.

Fifthly and finally, we see criminal justice and
accountability as a critical element in promoting
national reconciliation in post-conflict societies. In
Bangladesh, through much trial and tribulation, we
have been working on developing a national criminal
justice system. We would be welcome the opportunity
to share our experience with interested countries in
Africa and beyond with a view to helping them to
strengthen their national judicial systems, in particular
to account for mass atrocity crimes committed during
wars and armed conflicts.

In conclusion, my delegation aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

