The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Jamaica.

The meeting of the Security Council at this high
level is an expression of our firm commitment to taking
appropriate measures aimed at the elimination of
international terrorism. We have, without hesitation,
joined in a strong condemnation of acts of terrorism,
which constitute a challenge to all of us and which
place an obligation on all of us to work together to
defeat it.

We recognize that the fight against international
terrorism will be won not by any single act of the
Security Council, but only through our determination
to act together. Jamaica therefore fully recognizes and
supports the premise that the most effective response to
international terrorism is full cooperation at the
international level. The United Nations is the only
forum which can effectively address this challenge to
all States and to all humanity. We must join together in
firm, decisive and broad-based actions to defeat this
scourge.

The Security Council, acting in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, has taken the lead in
adopting measures aimed at defeating the forces of
terror. In resolution 1368 (2001), we expressed our
readiness to take all necessary steps to respond to and
combat all forms of terrorism, in accordance with the
Council's responsibilities under the Charter of the
United Nations. By resolution 1373 (2001), we
reaffirmed in unequivocal language that any act of
international terrorism constitutes a threat to
international peace and security. We were decisive in
setting out a range of comprehensive measures for
Member States to undertake in combating terrorism.

All States are obliged to prevent and suppress the
financing of terrorist acts. All States must refrain from
providing any form of support and deny safe haven to
perpetrators of terrorism. It is obligatory for all States
to preclude anyone in their territories or jurisdictions
from in any way aiding and abetting the planning,
promoting, financing, executing or otherwise
supporting of acts of terrorism. We reaffirm that any
such support is contrary to the Charter of the United
Nations.

We must ensure that the many challenges that the
international community faces do not prevent us from
moving forward together in our fight to defeat
international terrorism. We must not allow terrorism in
any form or guise to breed instability and thereby
hinder our prospects for peace and development. To
avoid this, we must ensure the full implementation of
the measures provided in resolution 1373 (2001). The
Counter-Terrorism Committee has set out guidelines
which, if followed, will assist Member States in
carrying out their obligations and enhance our
collective capacity to fight and defeat terrorism.

However, not all States have an equal capacity to
fully implement the measures provided in resolution

1373 (2001), so the international community, led by
those with the capacity to do so, is enjoined to provide
the necessary financial and technical assistance to
those who need it to carry out their obligations
effectively. While it is the obligation of all States to
implement resolution 1373 (2001) fully, it is no less the
responsibility of States and regional and subregional
organizations with sufficient resources to provide all
necessary support. This is essential if we are to succeed
in the fight against international terrorism.

Secondly, there must be a renewed commitment
to international efforts aimed at addressing global
issues which give rise to terrorism. No cause or
grievance can justify reprehensible attacks on innocent
victims. But the problems of poverty; the prevalence of
regional conflicts; the denial of human rights, access to
justice for all and equal protection under the law; and
the lack of sustainable development and environmental
protection provide a fertile breeding ground for
terrorism and a cover for those who perpetrate terrorist
acts.

Thirdly, we must enhance coordination of efforts
on national, subregional, regional and international
levels to strengthen a global response to the serious
challenges posed by links between international
terrorism and transnational organized crime, illicit
drugs, money-laundering and illegal arms
trafficking - in particular the illegal trafficking in
small arms and light weapons, tools of terrorism.

Jamaica is fully committed to the fight against
terrorism and supports the work of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee. On Saturday, Jamaica signed the
International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism. My Government is
accelerating domestic action to achieve universality of
existing conventions and other instruments against
terrorism. We support ongoing efforts to elaborate the
draft comprehensive convention against terrorism, and
we urge all Member States to seek agreement on the
final draft during this session of the General Assembly.

We in the Caribbean reiterate our commitment to
work with the international community in the fight
against terrorism according to international law and
conventions. Acts of terrorism endanger innocent lives
and the dignity and security of human beings
everywhere. They threaten the stability and the social
and economic development of all States and undermine
global stability and prosperity. We must not resign
from our commitment and our individual and collective
obligation to defeat it.

I now resume my functions as President.

I now call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the People's Republic of China, His Excellency
Mr. Tang J iaxuan.

