Ms. Ziade (Lebanon): I thank you, Sir, for having
organized this meeting. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Wittig for ably chairing the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) in 2010 and to extend to the
current PBC Chairperson, Ambassador Gasana, my
sincere wishes for success in his endeavours.

Tangible results have been achieved through the
PBC's engagement in country-specific situations. From
the supportive role it played during the elections in
Burundi to the economic revitalization it helped foster
in Sierra Leone, the PBC has proved its added value as
the main platform for peacebuilding activities within
the United Nations system. Furthermore, steady
requests made by countries emerging from conflict for
inclusion on the Commission's agenda reflect the level
of expectation associated with it.

However, different levels of challenges remain in
the countries on the Commission's agenda. The review
of the peacebuilding architecture concluded this year
created valuable momentum on which we could build
to face those challenges in a comprehensive manner. In
this regard, we are pleased to note that the
Commission's report on its fourth session (S/2011/41)
takes into account the recommendations emanating
from the recently concluded review process. We also
note with appreciation the progress made in response
to a number of those recommendations. However, we
need to redouble our efforts to meet the expectations
generated by the review and its recommendations. In
our view, sustained attention needs to be given to the
progress achieved in the following vital areas.

First, the PBC must keep national ownership at
the forefront of its activities by involving populations
as quickly and extensively as possible within their own
governance architecture. Such engagement should be
context-sensitive and orient different actors and
partners towards re-establishing national capacities for
governance and service delivery, according to the
specific needs of the country concerned.

Secondly, it is essential to enhance synergy
between the PBC and the Peacebuilding Fund in a way
that ensures supply-driven funding that would support
broader peacebuilding objectives. Mutual commitments
between national stakeholders and their regional and
international partners need to be coupled with mutual
accountability.

Thirdly, it is also essential that all Organizational
Committee members and senior United Nations leaders
use their political weight and commitment to align
actors around common peacebuilding objectives.

Fourthly, the Security Council should make better
use of the advisory capacity of the PBC through a more
proactive and dynamic linkage between the
Commission and the Council, as has been stated and
pointed out by Ambassador Wittig. In that regard, we
encourage closer engagement by the Chairs of country
configurations with the Council, which can benefit
from their input and views during relevant country-
specific discussions.

It is important at this stage to build on previous
achievements in a way that the activities of the
Commission acquire a cumulative nature. Therefore,
we regard the road map of actions for 2011 as a living
document. We look forward to the forthcoming
progress report and to the practical approach to be
developed by the PBC to track the progress made in the
implementation of the PBC review's recommendations.

The evolution of the PBC in the coming years
will greatly influence the shape and direction that
peace and stability take in many post-conflict
countries. Let us provide it with the necessary tools for
the success of that undertaking.
