Mr. Vershinin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I have indeed asked to speak again and beg
the Council's indulgence for just a few minutes more.
First of all, I am very moved by the serious discussion
today and with my welcome, which is truly very
important to me. We are dealing seriously with every
issue related to the evolution of the situation in Syria
on the humanitarian, military and political settlement
fronts. I therefore want to say a few words, and partly
to respond to what has been said.

Clearly I cannot continue analysing or comparing
the situation in Syria to the Game ofThrones television
series, which I have not seen, but needless to say what
has been going on in Syria for a very long time is no
game. The reality is that a sovereign country and its
people are not playing at anything. They are trying to
survive and build a future for themselves.

In my statement I said that according to our estimate,
Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, an organization that the Council
has recognized as terrorist, now controls 99 per cent of
the Idlib de-escalation zone. I was expecting someone
to at least attempt to correct that number, but no one
did. I therefore want to ask once again exactly what
the sides in question here are. I was pleased to hear
condemnations of Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham's violations of
the ceasefire. But what I want to say is that there have
been no violations, because Hayat Tahrir Al- Sham is not
a party that has any obligation under anything to do with
the ceasefire. The ceasefire was established between the
Government and the armed opposition, and the Astana
format played a role in that. Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, the
Al-Nusra Front and Al-Qaida are all organizations that
we have all designated as terrorist and that we must
therefore repudiate. That is why I was surprised by the
references to the Government's relaunching or renewal
ofthe fight against the Al-Nusra Front. That is not some
whim, it is the duty of the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic to us, the international community, to
combat that terrorist group.

The hope was expressed here several times that
Idlib might not become a second Aleppo. I kept waiting
for somebody to say that they hoped Idlib would not
become a second Raqqa. I can assert that Idlib will not
become a second Raqqa, that dead city that the United
States-led international coalition bombed into the
ground. The Idlib operation is not about the large-scale
use of force. I want the Council to know that Russia
is very committed to all of its obligations under the
memorandum with Turkey, which has been frequently
cited today. That is therefore not going to happen , but at
the same time the fight against terrorism is necessary.

I have also wondered, in answer to questions that
have been asked today, what sort of message we are
sending, after today's discussion and those during
previous meetings, to the 3 million civilians in Idlib
who, as we have all acknowledged, are hostage to
organizations that we all call terrorist. As I understand
it, the message that many are trying to send is that
they will have to continue to put up with the situation
for now. I think that is wrong and creates terrible
disappointment among the civilians who are hearing
that message from the international community.

With regard to the remarks by a number of
representatives that, in the case of reports of the use of
chlorine, they will respond quickly and appropriately,
I would only urge that, rather than acting quickly, they
act intelligently and based on verified data, which
should unquestionably precede any action, especially if
such action could have seriously destabilizing effects.

