Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): My delegation would like to express its
appreciation and gratitude to you, Mr. President, for
having convened this open meeting on peacekeeping
operations and their relationship with the International
Criminal Court (ICC). I should also like to join you in
offering our warmest congratulation to the African
Group on the creation of the African Union.

Syria actively participated in all of the
preparatory meetings held by the United Nations with a
view to establishing the International Criminal Court.
Syria has signed the Statute and is still playing an
active role in all current preparatory meetings. We
reiterate our interest in maintaining all the elements of
international law. We further reaffirm the importance of
United Nations peacekeeping missions, working within
their mandate to maintain stability and ensure
conditions of calm in areas ravaged by conflict, in
accordance with Security Council resolutions.

The Secretary-General has made it clear in this
respect that there is no historical precedent for
peacekeeping forces perpetrating criminal acts and thus
violating international law such that they would be
accountable to the International Criminal Court. The
ICC, whose Statute was adopted in Rome and which
entered into force in July this year, has permanent
jurisdiction. The whole world has freely and
voluntarily created it to be just, fair and neutral and to
try, without discrimination or exception, those accused
of crimes against humanity, genocide, war crimes and
other acts of aggression, after all the documents
relevant to such acts of aggression are complete,
noticing that the provision of such documents is being
discussed currently.
We are fully confident that the troops in
peacekeeping forces will not perpetrate acts that will
result in their prosecution by the ICC. The thresholds
that need to be reached in order for a crime to fall
within the jurisdiction of the ICC were decided upon
by all the Members of the United Nations in the course
of the preparatory and intersessional meetings.

All cases before the ICC will be tried on the basis
of complementarity. That means that the Court will not
be allowed to begin work unless it is proved that the
national jurisdiction has collapsed. Prosecution will be
able to proceed in the country concerned, overriding
the jurisdiction of the ICC, unless it is clear that those
national courts have not fulfilled their duties in
accordance with the law - in other words, if those
national courts have not tried cases in a manner
commensurate with the nature of the crime.

Furthermore, there are numerous legal safeguards
in the Statute in case the jurisdiction of the ICC comes
into play. The Syrian Arab Republic therefore believes
that a suitable solution to this question must be found.
Peacekeeping forces and their mandates should not be
held hostage to arguments that do not concern them
directly. We encourage further dialogue between States
parties and signatories to the ICC Statute and those
countries that have specific concerns and
apprehensions so that such anxieties can be alleviated
and a legal solution found that is in keeping with the
provisions of the Rome Statute and that also preserves
the integrity of peacekeeping operations, since such
operations provide a lifeline for peace. Consequently,
we all are in duty bound to maintain those
peacekeeping operations and strengthen, enhance and
consolidate them.

In conclusion, we would stress once again that
the Security Council does not have the right to take
decisions under Chapter VII to amend an international
treaty that has entered into force, because this would
constitute a precedent that would destabilize and
undermine the international legal regime. Such an
action is also outside the purview of the Security
Council, whose principal task, as set out in the Charter,
is the maintenance of international peace and security.

The Security Council has discussed this question
at length for the past two weeks. We are still hopeful
and optimistic that the Council will be able to elaborate
a proposal that would pave the way for a solution to
this dilemma, within the framework of the safeguards
available, so as to maintain the credibility of the
Council while preserving the integrity of the Rome
Statute and, most important, of peacekeeping forces as
a whole.

