Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): I wish to congratulate Ukraine and you, Mr.
President, and to wish you every success in your
presidency. I also wish to recognize the efficient
presidency of Tunisia.

We are discussing one of the most complicated
and recurrent items on the Security Council agenda.
Dozens of resolutions have been adopted that clearly
establish the will of the majority of Member States to
move towards a definitive and just solution of the item.

Just recently, to mention a few examples, Security
Council resolution 1322 (2000) and General Assembly
resolution ES-10/7 were adopted, which condemned
the excessive use of force by the Israeli armed forces
and called for the implementation of resolution 1322
(2000). The Human Rights Commission adopted a
resolution in this regard on 19 October 2000. The
Economic and Social Council adopted a resolution on
Palestine, which is contained in the report of the
Human Rights Commission. Furthermore, the
Secretary-General has also continued his tireless efforts
in the search for solutions to the present crisis.

Nonetheless, it is very frustrating to acknowledge
the fact that despite all these efforts, Israeli aggression
continues. The Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949
continues to be trampled; the excessive and
indiscriminate use of force does not stop; and every
day new Palestinian victims increase the martyrology
of that suffering people. Over 400 dead and several
thousand injured, the large majority being innocent
Palestinian civilians, clearly reflect the tragic human
cost of these almost six months of violence, begun as a
result of the provocative visit of 28 September to Al-
Haram al-Sharif.

The border closures of the Palestinian territories
and other acts with serious economic consequences are
also flagrant violations of the human rights of the
Palestinian population, which should be severely
condemned. The Palestinian National Authority
requires the urgent assistance of the international
community to avoid economic collapse.

If Israel had complied with the many Security
Council resolutions on the question of Palestine, the
critical situation we are witnessing today in occupied
territories would not be taking place now.
At the Security Council meeting held on 10
November, the President of the Palestinian National
Authority described in detail the deterioration of the
situation and clearly explained the reasons for which an
observer mission of protection should be immediately
deployed. My delegation wishes to reiterate once again
the need to deploy the observer force as soon as
possible.

The Israeli policies and practices that deny the
legitimate needs and aspirations of the Palestinian
people will never be compatible with a legitimate
peace process, based on Security Council resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973). A just and lasting peace
cannot be achieved in the Middle East until the
Palestinian people exercise their legitimate right to
establish an independent State with East Jerusalem as
its capital, until all the occupied Arab territories are
returned, and until Israel withdraws from the Gaza
Strip, the West Bank and the Syrian Golan to the 4 June
1967 border.

There will not be a lasting peace until the
provocations in southern Lebanon end, until all Arabs
arbitrarily and unjustly imprisoned, detained and
frequently tortured in Israeli prisons are released, and
until the illegal Israeli settlements are dismantled
pursuant to Security Council resolution 465 (1980).

It is striking how some Council members, so
ready to promote the idea of deploying humanitarian
intervention, with or without Security Council
authorization, when they decide that human rights
situations must be remedied, in this case work to avoid
enabling the Council or the General Assembly to act in
exercise of the powers conferred on them by the
Charter. Nothing could better illustrate what interests
are actually served by the calls for humanitarian
intervention.

We all know why a different standard is applied
in the case of Israel. This is the typical case of what
happens when the United States, a permanent member
of the Security Council and an ally of Israel, looking
after its national interests, arbitrarily uses its
privileges. Hypocrisy and double standards continue to
prevail, sheltered by the anachronistic and
antidemocratic privilege of the veto.

As long as the United Nations does not assume
the direct and irreplaceable responsibility assigned to it
by the Charter and by the will of the international
community, and as long as it is hegemonic and narrow
domestic policy objectives that determine the course of
negotiations, there will not be peace. Nor will there be
peace if the Israeli Government does not change its
policy of colonial occupation and its flagrant, massive
and systematic violation of the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people, and if it refuses to continue the
negotiation process and to fulfil the commitments
undertaken.

Cuba commends the position held by the Security
Council members who are also members of the Non-
Aligned Movement, as well as of the other Council
members who have been making sincere efforts to try
to have this Council fulfil its duties.

Cuba calls on the Security Council to act without
further delay and in accordance with the seriousness of
this crisis and its serious responsibilities. This body
must immediately establish an observer force to protect
the civilian Palestinian population. It must urge Israel
to immediately cease its use of force and to implement
the many resolutions on the question of the Middle
East adopted by the Security Council and the General
Assembly. This is the only path to a just and lasting
peace.

