Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would very much like to
thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Burundi, Mr. Kafando, and Ambassador Jiirg Lauber
for their very useful briefings today. I would like to
underscore that we fully support their efforts to achieve
durable peace and sustainable development in Burundi.

Today's briefings underlined the precarious nature
of the current political, economic and humanitarian
situation in the country and continued reports of
grave human rights violations and abuses. The attack
on 11 May, which many have mentioned, killed 26
people in Ruhagarika and further demonstrates that the
security situation remains fragile.

The referendum on 17 May was held against that
backdrop. We note that the Government allowed some
campaigning during the campaign period. However,
reports of an overall climate of intimidation, including
the closure of certain media outlets in the lead-up
to the referendum, demonstrate that conditions for
reconciliation and long-lasting political peace and
stability are still largely absent. The spirit and key
provisions of the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement for Burundi therefore remains relevant and
central. They constitute a pillar for peace and stability
in Burundi and the entire region. An inclusive political
resolution of the current conflict must be found
through dialogue. A lack thereof will negatively affect
upcoming elections in 2020 and the socioeconomic
and humanitarian situation. We fully support greater
involvement in East African Community-led mediation
efforts under President Museveni and former President
Mkapa. We expect the Government to commit fully to
the inter-Burundian dialogue.

The efforts of the Burundi configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) are equally
important. The PBC remains a unique platform for
discussing the situation in the country with Burundi.
We strongly support Ambassador Lauber's approach
and efforts and hope that the dialogue on socioeconomic
issues will contribute to increased confidence between
Burundi and its partners. In the short term, addressing
the humanitarian situation in Burundi is of paramount
importance. Urgent action is needed to alleviate
immediate suffering rooted in issues such as food
insecurity and protection challenges.

Lastly, continued reports of grave human rights
violations and abuses in Burundi remain deeply
worrisome. Sweden calls on Burundian authorities to
ensure that the three human rights experts mandated by
the Human Rights Council can carry out their work in
the country unhindered. In addition, we urge Burundi to
swiftly agree on a memorandum of understanding with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, as well as with the African Union,
with regard to its human rights and military observers.
Upholding and respecting human rights and ensuring
accountability are critical, nurture trust, strengthen
dialogue and reconciliation - and ultimately contribute
to durable peace.

