Mr. Bessho (Japan): First of all, I would like to
thank the United States for showing strong leadership
in preparing resolution 2304 (2016). Japan supported
the resolution in the strong belief that action is urgently
needed after the shocking fighting in Juba last month,
and strengthening the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) is the most effective response to
address the situation.

I should like to take this opportunity to emphasize
three points.

First, the resolution establishes a regional protection
force within UNMISS. Japan, as a country contributing
troops to UNMISS, appreciates the willingness and the
preparedness expressed by countries in the region to
deploy personnel. Japan believes that this new force
will contribute significantly to South Sudan's stability.
Needless to say, the basic principles of peacekeeping,
including consent of the parties, must be observed
and maintained.

For the smooth deployment of this force and
for the force to be effective, close coordination and
consultation among the Transitional Government of
National Unity of South Sudan, the countries of the
region and the United Nations should continue. We must
also emphasize that hostile acts, threats and harassment
towards UNMISS personnel, including obstruction of
their freedom of movement, are unacceptable.

UNMISS personnel are on the ground in order
to restore peace and stability for the people of South
Sudan. The Security Council should closely monitor the
situation and remain committed to ensuring stability on
the ground.

Secondly, the implementation of the August
2015 Agreement is vital to achieving lasting peace
and sustainable development in South Sudan. Japan
continues to urge the political leaders and uniformed
forces of South Sudan to fully abide by the ceasefire
and cessation of hostilities and to seriously work
on the implementation of the Agreement. In this
regard, Japan commends the efforts made by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, the
Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development and hopes to see further efforts to
this end.
Finally, I wish to return to the reason we are all
gathered here today: our commitment to the people of
South Sudan. Five years ago, the Council witnessed
the birth of South Sudan as the world's newest country.
Sadly, there was no room to celebrate during this year's
Independence Day. We must help South Sudan achieve
its promise by standing by the country when it needs
us the most. It is Japan's sincere hope for South Sudan
that it will achieve peace and stability and make great
strides on the path towards development. Japan has
supported South Sudan since its independence and
pledges to continue to be a partner in its development
and reconciliation, as a true friend to its people. We
must all work together to ensure that by this time next
year, we are able to celebrate progress and stability in
South Sudan on the occasion of its sixth anniversary.

