Mr. Cardi (Italy): At the outset, as others have
done, on behalf of the Government of Italy, I would
like to express, through Ambassador Maria Emma
Mejia Ve'lez, my deepest condolences to the people
and the Government of Colombia for the victims of the
landslide in the city of Mocoa, which left more than
260 dead and many more missing or injured. Italy
immediately activated emergency funding to contribute
to international assistance efforts.

I would also like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Colombia and the
Secretary-General himself for their report (S/2017/252)
and for their efforts in fulfilling the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in Colombia. Allow me to
make three brief remarks.

First, we strongly support the Final Peace Agreement
and commend the firm commitment of the parties to
finally bring to an end to the decades-long conflict. The
historical process we are witnessing would have been
unthinkable without the ownership and leadership of
the Colombian parties. We look forward to the Security
Council mission in May to directly convey this message
to the authorities and the people of Colombia.

Secondly, we encourage the parties to intensify
their efforts to implement the Peace Agreement
within the agreed deadline. It is important not to
lose the momentum. In that respect, we welcome the
commitment of the parties to complete the surrender
and registration of weapons within the agreed timeline.
We also welcome the measures established by the Peace
Agreement on legal, security and socioeconomic issues
related to reintegration.

Thirdly, reconciliation and reintegration are the

cornerstones of a durable and sustainable settlement.

They are a precondition to build confidence, to

generate an inclusive political dialogue and to bring the

concrete dividends of peace to the populations in terms

of security and improved living conditions. We are

aware of the challenges ahead and stand ready to assist
the Government and the parties in this endeavour, both
bilaterally and at the international level.

In that regard, Italy firmly supports the European
Union action for post-conflict stabilization and
development in Colombia, including through the
European Union Trust Fund for Colombia, to which
we have contributed €3 million. I also recall our long-
standing contribution to United Nations Mine Action
Service programmes on humanitarian de-mining
and peacebuilding and to Organization of American
States activities on mine-risk education, psychological
assistance and rehabilitation of the victims.

I would like to conclude by commending the efforts
made by the authorities for protecting and assisting
women and children involved in the conflict, as also
recognized by the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict in its recently adopted conclusions on
the situation ofchildren and armed conflict in Colombia.

