Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I thank the Secretary-
General and the other briefers for their comprehensive
presentations. I also commend the United Kingdom for
providing a timely opportunity to discuss the further
international efforts required to resolve the conflict in
the world's youngest nation.

Basically, and tragically, almost all the worst fears
about the fate of the country have become a reality.
South Sudan is on the verge of chaos. Millions have
been displaced from their homes. The economy is in
ruins. Hunger and poverty are rampant. As the South
Sudanese people suffer, the warring parties continue
to pursue their goals by military means. Killings,
abductions, rape, looting and the burning of homes
now constitute a horrifying daily routine in South
Sudan. Yet in recent months the situation has sunk
to unprecedented new lows, with reports of growing
ethnic violence and declarations of famine in some
parts of the country. Leer county in Unity state is just
one example. It is one of the epicentres of the famine,
where more than 100,000 people face imminent
starvation. Villages are deserted. Gunmen from both
sides have torched crops and chased farmers from their
fields. People are hiding in swamps. They eat water-lily
roots and the occasional fish that they manage to catch.
There are no schools and no health services. There is
nothing but the fear of losing the only thing that still
belongs to them - their lives. It is shameful that all
of this is happening in the twenty-first century. It is a
disgrace that we, the international community, have not
managed to prevent it from happening. It is an outrage
that the South Sudanese political leaders have failed
to shoulder their responsibilities for their own people.
Time is not on our side. But as long as we do not stand
by idly, that human tragedy can still be averted.

How can we do that? We must shake up the deadly
status quo and divert the energies currently squandered
on war towards advancing peace. Public statements
of condemnation and threats of consequences without
action will not help. Both sides largely discount them
as barking with no bite. Biting requires a get-tough
approach that might truly be able alter the calculations
and influence behaviour. If we are to stop the fighting,
the flow of arms must be stopped. If we are to prevent
public funds from being used for personal purposes,
they must be made inaccessible to certain individuals.
If we are to stop attacks on civilians, the perpetrators
must be held accountable.

That is why Ukraine believes that an arms embargo
and additional targeted sanctions are still relevant if we
are to prevent South Sudan from sliding into war and
chaos. We do not believe that such measures will be a
panacea. However, we do believe that they will reduce
the parties' ability to continue fuelling the conflict.
That will help to silence the military equipment they
already have and stop desperately needed financial
resources being spent on new weaponry.

Ukraine firmly believes that the conflict in South
Sudan has no military solution. An inclusive political
dialogue within the framework of the 2015 peace
agreement is the only way to restore peace and stability
in the country. In that regard, we welcome the initiative
of the Government of South Sudan to launch a national
dialogue aimed at promoting national reconciliation and
inter-communal harmony among all groups in South
Sudan. However, for it to be credible and effective, the
hostilities must cease immediately, the rule of law must
be restored and humanitarian aid must be allowed to
reach those in need.

Finally, I would like to express Ukraine's full support
to the Secretary-General's commitment to working
closely with the African Union, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development member States and other
partners to ensure inclusivity in the implementation of
the peace agreement and the national dialogue process.
As one of the troop and police contributors to the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan, Ukraine will
continue to actively back United Nations peacekeeping
and peacebuilding efforts in that fragile country.

