Mr. Laher (South Africa): South Africa expresses
its appreciation to Special Coordinator Robert Serry for
his briefing to the Council and for the statements by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the State of Palestine
and the Permanent Representative of Israel.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be delivered by the representative of Iran on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.

We have served as a member ofthe Security Council
for the past two years as an elected member, during
which time we had the opportunity to take part in
discussions on today's subject at least 24 times. Perhaps
the question that needs to be asked at this juncture is
this: "What has really happened in the past 24 months,
or the last few years for that matter?" Our objective
response to that question is that over the past few years
we have seen the following: the continued occupation
of Palestinian land; continued insecurity for the people
of Palestine and Israel; the continued blockade of
Gaza; continued conflict in Gaza; continued rocket
fire into southern Israel; the continued construction
of the separation wall; continued threat to regional
and international peace and security; and continued
inaction by the Security Council.

That is not an impressive record for the United
Nations in general, and for the Security Council in
particular, on whose watch the situation has deteriorated
for decades on end without any hope of a lasting
solution. In November of last year, the majority of States
Members of the United Nations, including the majority
of the members of the Security Council, welcomed
Palestine to the United Nations as an observer State.

Last year, the Security Council had the opportunity
to affirm Palestine's statehood, but unfortunately it
failed to do so. In anticipation of reaction to Palestine's
admission to the United Nations, we had warned
against any acts of retribution; but, no sooner had we
welcomed Palestine into the United Nations fold, that
Israel announced that it would withhold Palestinian
tax revenues. That retributive reaction is illegal and
immoral, as it constitutes collective punishment of
the Palestinian population and negatively affects the
effectiveness of the Palestinian Authority, which
is already facing serious challenges with regard to
institution-building and the provision of myriad of
public goods. We condemn that act and call on Israel
to respect the decision on Palestine as it, in fact, is a
positive step towards the realization of the two-State
solution.

South Africa condemns the ongoing settlement
activities by Israel in the occupied Palestinian
territories. The continued construction of settlements
seriously undermines the two-State solution by isolating
East Jerusalem and by threatening the viability and
territorial contiguity of a Palestinian State. Those
illegal settlements further constitute a major stumbling
block in the resumption of direct negotiations, and
therefore in the achievement of sustainable peace. It is
now high time that the Council speaks with one voice
against thpse counter-productive actions. We condemn
all acts of violence regardless of where they come from,
as they undermine the viability of a two-State solution.

Despite calls on Israel to lift the blockade of
Gaza, it continues to execute its policies in the enclave
with impunity, without any action from the Council.
Israel must stop those policies, as they are contrary
to international law and render peace elusive. As we
all know, at the heart of the confrontation between the
Palestinians in Gaza and the Israelis, lie the latter's
continued illegal occupation of Palestinian land,
especially the continuing blockade of Gaza.

The ongoing efforts of Egypt in reconciling the
Palestinian parties are indeed commendable. We
encourage the Palestinian parties to forge ahead with
their reconciliation efforts in order to consolidate
the gains made, and act in unity for the permanent
liberation of the people of Palestine. We cannot
overemphasize enough the importance of the unity of
the Palestinian people as they seek to build a new and
prosperous nation, whose complete affirmation hinges
on the implementation of the two-State solution.

With no peace on the horizon and the Quartet not
making any significant progress, we maintain the view
that the Quartet's utility should be urgently evaluated.
As a member of the Quartet, the Members of the United
Nations have an obligation to ask questions about the
body's usefulness and the role of the United Nations in
this body.

With regard to the situation in Syria, we are
deeply concerned about the further deterioration of the
security and humanitarian situation, including violence
against the Palestinian refugees in the country. South
Africa continues to maintain that the only solution to
the Syrian crisis is an all-inclusive process of national
dialogue, free from any form of intimidation, violence
or outside interference aimed at regime change. Syria
requires a political transition that reflects the will of
its people. In that regard, we once again discourage the
arming of all parties, including the opposition.

In conclusion, we believe that in our search for a
solution to the Palestinian question we should not lose
sight of the broader regional dynamics. We therefore
call on the Council and the rest of the international
community to accelerate constructive efforts towards
the holistic resolution of the Middle East crisis,
including the Lebanese and Syrian tracks.

