Mr. Eitel (Germany): We welcome the improvements
outlined in the addendum to the Secretary-General's report
on the United Nations Support Mission in Haiti (UNSMIH)
of 12 November 1996 (S/l996/813/Add.l), especially in
regard to the improvement of the security situation in Haiti.
Fortunately, the rebuilding of the police force has slowly
but surely acquired its own momentum, as the Secretary-
General stated in his report.

 

Moreover, we commend the Canadian Government
for its initiative and active role in the operation. We also
commend the efforts of President Preval and his
Government, who are showing their determination to
consolidate democracy and the rule of law, to make the
necessary institutional changes and to address the social
and economic problems that the people of Haiti have to
face. Germany welcomes those commitments, as well as
the determination of the Haitian authorities, to uphold
human rights and to ensure the accountability of human
rights violators.

However, we continue to be concerned that, as the
report of the Secretary-General (S/1996/813) states, over
the last year common crime among Haiti's civilian
population has increased considerably, including some
forms of dangerous criminality such as drug-trafficking
and the greater use of firearms.

We therefore agree with the report's conclusion that
so far the Haitian National Police has not reached the
level of experience and confidence necessary to tackle
successfully the problems created by previous members
of the security forces, nor to deal with the day-to-day
problems a police force usually encounters. It is clear,
therefore, that UNSMIH's military element is, for the
time being, a key factor in the ability to contain the
danger of destabilization.

We urge the Government of Haiti, but also the
United Nations agencies, to implement a plan of action
for the reintegration of former soldiers of the disbanded
armed forces of Haiti into civil society. To neglect that
issue is to neglect an important aspect of peace-building
in an emerging, socially balanced democratic society.

We strongly condemn the fact that those small
groups of former members of the Haitian armed forces,
acting in concert with political figures associated with the
previous undemocratic regime, still have access to
funding and weapons. Recent information suggests that a
number of those groups may be using neighbouring
countries as a base. Those groups are therefore still in a
position to threaten and damage Government installations
and infrastructure, and are believed to be planning future
challenges to the democratically elected Government of
President Preval, seeking to undermine its efforts to
stabilize democratic structures and promote economic
development.

We are also deeply concerned that judicial reform in
Haiti is not keeping pace with the progress already

 

achieved in reforming the Haitian National Police. When 80
per cent of the people incarcerated nationwide are in
pre-trial detention, it seems obvious that the court system
is largely unable to process judicial cases adequately. We
therefore urge CIVPOL, the civilian police component of
UNSMIH, to concentrate resources and expertise more on
the fundamental reform of the justice system.

The members of the Security Council, in agreeing to
the final extension of UNSMIH's mandate, have proved
once again that the international community is willing to
cooperate with and support the efforts of the Haitian
Government to rebuild the country.
Germany has actively supported the efforts of the
international community to consolidate the democratic and
economic restructuring of Haiti. Bilaterally, we have
earmarked almost DM. 110 million for 1996 for economic
cooperation with Haiti. The main focus of that cooperation
is a food security programme.

We truly hope that the final extension of UNSMIH's
mandate will create the necessary security conditions in
Haiti for the transition to a successful post-conflict peace-
building phase. On the basis of those considerations,
Germany will vote in favour of this draft resolution.

