Mr. Cerdenas (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): At the outset, as is customary, I should like to
welcome you, Sir, to the presidency of the Council. I
wish also to thank the Mission of Nigeria, led by
Ambassador Gambari, for the outstanding work it did last
month.

This is obviously not the first time that the Security
Council is meeting to address violations of humanitarian
law and human rights committed in the territory of the
former Yugoslavia. However, it is one of the few times
that we have to discuss those reprehensible acts in the
context of apparently propitious circumstances for those
violations to end, since talks are under way among the
parties that enable us to cherish that hope.

The Government of Argentina can only vigorously
condemn the incredible reluctance of the Bosnian Serb
authorities to allow humanitarian bodies access to the
persons and places which they feel to be relevant to
investigations into alleged violations of human rights and
humanitarian law committed in Zepa, Srebrenica and
Banja Luka. Inasmuch as they imply the commission of
acts of depravity, such violations can hardly be committed
with the general consent of the population. They are
almost always committed by deviant minorities who do
not respect the minimal constraints of civilized
coexistence. It is those minorities whom the Serbian
people must isolate rapidly if they are to comply fully
with the principles that shape the international
community.

As several delegations in this Council have said on
previous occasions, the reluctance of the Bosnian Serb
authorities to allow the humanitarian entities to act raises
in itself strong presumptions against them. It is that
reluctance of the Serbian authorities in Bosnia that has
made it impossible reliably to ascertain the commission of
these acts or to identify their perpetrators. As a result, the
uncertainty and climate of suspicion today surrounding
the events in Zepa, Srebrenica and Banja Luka are among
the elements that are severely complicating the peace
talks.

It is within those same criteria and with a similarly
intense concern that we are also following the sad events

 

occurring in the territories of Croatia formerly occupied by
Serbs. The differences that may exist in the ways in which
people are forced to leave a region in which they live
should not make us forget that the aim pursued in all the
practices being addressed here and in the resolution that we
have just adopted seems ever to be the same: "ethnic
cleansing".

On previous occasions, we have also said that, like
other delegations, we have not felt comfortable with having
to deal with a "package" of presumed violations of human
rights committed by one party or another in a given
conflict. In this respect, we reiterate that the values
embodied in rules of this kind are not ideally suited to
analysis or discussion in a "package". The violation of
these rules by one of the parties neither justifies nor
remotely warrants the commission of similar violations by
another.

It is clear that the alleged violations of human rights
and humanitarian law in Bosnia and Croatia are of such
magnitude that one cannot deny or quash their political
implications or their consequences for legal responsibility.

