The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassadors Wittig, Puri and Sangqu for their
briefings.

I shall now make a statement in my national
capacity as representative of France.

I should like at the outset to associate myself with
the statement to be made later by the representative of
the delegation of the European Union (EU) on behalf
of the EU.

International terrorism remains a serious threat to
international peace and security. The death of Osama
Bin Laden does not mean the end of Al-Qaida. The
relentless fight against those criminals must continue
and involve all States Members of the United Nations.

The United Nations must remain mobilized
through the work of its three sanctions committees.
First, the sanctions regime set up in 1999 against
Al-Qaida and the Taliban must continue to evolve,
which will not weaken but strengthen it. The upcoming
review of resolution 1904 (2009) will provide an
opportunity for us to assess the effectiveness of
sanctions, their adaptation to a constantly evolving
threat and their legitimacy. To that end, we must take
into account the changing relationship between the
Taliban and Al-Qaida over the past 10 years and their
respective objectives. We should like also to see the
sanctions regime have a more direct impact on the
quest for a political solution to the conflict in
Afghanistan. Thus we wish to bolster the legitimacy of
the current regime by responding to a number of
criticisms, some of which are justified, by improving
the mechanisms set up pursuant to resolution 1904
(2009).

Secondly, 10 years after its creation, the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) is continuing to make
progress in the fight against terrorism at the global
level, even as States continue to face new challenges. I

11-3390]
should like to touch on two areas in which the
Committee, as a result of the support of the Counter-
Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED), adds value
that is recognized by all: border protection and the
fight against the financing of terrorism.

In that context, the regional workshop held
recently by the CTED in Nouakchott with the
participation of practitioners from the Sahelian region
opens the door to improved regional cooperation in an
area that is especially affected by terrorism. The
combat against terrorism also requires that many States
improve their technical capacities. France is making a
contribution in this area and is determined to support
the work of the CTED in this field.

Thirdly, with respect to the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), I, too,
should like to welcome the unanimous adoption of
resolution 1977 (2011), which extends for a further 10
years the mandate of the Committee. The Council is
thus sending a clear and unified signal on the need for
long-term action by the international community to
combat the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery.

Security Council resolution 1977 (2011) also
provides the Committee with the means to more
effectively fulfil its mandate. These include the
strengthening of the Group of Experts charged with
assisting it; the five-year review mechanism; and the
drawing up of a list of specific priorities in the area of
the sharing of experiences and best practices and in the
promotion of an active dialogue, including on the
ground, between the Committee and States regarding
their implementation efforts.

We also welcome the fact that resolution 1977
(2011) strengthens the work of the Committee in the
field of assistance, an area to which we attach
particular importance. France is thus ready, in
cooperation with the Office for Disarmament Affairs,
to host a conference in Paris on assistance. We must
not only raise awareness about resolution 1540 (2004)
but also focus our efforts on its concrete
implementation by all Member States. Resolution 1977
(2011) provides us with a clear road map for the next
years. It is now up to us to use these new tools, and we
intend to work actively in that respect with the other
members of the Committee.

Finally, coordination is important. That is why
France lends its full support to the work of the

11-3390]
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, which
will continue to coordinate the work of various actors,
including the three Committees we are dealing with
today.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

