Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, first of all, I would like to echo your
words today regarding this being Ambassador
Khalilzad's last meeting as the Permanent
Representative of the United States to the United
Nations. I would like to highlight his contributions to
the work at the Organization and the humility and
respect that he has always shown towards his
counterparts from all States Members of the United
Nations, regardless of whether they were in agreement
or disagreement. I wish him every success in his future
endeavours.

Mexico supports resolution 1863 (2009), aware
of the urgent need for the Security Council to adopt
measures to address the deteriorating situation in all
areas on the ground and the challenges they represent,
after so many years and frustrating attempts to achieve
the stabilization of Somalia and its viability as an
independent State.

We firmly believe that only through a
comprehensive approach to the conflict will we be able
to establish the conditions for peace in Somalia, end
the widespread violence and return hundreds of
thousands of internally displaced persons and refugees
to their homes.

Mexico acknowledges the important contribution
of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
to peace and stability in the country and the
commitment shown by the Governments of Uganda
and Burundi.
The security situation of international personnel
and the Organization in Somalia has worsened
significantly. Mexico condemns the attacks against
them, which unfortunately have led to many deaths.
Mexico expresses its deep concern over the
deterioration of the humanitarian situation and over the
very serious crimes that have been committed against
civilians, and reaffirms the importance of the fight
against impunity.

We urgently appeal to all the parties to respect
international humanitarian law, human rights and the
rights of refugees. We also urge the parties to
contribute to strengthening the political process and to
honour the commitments agreed upon in the Djibouti
agreement, which forms the basis for a settlement of
the conflict.

Today's resolution is an initial step towards the
possible establishment of a peacekeeping operation to
replace AMISOM. In that regard, we look forward to
the report of the Secretary-General requested through
the resolution on progress in the political situation and
events on the ground as the minimal conditions
necessary for the deployment of a peacekeeping
operation. We will also be awaiting the information to
be provided by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and other relevant authorities to the
Security Council on those aspects that are crucial to the
implementation of the mandate of a future
peacekeeping operation that might genuinely promote
stability in Somalia.

Mexico highlights the importance for
neighbouring countries and countries of the region, in
coordination with the United Nations, to step up their
efforts to fight the illicit trafficking of weapons and
munitions to armed groups in Somalia. In this respect, I
reiterate the commitment of my country to the peace
process, which will certainly be reflected through
Mexico's work as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 751
(1992) concerning Somalia, a fundamental element of
the efforts of the Organization to achieve a climate of
peace and lasting security.

