Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to address the
Security Council at this undoubtedly decisive juncture
in our collective involvement in Mali. Indeed, if the
Council decides today that the security situation
prevailing in the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
areas of responsibility allow for a transfer of authority
from the African-led International Support Mission in
Mali (AFISMA) to MINUSMA on 1 July, MINUSMA
will eventually become the third largest United Nations
peacekeeping operation. MINUSMA will operate
under robust rules of engagement. Its military and
police forces will absorb the majority of the AFISMA
forces. There will be a grace period of four months
to allow military and police units to strengthen their
contributions and incorporate the capabilities requested
by the United Nations in terms of staffing, training
and equipment. The support of international partners
will be very important in that regard. I would note
that the United Nations continues to receive additional
commitments from potential contributors, enabling us
to reach the maximal authorized personnel levels and
thus respond to the Mission's needs. But we still face
critical gaps, especially with regard to enablers and
force multipliers.

MINUSMA will therefore play a key role in the
stabilization of Mali and the protection of its citizens
threatened by insecurity in the north of the country.
Political engagement with Malian actors in order to
promote dialogue and reconciliation between and
among communities remains the cornerstone of our
involvement, as was the case last week during the recent
negotiations in Ouagadougou. MINUSMA will also be
very active in promoting human rights and support for
the restoration of the authority of the State, including
in the areas of justice and strengthening the rule of law.
MINUSMA troops and police officers will help create
a safe environment that is conducive to stabilization
by deploying from major cities in northern Mali. They
will conduct patrols, both alone and together with the
Malian defence and security forces. MINUSMA troops
will be mobile and will conduct operations across
a wide area on the basis of integrated analysis and
information-sharing with partners. A limited presence
will be maintained in Bamako, and all MINUSMA
operations will take into account the need to minimize
the risk to civilians.

In preparation for the transition, AFISMA
has continued to gradually assume operational
responsibility for several areas in northern Mali,
as Operation Serval has begun to draw down. As of
today, 25 June, the strength of AFISMA stands at
6,148 troops, with personnel deployed in the towns and
regions of Timbuktu, Gao, Menaka, Tessalit, Aguelhok,
Douentza, Diabaly and now Kidal.

Since its establishment on 25 April, MINUSMA
has begun to implement its mandate in terms ofpolitical
good offices, electoral support, human rights and, in
close cooperation with United Nations agencies, funds
and programmes, support for the restoration of State
authority. The MINUSMA military component will be
built up in the coming months. On 1 July, MINUSMA
will have an initial operational capability, including in
the force headquarters. The Force Commander arrived
in Mali today and the Deputy Force Commander
deployed last week. The two sector headquarters in Gao
and Timbuktu will also be operational soon, with staff
for all headquarters to be further and quickly built up
over the next two months. The two Sector Commanders
have been recruited and will deploy shortly. By the end
of July, we expect 100 staff officers to be on the ground
and all headquarters to be fully staffed by the end of
August. I can therefore state that we anticipate reaching
full operational capability by 31 December.

I would note that some have raised concerns about
the transition of the AFISMA Chadian troops as Blue
Helmets, given Chad's listing by the Secretary-General
among the countries that have allowed child recruitment
in their armed forces. Clearly, the Government of Chad

will need to comply with and implement the five short-
term measures of its action plan to end the recruitment of
child soldiers within the four-month grace period Ijust
mentioned, as agreed with the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict. Let me assure the Council that the United
Nations is making every effort to screen the Chadian
contingent that is to be re-hatted and ensure that no
troops under 18 are among them, as well as enhance
our efforts on training on child protection issues.

With respect to the police, we intend to re-hat
the three formed police units currently deployed with
AFISMA in Bamako, Gao and Timbuktu on 1 July,
if the Council so decides. Assessments of those units
are currently being conducted. Twenty additional
individual police officers from AFISMA will also be
re-hatted, while 10 new police officers are expected
on the ground by 1 July. Two additional formed police
units and 50 individual police officers are expected to
be deployed in August.

Training will play a key role in managing the
transition in Mali from AFISMA to MINUSMA. We
are deploying a mobile team to Mali today to conduct
initial training for AFISMA personnel to undergo the
transition to MINUSMA. Its immediate focus will
be on the officer ranks, so as to ensure that the most
important messages regarding the mandate, as well as
the posture, attitude and conduct of the United Nations
force, reach the troops deployed throughout the country.

The majority of our civilian, police and military
staff will be in the north. We are currently looking at
establishing civilian field offices in Timbuktu and Gao
and, very quickly, a small presence in Kidal to support
the implementation of the preliminary agreement.
We will also maintain a military presence in the key
population centres, defined for the purposes of the
mandate as Douentza and Diabaly; the key cities of
Timbuktu, Gao and Kidal; and the towns of Menaka
and Tessalit. Our emphasis will be on a mobile force
able to project influence across the wide geographical
areas in the north.

I would reiterate that we continue to seek pledges for
important outstanding capabilities, including medium-
utility helicopters, armed helicopters, intelligence,
information operations and special forces. We are
counting more than ever before on the continued support
of both our traditional and our new troop-contributing
countries to help us fill those critical shortfalls.
I think that the activities that we are conducting
in Mali are an excellent example of the unique
nature of United Nations peacekeeping as a
political-military endeavour. Under the leadership of
Special Representative Albert Koenders, whose role
in the Mission I commend, the Mission has played a
key role alongside the Economic Community of West
African States and the African Union in the political
negotiations leading to the preliminary agreement on
Kidal. MINUSMA will now have critical and immediate
responsibilities to support the implementation of the
preliminary agreement * signed, as the Council is
aware, on 18 June - particularly with regard to the
ceasefire provisions.

As outlined by Mr. Koenders, those include
chairing the commission that will monitor the ceasefire,
accompanying the return of the Malian army and
administration to Kidal, and overseeing the cantonment
of armed groups. The posture and capacities of future
MINUSMA forces will be critical to the success of
that process. The rapid deployment of AFISMA troops
to Kidal town will be also be key to ensuring that the
process is offto a good start, and I am pleased to report
that an AFISMA contingent was deployed to Kidal over
the weekend for that purpose.

Just over four weeks remain until the first round
of the presidential elections. As experience in other
countries has taught us, a poorly managed electoral
process could further aggravate instability. To that end,
MINUSMA will continue to actively support all efforts
to develop consensus among stakeholders on the rules
of the game and a shared commitment to accepting the
outcome of the elections.

Throughout the process, MINUSMA will provide
security, technical and logistical support, to the extent
possible, given the early stages of its deployment. We
are closely looking at ways to strengthen the Mission's
capabilities in those areas. To that end, for example, we
are bringing additional resources from neighbouring
countries under existing arrangements for inter-mission
cooperation. My colleague Ms. Haq will elaborate
further on the critical role of inter-mission cooperation
in the success of our efforts in Mali. We will need
agreement from contributing countries to realize the
full potential of that important tool.

As we embark on this ambitious new chapter
in the history of peacekeeping, it is worth taking a
moment to contemplate the magnitude of the challenge
before us. Past instances of failure, or partial failure,
we know have had lasting implications for United
Nations peacekeeping doctrine and practice and, most
importantly, for civilians and peacekeepers on the
ground. With that in mind, we must be aware that we
are facing new and unique challenges.

First, the United Nations is deploying a
peacekeeping operation in a geopolitical context
characterized by asymmetrical threats not previously
encountered in a United Nations peacekeeping
environment. MINUSMA has a mandate to use all
necessary means to ensure the implementation of many
elements of its mandate, including taking active steps
to deter and prevent the return of armed elements to
key population centres. While that does not describe
a peace-enforcement or counter-terrorism role, which
will be undertaken by others who have capacities
beyond the scope of and means of the United Nations
mandate and capabilities, it will require the United
Nations to be as robust as possible in implementing that
mandate in an environment characterized by threats.

However, with respect to circumstances where the
Mission might be under imminent and serious threat,
we are finalizing a technical arrangement with France
that will define the modalities to be used by the United
Nations and by France for the provision of support by
the latter to MINUSMA.

Secondly, in spite of the progress that I outlined
earlier, three significant challenges remain for the
transition, under the best conditions possible, from
AFISMA to MINUSMA. Our central priority will
be to maintain seamless continuity between the two
operations so as to preserve the security gains made
so far and avoid creating any security vacuums while
supporting elections and the ceasefire agreement. An
initial transition period of six months will see the
buildup of all of our additional military capacities and
the concomitant extension of the Mission's operations.

Thirdly, the realities on the ground, the harsh
climate, the very limited infrastructure and the vast
size of the geographic area of responsibility that we will
have will create unique challenges for the sustainment
and support of the Mission. The generation of logistical
enablers will be an absolute initial priority to enable
the establishment and sustainment of the Mission in
northern Mali. My colleague Ms. Haq will elaborate on
those efforts in greater detail.
However, we must be realistic and accept that not
all of those capabilities and means will be immediately
available. The deployment of mission components must
also take account of such things as improved security
conditions and the establishment of infrastructure. We
will require patience, concerted support and significant
investments to ensure that the gains made so far are
protected, strengthen stability in Mali and make every
effort to guard against the spread of insecurity to the
surrounding region.

I would like to conclude by thanking all the
members of the Council for their contributions and
support as we prepare to launch the newest operation.
Our ongoing joint efforts in Mali remind us that
peacekeeping is truly a global partnership. We will
build on the success of France's Operation Serval and,
with the support of the Council and our partners in the
African Union and the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), who have deployed their
forces under AFISMA, we will continue to engage
Malian actors on a political resolution to the conflict. I
would also like to take this opportunity to express our
deep appreciation to the African Union and ECOWAS
for all of their efforts. I also thank the brave women
and men of AF ISMA for the exemplary work they have
done to support the restoration of stability in Mali since
the beginning of 2013. Moreover, our development
partners, including the World Bank, bilateral donors
and the specialized agencies of the United Nations, will
also continue to have a critical role to play to make the
new peace in Mali sustainable.

As the United Nations assumes command of
operations in Mali, we now call on our other partners to
join this campaign for peace, justice and reconciliation.
As I said earlier, that will be a challenge that requires
efforts by all stakeholders - first and foremost
the Malians themselves, but also the international
community, and especially the countries of the Sahel
region. Lastly, it will be a challenge for the entire
Organization. I am confident that we will meet it
through our united efforts.

