Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank the Nigerian presidency for having organized this
open debate and its concept note (S/2014/238, annex) and
for your personal participation, Mr. Minister. We also
thank Secretary- General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing
and for his second report on security sector reform
(S/2013/480).

We wish to highlight four points that relate to the
challenges and opportunities related to security sector
reform (SSR).

First, we believe that such reform is the primary
responsibility of States and must be a process driven by
national needs and priorities. We recognize that there is
no single model of SSR, since the approach depends on
the culture, the level of development and the historical
relationship between the people and State institutions,
among others. Achieving mutual trust between citizens
and their security institutions * the police and/or army,
for example - remains a challenge for States.

Secondly, the United Nations and the international
community have played an important complementary
role in assisting States to build and strengthen effective
security systems. We consider it important to continue
to promote coherence and coordination in the efforts and
activities of all relevant stakeholders. The Organization
has accumulated a wealth ofexperience, especially since
the establishment in 2008 of the inter-agency Security
Sector Reform Task Force, which has created the ability
to provide support in the field and at Headquarters. We
consider it important to continue developing guidelines
in all relevant respects, in close consultation with
Member States.

Thirdly, we believe that the role of the United
Nations, in cooperation with bilateral, regional and
subregional partners, can provide technical assistance
for security sector reform through peacekeeping
operations when a country so requests and according
to its specific needs. For example, we recognize the
important role that the African Union plays in ensuring
regional stability. The crises in Mali and the Sahel
region show that international threats often transcend
the borders of a single country and that more interaction
with regional and subregional mechanisms is therefore
necessary.

Finally, we believe in the promotion of
comprehensive security sector reform that recognizes
its link to development. The World Bank has indicated
that no low-income, fragile or conflict-affected State
has so far achieved the Millennium Development Goals,
which suggests that stability and security are important
prerequisites for establishing an environment conducive
to development. In our region and in our own country,
insecurity and violence have had an adverse impact on
economic growth, the quality of life of our people and
the sustainable management of natural resources.

The establishment of an effective, accountable
and professional security sector is a critical element to
laying the foundations for lasting peace and sustainable
development. We hope that the draft resolution to be
adopted today will assist in achieving those goals.

