Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): In the presence of the
Foreign Minister of Peru, I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union and the countries
aligning themselves with this statement.

Substantive progress has already been achieved
since the adoption in 2001 of the Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. We
welcome this opportunity to address that important
subject in the Security Council just a few months
before the first review conference. I am particularly
happy to see you, Sir, presiding over this meeting,
since Argentina and the European Union share many
concerns in that field, as well as the conviction that
much stronger concerted efforts by the international
community are necessary.

Small arms still constitute the weapons of choice
in the vast majority of conflicts under the consideration
of the Security Council. From Cote d'Ivoire, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Sudan to
Haiti, Iraq and Afghanistan, small arms are used by
militias, armed groups and terrorists to commit the
worst atrocities imaginable against civilian
populations, disrupt the political processes under way,
control the illegal exploitation of natural resources, and
contribute to the destabilization of whole regions. The
easy availability of small arms and light weapons,
ammunition and explosives is in itself a fuelling factor
for many of those conflicts.

The European Union welcomes the continuing
emphasis by the Security Council on arms embargoes
and on the links between the illicit exploitation of
natural resources and the illicit trade in small arms.
However, as evidenced in the reports of the various
expert and monitoring groups that are supporting the
Security Council's sanctions committees in their work,
much remains to be done in order to make that central
tool of the Council more effective. Often, the inability
to trace arms flows and the lack of appropriate records
inhibit the effective execution of the work of those
expert groups. Global standards on the marking and
tracing of small arms are essential if we are to
understand, track and crack down on the illegal trade in
those weapons.

The European Union regards the adoption by the
General Assembly in 2005 of the International
Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a
Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and
Light Weapons as a first and important step. If
implemented by States with the necessary political
will, the Instrument will help to discourage and thus
reduce the illicit traffic in small arms, as well as aid in
implementing United Nations arms embargoes.
Unfortunately, provisions on the right of United
Nations peacekeeping operations to initiate tracing
requests and on ammunition could not be incorporated
into the Instrument. We hope that the Instrument can be
strengthened at future review meetings, making it
legally binding.

With regard to the Secretary-General's
recommendations on disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR), we welcome the increased
attention paid to that issue by the Security Council and,
in particular, to the importance of inter-mission
cooperation in DDR. The post-conflict situations in
West Africa, where transborder movements of arms,
combatants and illicitly exploited resources are
contributing to continued insecurity and instability, are
a case in point for the need for cooperation and
coherence within the United Nations system. We look
forward to the operationalization of the Peacebuilding
Commission as a forum where the serious small-arms
problems faced by many countries recovering from
conflict can be usefully addressed in an integrated
manner.

We welcome the work done elsewhere within the
United Nations to develop integrated international
standards for DDR, and we look forward to their
implementation. The European Union is of the opinion
that assistance should be provided to conflict-affected
countries with the aim of fostering security,
disarmament and demobilization as well as the
reintegration of ex-combatants into civil society -
taking into account the special needs of women and
children - as an integral part of post-conflict peace
agreements and development strategies.

We believe that in order to alleviate the serious
impact of the proliferation of illicit small arms on
conflict, development and human rights, United
Nations efforts to control small arms have to be
intensified, notably through measures on brokering,
transfer controls, marking and tracing, end-user
certification, stockpile management and destruction,
ammunition and especially capacity-building. The
European Union welcomes the decision to establish a
group of governmental experts to study global
regulations on brokering. The EU recognizes the close
link between illicit small arms and their ammunition,
and the need to find a coordinated response to these
issues.

The EU encourages the use of minimum common
standards in transfer controls, including criteria or
guidelines to determine whether a proposed transfer of
small arms will aggravate conflict, repress human
rights or undermine development. Such guidelines can
also prevent a shipment from being diverted to the
illegal market. The 1998 EU Code of Conduct on Arms
Exports represents one of several examples of agreed
regional instruments. Many other regions have adopted
their own agreements. We will endeavour to reach
substantive progress on all these issues at the review
conference to be held in June and July this year.

In our view, the integration of small-arms
measures into development assistance must be
strengthened. In that respect, we welcome the adoption
by the General Assembly at its sixtieth session of
resolution 60/68, on addressing the negative
humanitarian and development impact of the illicit
manufacture, transfer and circulation of small arms and
light weapons and their excessive accumulation. The
classification of assistance for small-arms control as
official development assistance by the Development
Assistance Committee of the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development last year
allows States to include armed-violence prevention
programmes in their poverty reduction strategies and
enables donors to provide assistance for small-arms
control as part of their development cooperation
programmes.

Our contribution in this field is based on the
recent European Union strategy on small arms and
their ammunition, which formalizes the Union's
existing small-arms policies. It is a strategy with a
global geographical scope, and it makes several
proposals for progress at the 2006 review conference.
The strategy identifies Africa as the continent worst
affected by the impact of internal and cross-border
conflicts aggravated by the destabilizing influx of
small arms and light weapons, but it also covers
Eastern Europe, Asia and Latin America.

The European Union expresses its readiness to
continue to provide support, both financial and technical,
to Governments, non-governmental organizations and
regional organizations and arrangements engaged in the
fight against the trafficking in and misuse of small arms
and light weapons, as well as in the elimination of
dangerous stockpiles of small arms.

For a few years now, the Security Council has
been seized of the matter of small arms, since it has
recognized that the illicit trade in small arms plays a
central role in fuelling conflicts and spreading
instability. We welcome the draft resolution under
consideration by the Council and commend Argentina
for preparing it. It is a sign of the Council's heightened
awareness of this issue. We are confident that the
Security Council will continue to pay special attention
to this cross-cutting issue, and we call upon all States
to do their utmost to contribute to the fight against this
scourge, which is killing thousands of people every
day.

