Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): Today is a very appropriate
time to address the situation of peacekeepers, as well
as to meet with them and hear some of their opinions.
We thank Mr. Ladsous and we thank and welcome all
the Force Commanders for their insightful briefings,
their clarity and incisiveness in presenting perspectives
on the subjects under consideration, which brings the
value of constant interaction between the Security
Council and the field into appropriate focus.

Lest we forget, the briefers are officers and
gentlemen, so while a lot has been said, so much has
not been said. While their briefings have evoked many
memories of actions taken in the service of humankind,
it would not be right not to mention here the injuries
and fatalities suffered by our valiant standard-bearers,
the most recent examples being the losses suffered in
the United Nations Operation in C6te d'Ivoire and the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).

The incident in MONUSCO last month resulted
in injuries to some of our peacekeepers, but that has
clearly not dented our commitment to United Nations
peacekeeping in any form whatsoever. Over the past
50 years, 130 Pakistanis have laid down their lives
during peacekeeping activities, which is one of the
highest numbers of fatalities suffered by any single
State Member of the United Nations and which speaks
of our continual commitment to defend - at whatever
the cost to us - the sanctity of the blue uniform.

Against the backdrop of such sobering statistics,
the imperativeness of enhancing the safety and security
of peacekeepers cannot be overemphasized. The
imperiled safety of troops can undermine the sanctity
of peacekeeping operations. Insufficient resources and
a lack of operational readiness can also jeopardize
troop safety.

Lieutenant General Prakash spoke of standardization,
performance and adequate resource provision. Those
aspects are important not only for us to consider but
for the contributors to the security of all our missions
to accomplish the mandates effectively. It can be
suggested that, to an extent, underperformance and
standardization should be addressed by developing
training modules and assessment parameters within
the context ofa mission's challenges. We can undertake
that important task by evaluating the troop-contributing
countries (TCCs) with more structured predeployment
visits that encompass a host of tests and scenario-based
exercises, with a View to checking the operational
efficacy of all outfits. In fact, we recommend that
approach. The module can be developed to assess the
operational readiness and worthiness of our troops. We
welcome the Department of Peacekeeping Operations'
reinforced focus in that specific area.

Given the broad geographical base of TCCs,
achieving standardization in equipment, mechanical
transport and training may not be easy. However, it is
important and essential to determine baseline standards
to avoid underperformance. Quality and performance
should not be compromised out of the desire to widen the
base of TCCs or in the name of regional representation
or other geopolitical considerations. We must continue
to place the highest premium on professional excellence.

In all United Nations peacekeeping missions,
leading a composite force towards common operational
goals is a pressing challenge that is exacerbated by
numerous factors. First, peacekeeping operations are
not conventional warfare, with a well-defined adversary.
Often there is no defined adversary. Secondly, the
presence of multinational contingents entails numerous
diversities, for example in terms of training, weapons,
equipment, the articulation of command and control
imperatives, and communication. Finally, a wide
range of strains, including alien terrain, weather and
the prevailing political and security situation, also
contribute significantly.

The challenges of common operational goals are
exacerbated by complex mandates, where support for
host nations has to be provided in difficult political
environments. Such assistance includes support for
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
ex-combatants, security structure reforms in the host
State, improvements in the judicial and correctional
systems, the protection of civilians, humanitarian
support and infrastructure development. That is indeed
a wide range of issues that need to be addressed.

I think that the United Nations peacekeeping
Missions in Liberia and East Timor are stellar examples
in that regard, and - this is very important - those
tasks need the active cooperation not only of the United
Nations as a whole but also of the Security Council in
particular, as well as the ownership of host States.

Today's meeting has highlighted the challenges
and complexity of peacekeeping operations. We in the
Security Council must ensure that complexities are
simplified and operational strains eased out. We can do
so by laying down clear and achievable mandates that
are not fraught with individual national priorities or
complicated by unwieldy political propositions.

Reinforcing triangular cooperation among
the Security Council, the Secretariat and TCCs is
therefore essential. The Security Council must drive
such cooperation. A one-off briefing close to mandate
renewal does not suffice.

Sustained dialogue is also essential in the wake of
drawdown and reconfiguration. These must be thought
out in much more complex situations, such as in
Africa. Technical assessments carried out to implement
drawdown and deployment must be based on realities
on the ground and shared on a timely basis with TCCs.
Consultations with the TCCs concerned therefore
become vital, not just on the ground but also here in
New York.

The operational success of peacekeeping is
predicated on the timely and assured deployment
of human and material resources. Questions of
resources - and this is an important point - cannot
be hedged on the pretext of financial constraints; I will
say a little more on this issue later on. Under-resourced
Missions are neither effective nor safe. The Security
Council and the Secretariat must therefore ensure the
provision of resources to peacekeeping missions, in
consultation with all stakeholders.

Finally, let me say that underlining and strengthening
coordination between peacekeeping and peacemaking
also remains essential for success. Successful military
operations can neither replace nor obviate political
dialogue and reconciliation. If we cannot win peace,
we will not be able to enforce it.

Lastly, I wish to raise the issue of the ever-pressing
need for money. The strapped Western Powers, which
foot most of the annual $6 billion bill to keep the peace
in Africa alone, are today in difficult situations when
it comes to paying more, and we should understand
that. But at times like this, I return to the sage advice
of The Economist, the most effective media organ in
the United Kingdom - I think my friend Mark Lyall
Grant will agree - which I believe is one of the most
no-nonsense, common-sense publications in the world.
The Economist states, in this month's edition - rather
appropriately and aptly - that peacekeepers are doing
a useful job in Africa and deserve to be properly paid.
The United Nations Africa missions have helped to
create the continent's own peacekeepers, and as useful
as such missions are, Africa will need external help
from the United Nations peacekeepers for decades.

Money is grudgingly spent. Helicopters and other
effective equipment are often essential. The current
world situation, with inflation rampant everywhere,
has not left a safety margin for the countries, especially
those in Asia, providing those troops, so very often
these helicopters are withdrawn, as was the case with
MONUSCO recently, with devastating consequences.
The Economist says, rather arrestingly, that sticking to
such a low fixed price is self-defeating in the United
Nations. The advice they give us in the end, which I
think all present could definitely benefit from, is that
without peacekeepers

"conflicts will begin again - and the ensuing costs
would be enormously higher, not just in terms of
military action but in relief efforts, forgone trade
and ruined futures. Without peace, nothing happens
in Africa. It is worth a few more dollars a day." (The Economist, 9 Jane 2012)

