Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I would like to
congratulate Judge Fausto Pocar on his election to the
presidency of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) last November. I thank
Judge Pocar and Judge Erik Mose, as well as
Prosecutors Carla Del Ponte and Hassan Bubacar
Jallow, for their thorough reports on the level of
progress achieved in the work of the two Courts, as
well as on the still prevailing difficulties and the
current efforts to tackle them.

The ICTY and the ICTR should be seen as
successful examples of the commitment of the United
Nations to ensuring that those responsible for the most
heinous crimes, which offend the very essence of
human dignity, answer for them in public trials. It is
necessary that the Tribunals remain committed to the
goals set forth by Security Council resolution 1534
(2004), while concentrating resources and efforts to
promote justice in the former Yugoslavia and in
Rwanda.

Concerning the ICTY, the arrest of Ante Gotovina
in Spain early this month is a major step in the fight
against impunity in the former Yugoslavia. States and
entities of the former Yugoslavia, especially Republika
Srspka within Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia and
Montenegro, among others, should intensify, as
requested, their cooperation with the Court regarding
the arrest of the remaining high-level accused,
including Karadzic and Mladic.

Brazil underlines that the rigid deadlines set out
in the completion strategy may frustrate justice, rather
than assist the international community to end
impunity. Yet my delegation would like to commend
the President of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the former Yugoslavia and his predecessor, Judge
Meron, for their efforts to accelerate the proceedings
and trials of the Tribunal, while meeting the highest
standards of international justice and due process of
law. The working groups on speeding up appeals and
trials, the joinder of cases and the e-Court system are
positive initiatives, which bring efficiency to the work
of the Tribunal and contribute to preserving the goals
of the completion strategy.

My delegation is also pleased to note that the
adoption of resolution 1597 (2005), which removed the
prohibition on the re-election of ad litem judges, has
contributed to the efficient functioning of the Tribunal.
In the effort to preserve the success of the completion
strategy, we would like to stress the need for enhanced
cooperation among the organs of the Tribunal: the
Chambers, the Registry and the Prosecution.

Judge Pocar reports that the Tribunal has been
careful to ensure that a fair trial will be accorded to
defendants transferred to competent national
jurisdictions. In that respect, we understand that the
initiatives in capacity-building, in particular the
strengthening of the rule of law in the former
Yugoslavia, greatly contribute to reconciling the
Court's concerns about the referral of the cases of
intermediate- and lower-ranking accused with the need
to obtainjustice.

With respect to the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, in his latest report, Judge Mose
informed the Council that the number of accused
whose trials have been completed or are in progress is
now over 50. The number of accused still at large,
however, is cause for concern. For that reason, my
delegation supports the Prosecutor's efforts to visit
Member States to seek political cooperation in the
arrest and the transfer of fugitives.

We also welcome the Prosecutor's decision to
transfer non-senior detainees to national jurisdictions
whenever a country's judiciary structure allows it. The
report mentions that, as the workload of the Trial
Chamber decreases, the focus will shift to the Appeals
Chamber, where an increase in work is anticipated.

My delegation agrees that the number of judges
will need to be reviewed at some future stage and that
periodic reports of the Tribunal will help us to assess
the evolving situation.

The international community faces the challenge
of reconciling the inherent limitations of ad hoc
judicial arrangements with the principle of due process
and the rights of both victims and those accused, as
well as with the overall objective of putting an end to
impunity.

In considering the prospects of the completion
strategies of both Tribunals, Brazil understands that it
is essential that the Tribunals continue to be able to
rely on adequate resources and personnel to perform
their functions. Financial difficulties pose a constant
threat to the accomplishment of their duties and their
ability to carry out their completion strategies.

