Mr. Kolby (Norway): I would like to thank Mr.
Annabi for his briefing, and to convey my
Government's appreciation for the work of the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative in
Kosovo, Mr. Hans Haekkerup.

Norway welcomes the fact that the provincial
Assembly elections in Kosovo were conducted in an
orderly and largely peaceful manner. We are grateful to
the women and men of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and KFOR for the organization of these elections. They
reaffirm the international community's commitment to
the full implementation of resolution 1244 (1999) and
the Constitutional Framework for Provisional Self-
Government in Kosovo.

We note that the overall election turnout
percentage was somewhat low, especially considering
the high turnout at last year's election and the
importance of the elections on 17 November for
creating meaningful self-government. But, at the same
time, a higher number of voters actually went to the
polls this year. Election day was also calmer than it
was last year.

We were quite encouraged by the overall
participation of minorities in the elections, including
by the fact that about half of the 170,000 registered
Kosovo Serbs eventually turned out to vote. We agree
with Mr. Annabi about the importance of the
UNMIK/Federal Republic of Yugoslavia common
document in achieving that. Norway also commends
the efforts of UNMIK and the OSCE in this regard. The
leadership in Belgrade and Mr. Covic' deserve credit for
their role in promoting the participation of Kosovo
Serbs.

The election campaign was, unfortunately, not
completely free from incidents of intimidation and
violence, which were directed mainly at ethnic
minorities. There were fewer such incidents than last
year, but there can now be no tolerance of ethnic and
political violence in Kosovo.

The unsatisfactory situation regarding security
and freedom of movement for non-Albanians in
Kosovo is obviously one of the reasons why many
Kosovo Serbs decided not to vote on election day. It is
also a main reason why the number of internally
displaced persons returning to Kosovo has so far been
limited.

An immediate priority for the newly elected
Assembly must now be to ensure a peaceful and normal
life for all citizens of Kosovo. The success of the new
Assembly will largely be measured by its willingness
and ability to improve security and to encourage the
return of all internally displaced persons to Kosovo, in
accordance with resolution 1244 (1999). Only then can
Kosovo have a truly democratic and multi-ethnic
society.

Administrative authority will now be gradually
transferred to the institutions of self-government. We
stress the elected representatives' responsibility for
ensuring the continued professionalism and efficiency
of its administration.

The Assembly must work closely with UNMIK
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General to demonstrate its legitimacy to the people of
Kosovo. We also expect the representatives to show the
will to work across political and ethnic lines.
Cooperation, compromise and reconciliation among all
parties is needed to strengthen democracy in Kosovo.
Increasing the role of women is also crucial. Like
Ambassador Durrant, we welcome the results of the
elections in that regard.

We must also ensure that UNMIK is able to fulfil
its remaining core responsibilities efficiently and
decisively. At the same time, its size and organization
should reflect the gradual transfer of authority to the
provisional institutions.

Ensuring the rule of law is fundamental for
promoting democracy and human rights. Norway will
continue to support efforts to build a democratic civil
society in Kosovo. This includes the training of local
police. We urge that more be done to recruit police
cadets from the Kosovo Serb and other minority
communities.

The ultimate success of these elections will
depend on the implementation of resolution 1244
(1999). This will require close cooperation between the
Assembly and UNMIK. With regard to final status, we
reiterate that a future decision can be made only after
consultations with all involved parties, and in the light
of the developments in Kosovo, in the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and in the region.

