Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank High
Representative Inzko for his briefing today. It is
fitting that my first statement in an open debate of
the Security Council is on the subject of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Earlier in my career, I served in the
British delegation at the Dayton peace talks. I saw first-
hand how the international community, led by Dick
Holbrooke, came together to help end years of brutal
fighting. Later, as the British Ambassador in Sarajevo
from 2005 to 2008, I witnessed how far Bosnia had
progressed after the war and saw the first steps taken
towards a future in the European Union (EU) and in
NATO. Although those steps have faltered, the United
Kingdom has always been a strong supporter of Bosnia
and Herzegovina's long-term stability and prosperity. I
am pleased to reassert that commitment unambiguously
in the Council today.

This year, Bosnia's political leaders have an
opportunity that they must not miss - to stop the drift
and accelerate the journey towards a better future. They
have a chance to implement the social and economic
reforms their citizens expect and deserve. We must do
our utmost to support them. I believe there are three
areas in which we can do so.

First, let us all give our full backing to the EU
initiative on Bosnia and Herzegovina, first developed
by the United Kingdom and Germany. The written
commitment to reform by Bosnia's leaders, including
those in the Republika Srpska, is a sign that the
initiative can succeed. The EU will fulfil its side of the
bargain; the Stabilization and Association Agreement
will soon come into force. As the British Ambassador
to Bosnia and Herzegovina when the Agreement was
signed, seven years ago, I am amazed and disappointed
that it has not yet come into force.

Bosnia and Herzegovina's leaders can now harness
momentum to deliver meaningful reform. Their actions
need to match their written commitments. Stabilizing
and stimulating Bosnia and Herzegovina's economy
should be their priority - because in an average group
of five young Bosnians, three of them have no jobs.
Public dissatisfaction is growing. The many levels
of Bosnia and Herzegovina's Government must now
define their agenda for reform.

If Bosnia and Herzegovina's leaders do not take
that opportunity to reform, we may see a repeat of the
anger that shook the streets of Sarajevo last year. The
violence and challenges to law and order showed that
tensions still lie just below the surface. On occasions
tensions have been high this year, and we condemn the
unacceptable attack against a police station in Zvornik
last month. Although the frequency of such attacks may
be low, their effects can be far reaching.

Secondly, the Council must continue its support
to preserve the security and stability of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The seventieth anniversary of the end of
the Second World War and the twentieth anniversary
of the Srebrenica genocide this year illustrate that in
every generation Bosnians, Bosniaks, Bosnian Croats
and Bosnia Serbs have suffered from conflict. Until
security and stability is embedded across Bosnia and
Herzegovina, we must do all we can to reassure this
generation that we mean it when we say "Never again!"

The United Kingdom believes that the continued
presence of the European Union-led peacekeeping force
(EUF OR), with an executive mandate, is the best way
to provide that reassurance. We advocate the retention
of this Vital asset when its mandate is up for renewal in
November. And we also support the continued work of
the High Representative and his efforts to fulfil the five
objectives and two conditions, which were set back in
my time in Sarajevo and still have not been fully met.

Together, the international community has a
continued role to play to deter those who question
Bosnia and Herzegovina's sovereignty and territorial
integrity. Last month's declaration by the Alliance of
Independent Social Democrats on the independence of
the Republika Srpska shows that there are those who
still relish in division. But their proposed referendum is
a clear breach of the Dayton Agreement. The Republika
Srpska does not have the right to secede. Borders will
not be redrawn. And the EU position is simple and clear:
only a united, functioning, effective State of Bosnia
and Herzegovina will be offered EU membership, when
it meets all the conditions.

Let me conclude on my third point. In November we
will mark the twentieth anniversary of Dayton. For two
decades, it has been up to Bosniab and Herzegovina's
political leaders, supported by the international
community, to overcome their narrow interests and
find common ground. They have not always managed
to do so, but they will continue to have our support.
This year, Bosnia and Herzegovina's newly elected
leaders have a chance to demonstrate to the Council
that they can act in their collective national interests
and end years of stagnation. We cannot do it for them.

Just as they showed at Dayton, nearly 20 years
ago, and in signing the Stabilization and Association
Agreement seven years ago, they have shown in their
commitment to the EU initiative that they can find
consensus, they can succeed and deliver real reform,
they can set aside their differences for the greater prize
of economic growth, stability and prosperity. They owe
it to the Bosnian people to seize this opportunity.

