Mr. Berml'ldez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and to wish you a very productive month. I also thank
you for having convened this very important open debate
to mark the 20-year anniversary of the Graca Machel
report (see A/51/306). I should like also to express
my gratitude for the briefings given by Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon, Special Representative Leila
Zerrougui and the Executive director of UNICEF,
Mr. Anthony Lake.

Uruguay supports the statement made by Canada
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Children and
Armed Conflict.

Conflicts today more than ever have a marked
impact on the civilian population, in particular children,
given their particular vulnerability, and, in the twenty-
first century, continue to represent one of the major
threats to the protection and promotion of their human
rights. Uruguay has historically been committed to
respecting and promoting the rights of the child and,
among other things, we have promoted year after year
the General Assembly resolution on this item.

My country categorically condemns the repeated
violations of the human rights of the boys and girls, and
reiterates its dismay at the fact that they continue to be
killed, maimed, mutilated, kidnapped, and subjected to
rape and other forms of sexual violence, recruited as
child soldiers and used in acts of war, as the Secretary-
General's report (S/2016/360) sadly points out.

Also of particular concern is the situation of girls
sold into slavery as well as the victims of abduction
and those forced into sexual unions or forced or
early marriage. These practices represent a flagrant
violation of their human rights and have an irreversible
impact on their physical and mental integrity as well
as their future development. Also reprehensible is the
growing use of explosive weapons and aerial bombings
against civilian targets perpetrated by various parties
to armed conflicts, including schools, hospitals and
populated areas, which deprives children of access to
education and has an adverse effect on the provision of
humanitarian assistance.

In Syria, indiscriminate air attacks against civilian
targets and zones are the main cause of death and
maiming of children during the period covered by the
report of the Secretary-General. The actions of armed
groups also prevented 35,000 children from being
vaccinated. According to the report, the number of
attacks against schools and hospitals doubled in Yemen
in 2014, with 59 attacks against hospitals and 42 against
schools.

We are also dismayed at the impact of terrorism
and violent extremism on the promotion and protection
of the human rights of children. According to the report
of the Secretary-General, more than 6,500 schools
have been destroyed, damaged or used as shelters
in Syria, while terrorists of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham, or Da'esh, continue to use education to
indoctrinate and recruit children.

The report of the Secretary-General highlights the
serious violations being committed against children.
In this situation, the adoption of urgent measures is
an inescapable moral duty and a legal obligation of the
international community towards current and future
generations. That is why my country, while it reiterates
its firm commitment to eradicating violence against
children, also calls on the countries that have not yet
done so to sign or ratify the Convention on the Rights
of the Child and its Optional Protocols and Convention
No. 182 of the International Labour Organization, on
the prohibition of the worst forms of child labour, which
are based on the Cape Town Principles adopted in 1997.

We also reiterate our concern about the continued
violations by the parties to armed conflicts of the
provisions of international law and international
humanitarian law, including those related to the
protection of civilians and in particular children. All
parties to conflicts must fully comply with the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and their Additional Protocols
of 1977, which are of vital importance to respecting
the rights of the child. As underscored today by the
Secretary-General, even in time of war certain rules
must be followed. We also call for effective compliance
with, and the implementation of, resolution 2143 (2014),
resolution 2225 (2015), with regard to children abducted
by non-State armed groups or recruited by State armed
forces, and resolution 2286 (2016), which was adopted
in May, with regard to attacks on medical facilities
and personnel.

Among other measures to be taken are those
designed to address the basic needs of the large number
of children who are displaced owing to armed conflict,
many of whom are unaccompanied minors and could
be subjected to serious violations or be recruited by
parties to conflicts within refugee camps or zones. In
that context, it is crucial that States of origin, transit and
destination ensure the protection of displaced children
and guarantee their access, especially to medical
assistance and education. The international community
must also fight against impunity and adopt measures
against those responsible for serious violations against
children. When appropriate, the perpetrators should be
referred to the International Criminal Court, since the
Rome Statute categorizes as war crimes those involving
sexual violence and the conscription or enlistment of
children under the age of 15 or using them to participate
actively in the hostilities of armed conflicts.

We would like to refer to a subject we consider to
be of great importance, namely, the reintegration of
children who have been involved with armed groups
and have been victims of violent extremism and have
suffered other serious violations of their rights, in
particular in cases of abuse or sexual exploitation. For
their social reintegration, we need the commitment
of the State concerned, but also the cooperation of
the international community. Children should be
considered first as victims, and be treated as such within
the framework of legislation and a juvenile legal system
oriented to their social rehabilitation. We must also
create protective environments, including programmes
and services for social and psychological care to
overcome the effects of the experiences of conflict
and facilitate their rehabilitation and reintegration in
the community as a key element of the post-conflict
process. The implementation of effective disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes to
promote the well-being of affected children is of
particular importance in that regard. We understand
that these efforts must include short-, medium- and
long-term plans and must have adequate human and
financial resources for the reintegration to be effective
and sustainable over time.

Education is another vital factor in achieving
reintegration, as it offers children valid alternatives to
a future that often is presented as grim and devastating.
Children who have grown up experiencing violence on
a daily basis lack such concepts as how to live in peace
or how to have respect for human life. That is why there
must be education to train them, first in those lacking
concepts, such as peaceful social coexistence and
respect for human rights. Secondly, through education
we must offer these children professional opportunities
and economic security to enable them to break the
cycle of violence and prevent them from being forced
to resort to delinquency or to joining other groups that
commit illegal or terrorists activities.
In the United Nations and the Security Council,
we must redouble our efforts to address the terrible
situation faced by children who are victims of violent
conflicts. Uruguay supports the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and reiterates the importance it
attaches to fulfilling her mandate. We value the role
played by instruments that are part of the children and
armed conflict agenda, including the annual report of
the Secretary-General, the list attached to his report
and the monitoring and reporting mechanism. These
instruments are necessary and fundamental since
accurate, timely and objective information on serious
violations committed against children during armed
conflicts would help the parties to a conflict to comply
with international standards on the protection of
children and accountability.

That is why Uruguay expresses its concern about the
fact that States Members of the Organization are using
pressure to avoid international scrutiny, such as is the
case with the suspension of the coalition operating in
Yemen from the list annexed to report of the Secretary-
General. These actions are particularly disturbing,
primarily because they undermine the effectiveness
of the instruments adopted to provide a response and
a solution to the serious violations committed against
children in conflict situations.

I would like to conclude by referring to the
role that can be played by peacekeeping operations
with respect to this agenda. As a troop-contributing
country, Uruguay shows on the ground its unequivocal
commitment to protecting the civilian population in
general and to children in particular by supporting the
recommendation to include specific provisions for the
protection of children in all peacekeeping operations.
In that regard, we understand that we must strengthen
within these operations the monitoring and information
functions on violations committed against children
and provide them with experts in the field and devote
financial resources to that end. Moreover, we must also
provide training on the protection and prevention of
sexual exploitation to troops before deployment.

The history of humankind shows that wars do not
produce winners, but rather victims and destruction.
Among the millions of deaths, injuries and those
suffering from physical and psychological wounds
persons, the main victims of armed conflicts are
children. According to UNICEF data on children born
in conflict, 86.7 million children have experienced
only war in their lives. This terrible reality shows that
armed conflicts robs them of their childhood, safety,
their family and feelings, robs them of their innocence
and denies them the right to play, learn and have fun
like other children. They have been denied for long
enough; it is now our collective responsibility make
sure they are not denied their future, their opportunities
or their dreams.

Some day all of us will have to learn that children
are untouchable.

