Mrs. Viotti: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
invitation to brief the Security Council in my capacity
as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission. I would like to extend a
warm welcome to the Minister of Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Guinea-Bissau, His
Excellency Mr. Mamadu Saliu Djalo Pires; the
Minister of Foreign Affairs of Portugal, His Excellency
Mr. Paulo Portas; and the Minister of External
Relations of Angola and Chair of the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP), His
Excellency Mr. Georges Rebelo Chikoti. I also
welcome Ambassador Youssoufou Bamba, Permanent
Representative of Cote d'Ivoire and Chair of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). And I thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Joseph Mutaboba, for his
briefing.

It is most unfortunate that, 20 days after I briefed
the Council (see S/PV.6743) on the progress that
Guinea-Bissau had been making in the implementation
of its peacebuilding priorities, I have to return here to
brief the Council on the forcible seizure of power from
the legitimate Government of Guinea-Bissau that took
place on 12 April. I will not dwell on the details of the
recent developments of the electoral process and the
coup d'etat, since they were ably presented by previous
speakers.
The Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission has condemned in the
strongest terms the forcible seizure of power in
Guinea-Bissau and the arbitrary detentions of the
interim President, the Prime Minister and other senior
officials. The configuration, moreover, called upon all
parties to oppose any attempt to change the
Government through unconstitutional means. We have
encouraged the Government of Guinea-Bissau and all
stakeholders to continue to work together to pursue
political dialogue so as to preserve stability in the
country and promote national reconciliation.

The solution to the current crisis requires the
immediate release of all of the authorities presently
detained by the military, the return of the armed forces
to their barracks and the resumption of the electoral
process.

We welcome the engagement of regional and
subregional organizations and key international
partners, notably the CPLP, ECOWAS and the African
Union. We must continue to support their efforts
towards the restoration of constitutional order without
delay and a lasting and peaceful solution to the current
political crisis in Guinea-Bissau.

This is not the first time that constitutional order
has broken down in Guinea-Bissau. The recent history
of the country has been, unfortunately, marked by
upheavals and crises. However, the 12 April coup
d'etat is particularly regrettable because it happened at
a moment in which progress towards a more stable and
prosperous society was under way in Guinea-Bissau.

The people and the Government of Guinea-Bissau
were implementing reforms to steer the country in the
right direction. Political stability, improvement in
governance and management reforms had led to
economic recovery and the revival of trust in the
country on the part of national stakeholders and foreign
partners.

Stability had brought about important gains to
Guinea-Bissau, allowing it to move from a situation of
financial disarray into a more stable position, thanks to
greater control of public spending, increased tax
revenues and a considerable reduction of public debt.
Due to such progress, the Government of Guinea-
Bissau had managed to establish regularity in the
payment of salaries, an element that had caused
constant dissatisfaction and instability in the past.
With respect to security sector reform, Guinea-
Bissau had adopted the necessary legal instruments and
had made efforts to put in place a special pension fund
in order to demobilize and reintegrate part of the
current military and police personnel into civilian life
in order to pave the way for a more professional armed
forces.

Progress had also been made in the fight against
drug trafficking. The Government of Guinea-Bissau
had adopted an operational plan to combat drug
trafficking and established a transnational crime unit
within the West Africa Coast Initiative. The immediate
return to constitutional order is crucial to allow those
processes to move forward. Grave consequences will
ensue if the current situation is not reversed. The
military coup will certainly curb confidence and donor
support, thus compromising the efforts to address
security sector reform and drug trafficking.

The international community must urgently act to
avoid a continuation of the current scenario. It is very
important that the country's hard-won socio-economic
gains brought about by stability in the recent past be
protected and built upon in an environment of respect
for the rule of law and democracy. The Council and the
international community as a whole must act with
resolve to assist Guinea-Bissau in breaking away, once
and for all, from the cycle of violence, coups d'etat,
impunity and instability that has plagued the country
for so long.

