The President (spoke in Russian): The Security
Council will now continue its consideration of the item
on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council welcomes the
Agreement on Movement and Access and the
Agreed Principles for the Rafah Crossing reached
between the Government of Israel and the
Palestinian Authority on 15 November 2005. The
successful opening of the Rafah crossing on
25 November 2005 represents an important step
forward.

"The Security Council commends the
efforts of the Quartet, its Special Envoy and his
team, as well as the positive contributions of the
Government of Egypt, and expresses its strong
the

appreciation to the European Union for assuming
the role of third-party monitor.

"The Security Council calls on the parties to
take immediate action to implement the terms of
both agreements according to the time lines
established therein.

"The Security Council calls for renewed
action in parallel by the Government of Israel and
the Palestinian Authority on their obligations in
accordance with the Roadmap, to ensure
continued progress towards the creation of a
viable, democratic, sovereign and contiguous
Palestine living side-by-side with Israel in peace
and security. The Security Council stresses the
importance of, and the need to achieve, a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle
East, based on all its relevant resolutions
including its resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973),
1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003), the Madrid terms
of reference and the principle of land for peace."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2005/57.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m.
05-622 14
