Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank the Secretary-General
for his presence here and for the very strong statement
that he made.

Japan welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2321 (2016). We would like to express our
sincere appreciation to the United States for taking
the lead, and our appreciation also goes to all other
members of the Security Council for their support.
Japan is pleased to have contributed throughout the
process. The fact that this robust resolution was passed
unanimously deserves attention. We have attained
a great number of sponsoring countries from outside
the Security Council as well. Now not only Council
members but all States Members of the United Nations
share a common responsibility to fully implement
the resolution.

Japan, together with the international community,
strongly condemns once again the repeated violations
of Security Council resolutions by North Korea. We
urge North Korea to fully comply with the relevant
resolutions, including today's, and to abide by its other
international commitments and obligations. Today's
resolution does not impose sanctions for the sake of
sanctions. It is a tool to correct North Korea's course
of action. It is a sincere call from the international
community to North Korea, urging it to abandon its
nuclear ambitions and return to the negotiating table.
We are always ready to resume dialogue if North Korea
shows a sincere commitment and takes concrete steps
towards denuclearization. In order for North Korea
to change its attitude, we have no other option but to
continue to increase pressure.

Resolution 2270 (2016), adopted in March, was
already very robust and comprehensive. However, some
of the livelihood exemptions for the people of North
Korea contained in the resolution have been misused.
The resolution adopted today closes such gaps and
introduces new additional measures. Drastic coal import
limitations, additional sectoral bans to cut revenues
and other measures should all have a significant impact
on North Korean nuclear and missile development
programmes. At the same time, I emphasize that
these sanctions are not meant to target ordinary North
Korean citizens. It should not be forgotten that North
Korea's nuclear and missile development continues
at the expense of the welfare of the people of North
Korea. It is significant that heightened attention has
been paid in today's resolution to the nexus between
people's unmet needs and the continuation of nuclear
and missile development. We welcome the stronger
emphasis on the deplorable humanitarian conditions in
North Korea, including the abduction issue, to which
Japan attaches utmost importance.

Unfortunately, we have heard some sceptical voices
in the process of implementing resolution 2270 (2016),
suggesting that nuclear and missile development has
not stopped even after the adoption of that resolution,
and that resolution 2270 (2016) is not as effective as
it should be. I believe that this view confuses cause
and effect, and that the degree to which the measures
outlined in resolution 2270 (2016) were unsuccessful
was in fact the result of those sceptical voices. In
other words, international efforts have not kept pace
with North Korea's capacity to evade sanctions or its
determination to continue nuclear development.

Now is precisely the time for the international
community to rigorously implement the resolution we
have just adoptedand send the strong, unified message
that North Korea cannot afford to continue its current
policy. Japan will continue to work very closely with
the members of the Council and all States Members of
the United Nations to reach a comprehensive solution to
the problems related to North Korea.

