Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): We too are grateful
to Assistant Secretary-General Annabi for his
comprehensive briefing, and we also wish to thank you
for having called an open meeting on the issue of East
T imor, an issue which, by its nature, lends itself well to
discussion before the full membership of the United
Nations. Apart from thus underpinning the trend towards
greater transparency of the Council proceedings when
transparency is useful, which is so dear to the Canadian
presidency's heart, it also makes it clear to everyone that
the United Nations and its Security Council are
committed to making a success of their involvement with
East Timor.

We are conscious of the fact that we are not just
dealing with the future of the people of East Timor but
that also the reputation of the Security Council of the
United Nations itself is at stake. Precisely because this
Council acted so expeditiously during the crisis of
September 1999, the world is now watching to see
whether the United Nations can do the job of getting East
T imor started on its way to independence.

East Timor demands our constant attention, but it
also requires financial support. The International Herald

 

Tribune of 26 April 2000 carried a collective contribution
by Xanana Gusmao, Sven Sandstrom, Shigemitsu Sugisaki
and Sergio Vieira de Mello, and in this article the need for
donor support is also emphasized. In this connection, it is
my pleasure to state that in addition to the $19 million we
have made available in response to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) appeal, the
Netherlands will shortly deposit about $2.2 million in the
UNTAET Trust Fund.

International support may be a necessary precondition
for success. It alone is not sufficient. It is also crucial that
the East Timorese population supports the process of
reconstruction and that it continues to believe in it.
Therefore, it would seem necessary that the East Timorese
understand what the obstacles are in the process and the
limitations to what the United Nations and other
organizations can do within a given period of time.

Several speakers have made mention of the recent
media reports which indicate that a certain disillusionment
with the United Nations efforts is taking root in East Timor
because the people do not see concrete results in their
everyday lives. When I suggest that we should take these
reports seriously, I am not at all suggesting that UNTAET
is not doing its job. Quite on the contrary, UNTAET is
doing splendid work and deserves our profound admiration.
We all know the circumstances of utter destruction and
neglect in which the Transitional Administration had to
begin its very complex task. It is also true that the absence
of any kind of structure required an enormous amount of
preparatory work which has remained invisible to outsiders.
Nevertheless, if there is a problem of increasing
disillusionment or demoralization among the population of
East Timor, then it is, by definition, our business. It is an
issue with which UN TAET and the international community
as a whole will have to deal.

Perhaps there may be a need for more visible projects
and a stepped-up information campaign. In any case, the
objective must be that the East Timorese themselves
acquire a greater sense of ownership with regard to the
process. The article I just referred to points out that the key
to success is the participation of the East Timorese people
in all aspects of the efforts currently underway in East
Timor. Of course the cooperation in the National
Consultative Council is an important aspect of East
Timorese participation, but it is not easy to assess to what
extent this involvement at the top gives the broad mass of
the people of East Timor a sufficient feeling of influence,
codetermination and contribution.

I realize that there are obstacles in the way to a
greater involvement of the people, not the least of which
may be the lack of suitably qualified East Timorese
personnel. According to the article I mentioned, the
search for qualified personnel is under way and training
is being provided. I would be grateful for more specific
information in that regard.

The United Nations is currently concentrating on
domestic civilian reconstruction, and rightly so.
Nevertheless, we should realize that external peace and
security are also essential. Several aspects are relevant in
this respect. First, good bilateral relations with
Indonesia - they depend on both sides, and the first
steps have given rise to optimism. Secondly, integration
in the wider region would also seem a prerequisite -
including, possibly, membership in the Association of
South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN), if ASEAN members
should so decide.

The international community cannot remain silent on
the issue of the many thousands of refugees who still
remain in West Timor. We have a whole series of
questions on this issue, such as how many of those
refugees have expressed the wish to return to East T imor?
What are the prospects for their return? Are the
international aid organizations in a position to deliver
effective support to the camp dwellers? Are the
Indonesian authorities sufficiently cooperative, including
in restraining the remaining militias? Our information
indicates that the militias still enjoy relatively unrestrained
freedom of action. It is disconcerting that more than half
a year after the decision of the Indonesian People's
Consultative Assembly, which the Security Council
welcomed on 25 October 1999, the situation of the
refugees in West Timor continues to be a source of
concern.

Let me conclude by quoting the final paragraph of
the article I have already quoted three or four times:

"After the horrors of the past, East Timor has
a just claim to an international commitment to
concrete assistance, rapid response and respect for
the aspirations to self-determination."

