Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, we convey our condolences to the families of
the victims of the air crash that took place on Friday.

The Chinese delegation would like to thank the
Slovenian delegation for having convened this important
meeting today. Ambassador Tiirk has made tremendous
efforts to that end. We also wish particularly to thank the
Foreign Minister of Slovenia for presiding over this
meeting.

We thank Ambassador Holbrooke for introducing to
us a number of important representatives of the United
States Congress, whom we welcome to our meeting
today.

The Chinese delegation thanks the tripartite
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina for its briefing of
the Council. Its visit and the adoption of the New York
Declaration offer vivid evidence of the Presidency's
resolve to implement the Peace Agreement for Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We support the New York Declaration and
appreciate the efforts made by the three parties in this
regard.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is an object-lesson of
United Nations participation in post-conflict peace-
building. A careful summary of the lessons and
experiences gained in Bosnia and Herzegovina could be
helpful to ongoing United Nations operations in other
regions.

China is pleased that on the whole the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina has been stable and that the
Peace Agreement is being implemented. We have also
noted that mutual tolerance among ethnic groups and the
concept of integrity are on the rise. Although progress in
the implementation of the Peace Agreement has been
slow, it is going in the right direction, and it should be
assisted in that direction. We also agree with the saying
that a flawed peace is often better than war.

The return of refugees is an important factor in
guaranteeing the multi-ethnic character of Bosnian
society. The international community has already made
tremendous efforts in this regard, but the task continues
to be arduous. It is necessary to take greater strides in
creating employment opportunities and carrying out
economic reform. We hope that further progress will be
made in this regard.

 

The realization of ethnic reconciliation among
Muslims, Croats and Serbs, the restoration of mutual trust
and the pursuit of common development constitute the
fundamental guarantees for the harmonious coexistence of
the Bosnian people and for the country's long-term
tranquillity and order. We sincerely hope that the leaders of
the three parties will proceed on the basis of the
fundamental interests of their people, put aside their
differences and make common efforts to maintain the hard-
won peace.

I would particularly like to emphasize that it is
necessary to establish a unified armed force. The help of
the international community has gradually reached all areas
of Bosnian society and its peoples' lives. I wish to reiterate
that the international community's participation in Bosnia's
reconstruction should focus on helping the local people be
self-reliant and gradually reduce their dependence on
outside assistance. The comprehensive settlement of the
Bosnian question ultimately depends on the Bosnian people
themselves.

The Chinese delegation supports the work of the
International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, which we
hope will proceed in a professional, impartial and objective
manner, so that its work will help promote the peace
process in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Not long ago Mr. Petritsch, the High Representative
for the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina, also briefed the Council, especially on
reforming property law and proposing draft electoral laws.
He also proposed the concept of ownership. We have noted
that the Presidency is supportive of these ideas. We believe
this will help Bosnia and Herzegovina participate in
international affairs as an integral whole. We hope that the
Presidency will further implement these concepts and add
specific content so that they can be really implemented.

