Mr. Van Shalkwyk (South Africa): I thank you, Mr. President, for the observance of two minutes of silence that you organized this morning. We would like to convey the condolences of the Government of South Africa to our brothers and sisters of the Niger on the terrible loss that they suffered. We also remember with sadness the large number of our brothers and sisters in Haiti, as well as the valiant United Nations personnel, who lost their lives 10 years ago. With regard to the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, let me start by thanking the Foreign Minister for Colombia, Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi, and welcoming her presence at this meeting. We appreciate her commitment and availability to brief the Security Council. I should like to assure her of South Africa's full support for her country's efforts to achieve long-term and sustainable peace. We also thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the Verification Mission in Colombia, Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, for his consistent and hard work in Colombia and informative briefing. South Africa remains fully supportive of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace, which was signed between the Government of Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC) in 2016. We welcome the mechanisms of the peace agreement, such as the Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the Implementation of the FinalAgreement, and urge the Colombian people and authorities to use such mechanisms to address gaps and challenges related to the implementation of the peace agreement. That is consistent with South Africa's principled stance that the only viable, sustainable resolution to the conflict remains in the full implementation of the peace agreement and an inclusive political settlement that is nationally led by and in the interests of the people of Colombia. In that regard, we welcome the relatively peaceful and successful holding of the local and departmental elections in October 2019, despite the challenges leading up to the day of elections. The participation of the FARC and former combatants is commendable and represents a positive step forward. South Africa commends the progress made on the demobilization and reintegration of former members of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia- Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP). In order to achieve continued and sustained progress in that regard, the demobilization should be accompanied by continued training and the creation of economic opportunities for former combatants. South Africa welcomes the recent progress made with regard to the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, which is playing a key role in addressing accountability for gross human rights violations committed during the internal conflict in Colombia. We furthermore call for respect for the judicial independence of the Special Jurisdiction. South Africa's own experience with its Truth and Reconciliation Commission confirmed that it was crucial for achieving national unity. In Colombia, reconciliation processes can ensure that the road to peace is inclusive. South Africa is concerned about the intimidation and increased killings of former members of the FARC- EP and of social and community leaders, who now also include members of the indigenous and A fro-Colombian populations. We call for a secure environment to be put in place for the protection of women, children, social leaders and human rights defenders, as well as all who are involved in the implementation of the peace agreement. In that regard, it is also important to strengthen the role of the National Commission on Security Guarantees, which can be used as a vehicle to swiftly implement the peace agreement. We welcome the Government's efforts with regard to the territorial areas for training and reintegration, as well as the constructive role and responsive attitude of the FARC. That is vital for the sustainable and successful integration of the FARC into Colombian society through, but not limited to, rural and political reintegration, work, access to land and opportunities, education, the protection of victims' rights and the empowerment of women. Let me conclude by reiterating that it is important for the international community and, in particular the United Nations Verification Mission, to continue to support the full compliance with the agreement reached between the parties, as well as the cessation of hostilities and the laying down of arms.
