Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank the Secretary-General for his report on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(8/2013/72). We also thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary- General, Mr. Farid Zarif, for presenting
the report and Mr. Ivica Dacie and Mr. Hashim Thaci
for their statements.

The Secretary-General's report once again affirms
that the United Nations continues to play an essential
role in guaranteeing stability and neutrality in Kosovo
and the region. We reaffirm the primacy of resolution
1244 (1999) as the legal framework applicable in
Kosovo, as well as the importance of full respect for
international law.

During the reporting period, we note the progress
in the dialogue between the parties. We congratulate
them not only on the level of the dialogue but also on
its quality, which has moved from a primarily technical
level to a political one, providing new prospects
for resolving several long-standing problems. The
Secretary-General's report also points out that, despite
the developments in the high-level dialogue, incidents
and tensions on the ground continue to occur. It is
therefore important that the results of the dialogue
have a positive impact on the reality on the ground, in
particular in the north.

In that regard, we regret that the parties were unable
to reach an agreement with regard to the situation in
northern Kosovo at the recent round of talks on 20 March
in Brussels. We encourage the parties to continue those
efforts, in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999), at
the next round, to be held on 2 April.

Northern Kosovo remains a source of concern to
my delegation. With regard to the security situation,
we note that to date this year there have been more
than 20 incidents using explosive devices. The report
documents serious incidents that also affected the staff
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK). It also reports on the arrests and
mistreatment of Kosovo Serbs during the Christmas
celebrations on 7 January. It is important that the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX), the Kosovo Force and the local authorities
investigate each of those incidents. We are pleased
that those entities have increased their visibility and
prevention activities in response to such incidents.

In addition, we are concerned about the situation
of the administrative office in Mitrovica. We regret
the freeze on the payment of salaries from the
Kosovo budget to the employees of that office. Given
the important work that UNMIK is doing to ensure
coordination and cooperation among the international
presences in the north, it is necessary to find solutions
to enable its administration to continue to carry out its
prevention, mediation and facilitation functions.

On that same point, we would like to comment in
general terms on the importance of UNMIK having the
necessary resources to achieve its operational capacity
and to implement its mandate. UNMIK operates in a
vulnerable situation with limited resources. A strong
United Nations presence with the appropriate resources
remains necessary given the prevailing situation on the
ground, in particular in northern Kosovo.

We were surprised by the information the Security
Council has received about refusals to allow Serbian
authorities to enter Kosovo, including the recent hostile
treatment of the Director of the Serbian Office for
Kosovo and Metohija. Such behaviour has an adverse
impact on the situation of minority communities in
Kosovo. It is worth recalling that UNMIK's goal is to
promote security, stability and respect for human rights
in Kosovo, with the participation of all its communities.
Kosovo's multi-ethnic character will be undermined
by the lack of mechanisms capable of assuring and
protecting the rights of those populations. Moreover,
it has a negative effect on the rate of those returning
voluntarily to Kosovo.

Turning to the work of the Special Investigative
Task Force in addressing the allegations of inhumane
treatment of persons and trafficking in human organs,
we note with interest the information included in the
annexed EULEX report and have followed progress
on the matter closely. We support the objectives
of operational cooperation and therefore continue
to believe that it would be desirable to reach an
arrangement that could involve the United Nations in
the process of investigating the allegations. We agree
on the importance of tackling impunity and ensuring
accountability.

We conclude by affirming that beyond the high-
level political process, it is equally important that
sustained and well-funded efforts be made to promote
reconciliation and build trust among the communities.
In that regard, we support the Special Representative's
efforts to promote consensus solutions and expand
cooperation among the principal stakeholders.

