Mr. Tanin: The Security Council has before it the
report (S/2017/387) of the Secretary-General covering
the period of January to April 2017. Much has transpired
since the reporting period ended on 15 April, and I will
share the main facts and some observations about the
more recent developments.

The last quarter witnessed fluctuating tensions
and fragility; however, the situation remains generally
stable. Escalation has been avoided in several instances
as a result of external diplomatic interventions, but the
necessary level of trust in Pristina and Belgrade has
been further eroded by a number of irresponsible and
inflammatory statements. Both sides have repeatedly
accused one another ofprovocation whereas the process
of normalization of relations requires cooperation.

The decision to call an early parliamentary
election in Kosovo in June following the collapse of the
governing alliance, and the lines painstakingly forged
in 2014 were a significant development. The outcome
of the election may draw a different future for Kosovo.
The next Government, regardless of its composition,
will nonetheless continue to face numerous pressing
challenges. Elections provide opportunities for the
renewal of political will and direction, as well as for
greater diversity in leadership and representation - for
example, greater engagement with youth.

I must express my shock, shared by many in Kosovo,
at the attack this past weekend on Arbana Xharra, a
prominent media figure who recently entered electoral
politics. Regardless of the motives of the perpetrators, I
cannot sufficiently stress the importance of a swift and
full investigation, this terrible incident having taken
place at the outset of the political campaign.

It is my responsibility to inform the Council
of progress made and the challenges that remain,
identifying dangers and dissecting the complexities
of the current situation. It is important to note that the
Mitrovica wall dispute was resolved peacefully through
negotiations, and that the initial determination to form
a Kosovo army via legislative amendments has calmed.
However, the relations between Pristina and Belgrade
are still not at ease. The frequent electoral cycles are
part of a continuum of distraction that is not helping
to advance the European Union-led dialogue or the
implementation of its central agreements, such as the
association/community of Serb-majority municipalities
in Kosovo. In practical terms, the dialogue has been at
a standstill for some months now; its resumption is of
the greatest importance.

Besides the limited progress seen in the dialogue
process, public communications during this reporting
period unfortunately slid back into intolerant and
ethno-nationalist sloganeering. This tendency should
be followed closely and is a matter of deep concern.
Instead of elaborating on this trend, I would like to
review what we have heard from different leaders
during this period.

In relation to Serbia's request for the extradition
from France of Ramush Haradinaj, leader of the
political party Alliance for the Future of Kosovo, prior
to the decision of the French authorities, the Kosovo
Assembly, on 9 March, adopted a resolution calling for
suspension of the European Union-facilitated dialogue
with Belgrade until Mr. Haradinaj had been released. It
is hoped that the resolution will now be rescinded.

In a television interview in early April, prominent
Assembly Member Daut Haradinaj, the brother of
Ramush Haradinaj, warned of an "ethnically clean
Kosovo" if judicial authorities in France were to rule
in favour of Serbia's extradition request for his brother.
Upon his return to Kosovo, on 27 April, Ramush
Haradinaj himself referred to Serbia's extradition
request as "a call to war", referred to the "enemy,
Serbia" and threatened "we will do to them far worse
than we did back then," referring to the highest point
of the war, in 1999. Outgoing Serbian President Nikolic'
compared Haradinaj to a "rabid dog that has tasted
human flesh".

Such statements directly and negatively affect the
atmosphere among the communities in Kosovo. Are
these responsible statements? Such incitements to hatred
fall outside the realm of civil political discourse. They
throw us into a situation where, as has been said, reason
would be consumed in the flames of irresponsible and
unnecessary behaviour.

Another issue that has received a great deal of
attention is the question of regional and subregional
unions, should the enlargement of the European
Union stall. Again, I will report to the Council on
what we have heard from different leaders during the
reporting period.

In a mid-April interview the Prime Minister of
Albania, Edi Rama, stated,

"[e]veryone would like to unite in the big union.
But if there is no hope, no perspective, no space,
then, of course, smaller unions may happen".

Other politicians seized the moment to shape this
statement into an expression of nationalist intent.
President Hashim Thaci remarked,

"[if] the EU continues with the delay and the unclear
approach", then "all Albanians in the region will live in
one unified State in order to proceed with integration
into the European family". The President of Serbia's
National Council of Albanians went further, saying,
"now is a key moment for Albania and Kosovo to show
Serbia that this is a part of Albania that must not be
touched", referring to mixed-ethnicity municipalities in
southern Serbia.

In reaction, Serbian Cabinet Minister Aleksandar
Vulin stated that Greater Albania "can only be
accomplished by a great Balkan war". He further stated
that
"Albanians must be aware that they will have to
fight their own wars and that they will pay for the
wars Haradinaj is trying to cause with the heads of
their own children".

Whatever the real intent behind such remarks,
some issues have moved from a more academic or
semi-academic debate to the political level. Such
suggestions can also fuel fears and tensions and lead to
something much worse. One must ask, what place does
such rhetoric have in 2017? What should any person, be
they Albanian or Serb, make of such statements? Such
language and such thinking produces real effects on
the ground.

There were a notable cluster of security incidents
centred on the city of Mitrovica, including physical
assaults, including some in which weapons were
used. Under the important agreements brokered by
the European Union, a long-anticipated and positive
development is the expected opening of the city's main
bridge to vehicular traffic. Yet in the current climate,
expectations are tinged with anxiety and fear, rather
than optimism.

Constructive engagement continues to be possible,
and we witness this fact on the ground every day. I have
continued meeting municipal and community leaders
throughout all parts of Kosovo. In this past quarter, I
had the opportunity to meet and talk with municipal
mayors in Gjilan/anilane, Pristina, north Mitrovica
and south Mitrovica. I witnessed real commitment to
promoting cooperation between the communities and
to resolving real issues in the daily lives and needs of
people. I have been exposed not to political rhetoric, but
rather to serious work aimed at building a tolerant and
inclusive society.

Particularly encouraging is the establishment,
by the associations of Kosovo Albanian and Kosovo
Serb families of missing persons of a shared resource
centre. Supported by the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), the
centre brings the families of missing persons together
to encourage dialogue and common efforts. The
missing persons issue is an open wound that inhibits
societal reconciliation, but I have been struck by the
spirit of unity at the centre, which is calling for better
performance by politicians and public institutions in
both Belgrade and in Pristina in order to bring answers
to those who have already suffered too long without
such answers.

On 15 March, UNMIK hosted a Global Open Day
on Women and Peace and Security, which convened
more than 100 dignitaries, journalists and political
and civil society leaders to foment a debate about the
role of women in societal reconciliation. The event's
keynote address was delivered by former Kosovo
President Atifete Jahjaga. We were highly impressed
by the diversity of the participants and the constructive
manner in which they were willing and able to discuss
difficult issues. We will continue to support women
who take courageous stands to shape a better future
for Kosovo.

Furthermore, UNMIK has worked to implement
resolution 2250 (20l5), focusing on youth. On
11 May, UNMIK hosted the second in a series on
meetings entitled "Stories from the other side", which
brings together young people from Kosovo's diverse
communities. Identifying their shared perspective,
they come up with new ideas for tackling current social
problems in Kosovo.

I wish to make special mention of the efforts of
the EU Special Representative in Kosovo aimed at
reinvigorating the Implementation and Monitoring
Council for the protection of cultural heritage, which
reconvened during this reporting period after a long
hiatus. This mechanism is crucial for implementation
of the Law on the Special Protective Zones and is a
platform for discussion of the full range of issues in
the area of protecting cultural heritage. Included among
those is the continuing obstruction by the Decan/Decani
authorities of the Kosovo Constitutional Court's ruling
on property belonging to the Visoki Deeani Orthodox
Monastery. The central authorities have yet to cancel
the procedure for privatizing the formerly disputed
land, despite the clear legal decision by Kosovo's
highest court.

Improving the situation in Kosovo and the region
requires leadership that transcends ethno-national
divisions, rather than amplify them. Overcoming such
destructive challenges is the European spirit to which
all regional actors aspire. I hope the members of the
Council can continue to use their considerable influence
to encourage democratic institutions to serve the real
needs ofthe people and to encourage leaders in Belgrade
and Pristina to proceed with visionary dialogue, in their
own and their people's true common interest.

Our Mission continues to work to support those
ends with all our means and in full partnership and
cooperation with local and international partners. The
Council's authority remains absolutely indispensable
for ensuring accountability and for recognizing the
leaders who understand that their political success is
measured through the well-being of the people.

I take this opportunity once again to thank all
members of the Council for their ongoing support of
our Mission.

