The President: At the outset of the meeting, I
should like, on behalf of the members of the Security
Council, to express our deepest sympathy to the
Government and people of Poland in connection with
the tragic plane crash on 10 April that killed President
Kaczynski, the First Lady and a large number of senior
Polish officials.

May I ask the members of the Security Council to
join me in observing a minute of silence to honour the
memory of those who perished in that tragic incident.

The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo

Thirty-first report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2010/164)

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the consideration of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the consideration of the
item without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mukongo
Ngay (Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a
seat at the Council table.


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Alan Doss,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
2
head of the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

It is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of members to
document S/20lO/164, which contains the thirty-first
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Alan Doss. I now give the floor to
Mr. Doss.


