Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We are grateful to
your presidency, Sir, for the excellent organization
of the eleventh annual joint United Nations-African
Union (AU) consultative meeting, held in Addis Ababa,
and for the warm hospitality provided to the Security
Council delegation.

I would also like to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Haile Menkerios for his
comprehensive and insightful briefings, in Addis Ababa
and here, on strengthening the United Nations-African
Union partnership on issues of peace and security in
Africa and the activities of the United Nations Office
to the African Union (UNOAU).

My delegation supports the recommendations
contained in the Secretary-General's report (S/2017/744)
and would like to make the following observations.

The United Nations-AU partnership has evolved
significantly, as reaffirmed at the recent United Nations-
AU consultative meeting, in line with the landmark
resolution 2320 (2016). The Joint United Nations-
African Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security, signed on 19 April, also marks a
new phase of enhanced strategic collaboration that can
have optimal value for Africa. What we realize today is
the need for what the Secretary-General calls a whole
new approach, with a shift to conflict prevention, rather
than spending more time and resources on resolving
them. These characterize the Secretary-General's New
Agenda for Peace and fast-forwards Africa's Strategy
2063 and the Silence the Guns by 2020 project.

Therefore, the United Nations-AU preventive
diplomacy tools and mechanisms can be strengthened
only by working closely at each level, with every
entity - the United Nations Security Council and the
AU Peace and Security Council, UNOAU, and the AU
Observer Mission to the United Nations. This calls
for close synergy between the United Nations and AU
Special Representatives and Envoys, including possible
joint field missions of the Security Council and the
Peace and Security Council. We also need to combine
our strengths at all phases of the continuum, from early
warning, conflict prevention, resolution, recovery to
development and disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration. We welcome, therefore, the establishment
of the two separate working groups of the United
Nations and the AU to further advance the recently
signed partnership.

The United Nations can leverage the comparative
advantages of regional and subregional organizations,
as well as groups of neighbouring countries, for they
possess a better understanding ofthe dynamics and root
causes of conflicts and the terrain, and are therefore
in a better position to mobilize resources. Often our
response to crises remains fragmented, while their
causes are deeply interlinked. It is therefore necessary
to elaborate comprehensive approaches, connecting
security, humanitarian and development efforts, to be
better reinforced by financial outlays on peacebuilding
measures. We must invest much more in addressing the
root causes of tensions and instability by building State
institutions and consolidating constitutions, holding
elections, building democracy and the rule of law,
ending impunity, establishing good governance and
implementing security sector reforms.

Equally important are investments in human
development, infrastructure development, climate
mitigation, disaster risk reduction and building
resilience. Only these will promote intra-African
economic growth, resulting in greater and more vibrant
regional integration with tangible progress. In addition,
there has to be harmonization of AU and United Nations
standards across the African continent. Furthermore,
peace will be more durable when women and young
people are fully integrated into all activities at every
stage of the peace and security process, and are at the
negotiating table at the highest levels.

While the framework of decision-making, proposed
by Secretary-General in his latest report, will make
joint action more effective, further technical work
needs to be undertaken to agree on the modalities for
joint analysis, planning and assessment of the relevant
intergovernmental bodies. These will also require a
revision of internal administrative processes, policies
and procedures.

AU peace support operations, with the
organization's knowledge of local conflicts and the
tactics of militias, are effective tools in helping the
United Nations to better discharge its mandate of
maintaining international peace and security. This
joint work is particularly advantageous in combating
terrorism, organized crime, human trafficking and
other scourges. The international community therefore
needs to provide AU peace operations with capacity-
building and financial support, in accordance with
resolution 2320 (2016).

We commend AU for its continued commitment
with regard to covering 25 per cent of the cost of its
peace-support operations, and believe that the AU
Peace Fund will be a robust mechanism for cooperation
and partnership. The four options of a jointly developed
budget, as identified in the Secretary-General's report
of 26 May (S/2017/454), should be explored for optimal
results, beyond the use of voluntary contributions.

Kazakhstan, as an observer of the AU, remains
committed to further strengthening the AU and to
helping African countries fulfil their vision for peace,
progress and prosperity.

