Mr. Motufaga (Fiji): Fiji would like to thank the Belgian presidency for this opportunity to contribute to discussions on the important topic of transitional justice. The Security Council has placed huge emphasis on peacebuilding and sustaining peace. Widespread and serious human rights violations create conditions where special justice interventions are needed if peace is to be secured and sustained. Transitional justice redresses gross violations. Transitional justice focuses on the needs of victims and their communities. When complemented by criminal justice mechanisms, they strengthen the rule of law, which is critical in any sustainable peace process. Violent conflicts are always associated with widespread human rights abuses and _ atrocities. Communities are traumatized and torn apart while losing property and sources of economic well-being. That poses a huge challenge as to how communities can be reconciled. When reconciliation cannot take place, the chance of peace and development succeeding is far lower. Communities have to be brought together, and victims and their hurts and grievances need to be heard. Transitional justice must have a heart in order to both acknowledge and establish measures to reduce what victims went through, as well as addressing their demands for justice. Transitional justice must seek to build trust and rebuild relations so that former victims and perpetrators can live side by side again, as a community. As an international community, transitional justice contributes to the promotion of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), especially SDG 16, which aims at achieving peaceful, just and inclusive societies. Transitional justice processes have been used successfully in our region. The process was supported by the international community and regional peacekeeping missions. Our own examples of transitional justice show that there is a need for political support to Governments to establish inclusive transitional justice processes. The United Nations system has an important role to play, including from both the peacekeeping and peacebuilding sides. Transitional justice mechanisms should be properly integrated with and complement State institutions. Such transitions always take time - the process is a delicate one and needs to be supported. It is essential that victims see that justice is done. Transitional justice brings a sense of closure to the victims, as well as to entire communities. They lay a foundation for development and achieving the SDGs. Transitional justice mechanisms should be part of broader security sector reforms. Divisions within communities take time to heal. Communities need to regain their confidence in the law and its institutions. Reconciliation measures must have a special focus, namely, women and children. In all conflicts, women and children are disproportionally disadvantaged and suffer the most. The skills and knowledge required to tackle the issue are complex, and therefore United Nations capabilities are needed to provide support in that regard. For small island developing States, the changes in climate will continue to have a destabilizing impact on communities. The loss of land, even entire islands, and livelihoods, as well as large-scale movements of communities, can be catalysts for conflict. As community relocation proceeds, new conflicts will inevitably arise. Most will be rooted in cultural settings around the management of and access to community- owned resources. Transitional justice measures offer unique possibilities for rebuilding communities.
