Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing. China
applauds the Secretary-General's tireless efforts to
advance the Middle East peace process.

The issue of Palestine lies at the heart and at the
source of the larger Middle East question. Today, the
situation in Palestine is dire. The peace talks between
Palestine and Israel are mired in an entrenched
deadlock, with violent clashes occurring continuously,
together with serious humanitarian crises. In particular,
Israel's continued construction of settlements has
undermined the prospects of the two-State solution. The
international community should feel a greater sense of
urgency, take tangible actions and help bring about a
comprehensive and just settlement of the Palestine issue
without delay. The international community should
stand behind Palestine's independent statehood and
the peaceful coexistence of Palestine and Israel, which
is the right way forward. Having a State of Palestine,
based on the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital and enjoying full sovereignty, is an inalienable
right of the Palestinian people.

The parties concerned should steadfastly advance
the peace process on the basis ofthe principle ofland for
peace, the two-State solution, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the applicable Security Council resolutions. The
international community should encourage Palestine
and Israel to hold fast to the correct course of peace
talks. Both sides should exercise maximum restraint
so as to avoid any further escalation of the tensions.
Israel should be the first to show good will by halting
the construction of settlements and the demolition of
Palestinian homes, so as to create enabling conditions
for the resumption of the peace talks. The parties
concerned should show vision and foresight, proceed
from the fundamental long-term interests of both
peoples to make a political decision, and strive to
resume fruitful talks as soon as possible.

The international community should maintain
its effort to lend effective support to the Middle East
peace process. China supports all peace efforts aimed
at de-escalating tensions between Palestine and Israel
and realizing the two-State solution. We support the
establishment of more effective mechanisms to help
bring peace to the Middle East. We also support the
idea that the Council should honour its responsibilities
and take action without delay to address positively the
legitimate concerns of Palestine and the Arab States. In
that process, the parties concerned should strengthen
coordination with Palestine and the Arab States so as
to form a synergy.

China is a staunch supporter of the just cause of
the Palestinian people and is an active mediator for
Palestinian-Israeli peace. As a permanent member of
the Council, China stands ready to work with the rest
of the international community towards a just solution
to the Palestine-Israel issue and towards peace and
stability in the Middle East as soon as possible.

