Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by thanking you, Sir, for bringing this important
issue to the Council for debate during the Danish
presidency. The United Kingdom is proud and pleased
to strongly support your initiative. Our thanks go as
well to Judge Higgins, President of the International
Court of Justice (ICJ), and to Mr. Michel, Under-
Secretary-General for Legal Affairs. Their valuable and
insightful contributions are informing today's debate.

I would like to cover three issues: the rule of law,
international crimes and sanctions. But before I do so, I
would like to pick up on what both Judge Higgins and
Mr. Michel said about the recent agreement between
Cameroon and Nigeria. I had the honour, along with
other United Nations delegates, of witnessing this
under the auspices of the Secretary-General. I would
like to take the opportunity to pay a tribute to the
leaders of both countries, but also to the Secretary-
General and his Special Representative, for the
decision to seek and implement the ICJ's judgment as
well as to lay down a very important template for
success for the rule of law. I would also like to express
the hope that other countries will be able to follow that
example.

First, the rule of law. The United Kingdom is
fully committed both to the rule of international law
and to the Purposes and Principles in the United
Nations Charter. The peaceful settlement of disputes is
at the heart of the Charter. And, as we have heard from
Judge Higgins, the International Court of Justice is the
principal United Nations judicial organ charged with
settling disputes between States; it has an absolutely
central role in maintaining international peace and
security. The United Kingdom is a strong supporter of
the ICJ, as demonstrated by our acceptance of the
compulsory jurisdiction under Article 36, paragraph 2,
of the ICJ Statute. We urge other States that have not
done so to also accept the compulsory jurisdiction.

Like you, Mr. President, we hope that this debate
will generate new momentum on the rule of law and
transitional justice in post-conflict situations.
Sustainable peace cannot be based on anarchy,
impunity or dictatorship. As the Secretary-General
stated, "It is by reintroducing the rule of law, and
confidence in its impartial application, that we can
hope to resuscitate societies shattered by conflict."
(A/59/PV.3, p. 3)

Some progress has been made since the
Secretary-General's landmark report on the rule of law
and transitional justice, of August 2004 (S/2004/616).
The rule of law now routinely features in the mandates
of new peacekeeping and peacebuilding missions. We
have been pleased to support the development of
lessons-learned studies and training for United Nations
rule-of-law personnel. That is all very welcome. But
some key recommendations in the August 2004 report
remain unimplemented. Notably, the Security Council
still awaits proposals from the Secretariat for
enhancing the United Nations system.

The United Kingdom warmly welcomed the
Secretary-General's idea of a rule of law assistance
unit, as endorsed in the World Summit Outcome
(resolution 60/1). We await a decision on the unit's
establishment, remit and location within the
Secretariat. Our View remains that the Unit's focus
must be on countries at risk of or emerging from
conflict, and we hope it will work closely with the
Peacebuilding Commission. We hope, too, that the
Peacebuilding Commission will devote considerable
attention to rule-of-law and transitional justice needs in
the countries on its agenda.

Increased and better coordinated rule-of-law
capacity is also needed in the field. What, for example,
can a single prison official do in a country the size of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo? If the
Secretary-General's planning reports provide more
detail about how many rule-of-law personnel will be
needed in a particular mission and what they will do,
the Council should be prepared to agree on this and to
provide the greater clarity and specificity on the rule of
law in peacekeeping mandates that the Committee of
Thirty-Four has rightly called for.

Within United Nations missions there should be
maximum cooperation among judicial, corrections,

human rights and policing units, the combined efforts
of which are critical. All of those elements, we suggest,
should operate within the same pillar and be
answerable to a single Deputy Special Representative
of the Secretary-General responsible for the rule of
law. Together with United Nations agencies on the
ground, they should adopt a single, "one United
Nations" approach.

Post-conflict States also need access to more and
earlier funding. We hope that the Peacebuilding Fund
will pay particular attention to this.

The Danish presidency has also asked us to
consider the important issue of rule-of-law vacuums,
where national justice and security sectors have
collapsed. The best possible response to this, in our
View, would be the early deployment of international
police, justice and corrections personnel and an early
start to the process of rebuilding the domestic justice
system.

We strongly support the establishment of the
standing police capacity and urge that equivalent
efforts be made on the judicial and corrections side. In
general, we believe that the work of the policing
components in United Nations missions would benefit
from a detailed discussion by the Council.

Where a rule-of-law vacuum exists, security
considerations will often mean that military
peacekeepers will inevitably retain a role for some time
in ensuring law and order. A recent study for the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations urged that
planning missions consider what law-and-order
functions the military needs to take on. That
recommendation warrants careful consideration, in our
View.

Secondly, I would like to turn to the subject of
international crimes. It is important that the Security
Council take the lead in combating impunity for those
who have perpetrated genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes. It is also important that the
international community assist States in their efforts to
strengthen the capacity of their legal systems so that
they can hold such perpetrators to account.

The international community and the Security
Council have a range of mechanisms at their disposal
for combating impunity, including the International
Criminal Court (ICC), national, international and
mixed courts and tribunals and truth and reconciliation

commissions. The adoption of Security Council
resolution 1593 (2005), referring the situation in
Darfur to the ICC Prosecutor, was a landmark step in
the Council's efforts to combat impunity. The United
Kingdom is a strong supporter, in principle and in
practice, of the ICC. We urge States that have not yet
done so to become parties to the Rome Statute.

The United Kingdom is also a firm supporter of
the work of the International Criminal Tribunals for the
Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, the Special Court for
Sierra Leone and other existing mixed tribunals. We
call on all States to cooperate with and provide support
to those tribunals, as the Security Council has
mandated.

We welcome the adoption of Security Council
resolution 1688 (2006) at the end of last week and the
transfer, on Tuesday this week, of President Charles
Taylor to face trial before the Special Court for Sierra
Leone, sitting in the ICC at The Hague. That is a
timely demonstration of the Council's commitment to
ensuring that those accused of serious international
crimes face justice, no matter how wealthy or powerful
they may be. The United Kingdom was pleased to have
been able to help in this endeavour through our
undertaking to take former President Taylor if he is
convicted.

Thirdly, I would like to turn to the issue of
sanctions. As set out in the World Summit Outcome,
we all support the need for fair and clear procedures
for placing individuals and entities on sanctions lists,
for delisting and for granting humanitarian exemptions;
the question is how we achieve that. It is in all our
interests that the Security Council's targeted sanctions
be both effective and fair. We are pleased that the 1267
sanctions Committee has now started its consideration
of these issues. We believe that any improved
procedures agreed in the 1267 Committee should also
be reflected in the practice of the other sanctions
committees. It would be wrong, in our View, to see this
issue in isolation. The United Kingdom is committed to
strengthening fair and clear procedures across the
various committees as soon as possible.

The United Kingdom supports a pragmatic
approach to these issues. We welcome the paper
produced by the Watson Institute in March this year
with the sponsorship of the Governments of Sweden,
Switzerland and Germany. This paper provides a good
quarry for practical and sensible improvements to
existing procedures, and we believe that it addresses all
the key issues. We trust that the 1267 Committee and
other relevant sanctions committees will use the paper
to inform their discussions.

