Mr. Desta (Eritrea): I would like to thank the
delegation of the United Kingdom for organizing this
open thematic debate on the prevention of conflicts and
natural resources. I would also like to commend today's
briefers for their informative introductory remarks.

Today's attack against the United Nations
compound in Mogadishu was appalling. My delegation
wishes to extend its deep condolences to the victims
and their families and expresses its solidarity with the
people and Government of Somalia.

My delegation views endowments in natural
resources as an asset to lift millions of people out of
poverty. However, fierce and aggressive competition
over access, illegal exploitation and mismanagement of
natural resources are among the most important factors
that are linked to several situations of civil strife in
African States, both causing and perpetuating conflicts.
Ensuring good governance in the control, management
and trade of natural resources and equitable access to
natural resources is therefore imperative in ensuring
the inclusive economic and social well-being of all
the people in a given country. That would in itself be
critical to maintaining and creating a cohesive and
harmonious society.

It is equally important to underscore the negative
impact of exploitative interference by external Powers
and transnational companies, which undermine the
sovereign rights of many Member States over the use
and management of their natural resources. More often
than not, this has become a recipe for international
conflicts, with grave consequences for international
peace and security.

While we agree with some ofthe remarks regarding
intra-State conflicts, including measures to prevent the
illicit exploitation of natural resources by non-State
actors, I would like to stress the following. First,
States have the primary responsibility to develop and
exploit their natural resources for the benefit of their
respective societies. This is an inalienable right and is
also unambiguously reflected in the landmark General
Assembly resolution 1803 (XXVII) of 1962.

Secondly, in recent years, the Security Council
has acted on several occasions to curb the negative
consequences of the illicit trade in natural resources by
targeting non-State actors. It must, however, be stressed
that, when such actions are taken, it is important for
there to be full consent of the State concerned. More
importantly, no resolution of the Council should
undermine a State's right to exploit its natural resources
or be used as a tool for political pressure. In that
connection, it is important to underscore that United
Nations organs dealing with social and economic
development are best suited to discuss the issue of
international cooperation on natural resources.

As a country that has emerged from the ashes of
war and is endowed with natural resources, Eritrea
has recently reached a stage where it is able to develop
and exploit its mineral resources in close cooperation
with its international partners. In Eritrea, all mineral
resources are designated as public property and the
conservation and development of such resources must
be ensured for Eritrea's present and future generations.

Let me conclude by stressing that Eritrea is of the
view that natural resources should promote cooperation,
not conflicts. We are firmly convinced that pursuing
policies for the sustainable use of resources with the
aim of creating a win-win solution is critical within and
between countries and corporations.

