Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
I have the honor to speak on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti, which includes Argentina, Brazil,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, the United States, France,
Guatemala, Uruguay, Venezuela and my own country,
Peru. I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President
for organizing this debate to discuss the latest report
(S/2016/225) of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).

The Group of Friends welcome the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for
Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honore, and thanks her for her
comprehensive briefing and for the intensive work she
is doing.

Strengthening the rule of law and democratic
institutions, the establishment of a political culture
that promotes democratic stability and improving
socioeconomic conditions are key elements in achieving
greater security, stability and prosperity in Haiti. The
Group of Friends welcomes the continuing efforts
of the United Nations, other multilateral agencies,
regional organizations and States Members of the
United Nations to support the critical needs of Haiti. In
that connection, the Group expresses its concern about
the continued suspension of electoral rounds and the
political uncertainty that has produced. We note the
agreement lead and reached by Haitians on 5 February,
which avoided a Government vacuum and established
a road map for the continuation of the electoral
process. We call for the prompt implementation of all
the provisions of the agreement in the agreed period.
We would also like to underline the responsibility of
all Haitians in that regard. We call on all Haitians to
contribute constructively, exercise maximum restraint
and work together peacefully to strengthen confidence
in the electoral process. We appreciate the efforts made
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
in that regard and we encourage her to continue in
that task.

The Group of Friends notes with alarm the
politically motivated violence during January and
February and calls on all political actors to promote a
peaceful climate in full respect of the law. We reiterate
the importance of the commitment of the Haitian
Government to strengthen the rule of law and to
make progress in the judicial and security sectors. In
that regard, we welcome the continued strengthening,
professionalization and reform of the Haitian National
Police, and reiterate that police training should continue
to be one of the key tasks of MINUSTAH. We also
note the partial progress in implementing the five-year
development plan for the period 2012-2016.

While recognizing progress in the judicial sector,
it is urgently necessary to reduce prolonged pretrial
detention and eliminate inhumane conditions of
detention, ensure accountability and end impunity,
including for past human rights violations.

The Group of Friends of Haiti reiterates its
commitment to the United Nations zero-tolerance
policy on sexual exploitation and abuse. In that regard,
we expect all United Nations personnel to adhere to
the highest standards of conduct. The Group urges all
stakeholders to assume their responsibilities to prevent
such cases, investigate allegations and hold accountable
those responsible.
We note the ongoing work of the Government of
Haiti, MINUSTAH and others to protect members
of vulnerable groups, but also note with concern the
limited national capacity for the protection of human
rights, particularly with regard to vulnerable groups.
That demands the utmost attention of all actors to
prevent and reduce violent crimes, particularly against
women and children, including rape and other sexual
violence. In that regard, the Group supports focusing
on gender issues and child protection, as well as the
continuing violence-reduction efforts to promote the
welfare of youth at risk and vulnerable communities.

The Group also expresses its concern about the
fact that the ongoing political instability diverts Haiti's
attention from its persistent humanitarian challenges.

Similarly, the Group notes that food insecurity
resulting from three years of drought, which continues
to worsen, is now having an impact on 1.5 million
Haitians, as well as on the country's stability.

The continued efforts to eliminate the cholera
epidemic serve to remind us of the importance
maintaining cooperation between the international
community and the Government of Haiti to address the
needs of the Haitian people. We echo the call of the
Secretary-General to support the efforts of the Haitian
authorities in this area, and encourage a greater number
of partners to complement the contributions of current
international contributors.

The Group notes with concern that the current
political crisis negatively affects development spending
and, along with the drought and the concomitant decline
in agricultural production and the decreasing flows
of donor contributions, is also affecting the country's
economic growth.

There can be no genuine stability or sustainable
development in Haiti without strengthening democratic
institutions and credible democratic processes. In that
context, we emphasize the importance of completing the
electoral cycle without further dela in order to ensure
that Haiti can count on fully functioning democratic
institutions. We recognize the principle of ownership
and the primary responsibility of the Government and
the people of Haiti over all aspects of stabilizing the
country. We also underscore the responsibility that falls
to MINUSTAH in that effort, according to its mandate.

The Group reaffirms its solidarity and commitment
withthepeopleandtheGovernmentofHaitiintheirpursuit
of stability, reconstruction, recovery, socioeconomic
development and democratic consolidation.

Finally, the Group of Friends of Haiti recognizes
the important role of MINUSTAH in ensuring stability
and security in Haiti and expresses its support and
appreciation for the women and men who make up
MINUSTAH for their dedication and tireless efforts to
support recovery and stability in Haiti.

I also wanted to make several comments in my
national capacity, but given the lateness of the hour, I
shall stop here.

