Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran):
Terrorism is one of the gravest threats to international
peace and security. Addressing this problem requires an
integrated and comprehensive approach. Clearly, the
United Nations has made considerable progress, both
in the areas of standard-setting and in implementing
counter-terrorism measures. But despite all those
efforts and activities, we have unfortunately witnessed
an escalation in terrorist attacks in various parts of the
world.

Genuinely combating terrorism very much
depends upon how we identify its root causes. Foreign
occupation, exclusion, selectivity and expansionist
economic and political policies are among the factors
that create conditions conductive to the spread of
violent acts and terrorism. Furthermore, the double
standard exercised by certain States in dealing with
terrorism has aggravated the situation. On the one
hand, they appear to confront some terrorist groups
while, on the other, they overlook others. Perhaps one
reason for the rise in terrorist activities in recent years,
in terms of frequency and the advanced tactics used by
terrorists, is the wrong and selective approach by
certain States in dealing with terrorism.

On the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), we welcome the
initiative to convene the open meeting of the
comprehensive review on the status of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), which was
held in October. The meeting was an opportunity to
address a number of serious and valid concerns of
Member States in connection with the work of 1540
Committee. The Islamic Republic of Iran believes that
the work of the Committee should not have operative
impact on the rights enshrined in internationally
negotiated instruments such as the Treaty on the

Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the Chemical
Weapons Convention and the Biological and Toxin
Weapons Convention, as well as the statute of the
International Atomic Energy Agency.

The Islamic Republic of Iran also believes that
any emphasis on the concept of prohibiting access by
non-State actors to weapons of mass destruction and
nuclear materials should not divert the attention of
Member States from nuclear disarmament as the
highest priority of the international community.

In line with the points I have just made, the
Islamic Republic of Iran has submitted two reports to
the 1540 Committee on the measures Iran has taken to
implement the resolution.

The Islamic Republic of Iran has taken serious
steps in implementing the Security Council's
resolutions on terrorism, including resolution 1373
(2001). We have submitted six national reports on our
implementation of that resolution, in which we have set
out the concrete steps that our country has taken to
implement the provisions of that and other relevant
resolutions. Those steps include stepping up border
control security and surveillance measures at border
entry and exit checkpoints. Moreover, we have
intensified our fight against drug trafficking originating
from Afghanistan. Given the fact that that menace
serves as a feeding ground for terrorism, Iran's efforts
in that regard have undoubtedly made a fundamental
contribution to the global fight against terrorism. Iran
has thus far shouldered that burden almost single-
handedly.

As one of the first victims of terrorism in the
region, Iran made unwavering efforts to fight it and has
always strongly condemned that vicious menace in all
its forms and manifestations. As I stated earlier, the
application of double standards in dealing with
terrorism and terrorist groups is a matter of grave
concern that seriously undermines the international
community's collective fight against terrorism. The
Islamic Republic of Iran has been subject to various
acts of terrorism by certain terrorist groups over the
past three decades.

In that regard, particular reference should be
made of the Mujaheddin e Khalq terrorist group, which
has thus far perpetrated more than 612 terrorist
operations in Iran, resulting in the killing and
wounding of many civilians and officials and damage
to private and government properties. That terrorist

group has also devised many atrocious ploys to incite
acts of terrorism inside and outside the country. This
terrorist group was long supported and sheltered by the
former regime in Iraq and was engaged in Saddam's
bloody campaigns against the Iraqi people, too.

Despite its heinous and appalling record of
terrorist acts and incitement to terrorism, and although
it was officially designated a terrorist group by the
United States and others, elements and members of that
group continue to enjoy support and receive safe haven
in the United States and some European countries,
including some States members of the European Union.
The irony is that the European Union Council of
Foreign Ministers, despite its own belief in and
emphasis on the terrorist nature of the Mujaheddin e
Khalq, decided, on 26 January 2009, to remove the
name of this notorious terrorist cult from the European
Union list of terrorist groups by invoking the judgment
of the Court of First Instance of the European Court of
Justice. The European Union decision has put on
display the selective approach and double standard
with which the European Union deals with the vicious
menace of terrorism. It is obvious that this kind of
attitude towards terrorist groups weakens the
international consensus against terrorism and
encourages terrorists to continue their inhuman
activities. Such support is indeed in clear violation of
the provisions of Security Council resolutions,
particularly resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005).

There are certain other terrorist groups that have
committed acts of terrorism against the Iranian people.
In the past several years, the Jundullah terrorist group
has attacked and killed dozens of people in the eastern
and south-eastern parts of the country in an attempt to
create an environment of intimidation and insecurity.
On 18 October, that group attacked participants in a
conference of tribal and local leaders in the border city
of Pishin in the eastern province of Sistan-Baluchistan,
killing at least 57 and injuring 150. This group also
enjoys the support of some foreign countries. We
expect all countries to uphold their international
obligations in this respect.

I would like to conclude by reiterating that we
should all strengthen our cooperation in the fight
against terrorism. Only through a coordinated and
comprehensive approach will the international
community's fight against terrorism yield lasting
results.
10
