Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I wish first of all to respond to the
irresponsible and factually inaccurate statement made
by the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom, who took it upon himself to interpret the
Russian position with reference to a decision of the
Group of Eight (G-8). I would recall something that
anyone who read that decision should know: not
coincidentally, it makes no reference to the actions of
the Security Council. The Russian Federation based its
action on today's draft resolution precisely on the
position formulated by the G-8, and of which every
member of that group should be perfectly aware.

I should now like to set out the reasoning behind
our vote on the draft text that was before us today. The
result of the vote on that draft resolution, on sanctions
against Zimbabwe, was largely predictable and was due
to a number of circumstances. In the positions of a
number of Council members, we have of late seen an
increasingly obvious attempt to take the Council
beyond its Charter prerogatives and beyond the
maintenance of international peace and security. We
believe such practices to be illegitimate and dangerous
and apt to lead to a realignment of the entire United
Nations system. The Russian Federation intends to
continue to counter such trends, so that all States
without exception will firmly comply with the Charter
of the Organization.

We are firmly convinced that the problems of
Zimbabwe cannot be resolved by artificially elevating
them to the level of a threat to international peace and
security. The Council's application in this instance of
enforcement measures under Chapter VII of the United
Nations Charter is unjustified and excessive. Moreover,
the draft resolution represents nothing but an attempt
by the Council to interfere in the internal affairs of
States, contrary to the Charter.

The draft ignores important realities. The
negotiating process in Zimbabwe has begun; dialogue
has been launched between the representatives of the
Government and the opposition and is proceeding
apace. In that context, a broad range of problems in the
inter-Zimbabwean settlement, including the formation
of a Government of national unity, is under
consideration. In that respect, we note the mediation
efforts of President Mbeki of South Africa and
President Santos of Angola, which are opening a
window for realistic opportunities to overcome the
internal conflict in Zimbabwe.
The sponsors of the draft resolution have not
considered the opinions of the States of the region,

which reject its sanctions philosophy and are calling
for the search for a political solution to be continued.
Indeed, the draft ignores the consensual decision of the
African Union appealing to States to refrain from any
act that could have a negative impact on advancing the
dialogue between the Zimbabwean parties. The
adoption of a resolution could lead to a realignment of
the regional situation and deepen existing problems.
That is why the sponsors have been warned against
such action by countries of the region that are involved
in the search for a solution to the inter-Zimbabwean
conflict.

On the basis of all those factors, the Russian
Federation voted against the draft resolution.

In ignoring the voices of the skeptical and those
who disagree with them, the sponsors unfortunately
squandered a genuine opportunity to coordinate a
Council response to events in Zimbabwe that would
truly have promoted the success of the political
dialogue in a country friendly to Russia and,
subsequently, a way out of the current profound crisis.

However, the fact that the draft resolution was
not adopted hardly means that the grave situation in
Zimbabwe is beyond the purview of international
attention. The Russian Federation calls on the
authorities of that country and the opposition to pursue
constructive dialogue in order to develop a formula for
a political settlement as soon as possible. Harare must
understand that there is no alternative.

