Mr. Baublys (Lithuania): The international
community has been in painful shock since the downing
of Malaysian Airlines Flight 17 in the Donetsk oblast
of Ukraine on Thursday. Having heard the statements
today, I believe all of us are still in a state of disbelief.

Ukrainian and international investigators and
observers of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) have been impeded
by illegal armed groups from securing, investigating
and collecting evidence at the crash site. Black boxes
apparently remain in the hands of armed terrorists.
Inexplicably, tampering with evidence has been taking
place. Only today, after sustained pressure on the
Russian authorities, were OSCE observers allowed
access to the site.

By depriving 298 loved ones, including 80 children,
of the right to live, this tragedy has touched us all. The
Government of Lithuania extends its deepest sympathy
and condolences and shares the grief of all those
families in this time of bereavement.

The remains of the victims must be treated with
dignity and be returned to the families as soon as
possible.

In the face of this unjustifiable incident, we look
forward to a thorough and independent international
investigation in accordance with international civil
aviation guidelines. The perpetrators of this despicable
crime must be brought to justice. Impunity will not go
unpunished.

We welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution
2166 (2014) today. Thirteen Council members, including
Lithuania, sponsored the resolution. The resolution
requests the Secretary-General to report to the Council
on the relevant developments and to identify options for
providing United Nations support to the investigation.
We ask the Secretary-General to do that as soon as
possible.

We commend Ukraine for its enormous efforts to
convene an objective, transparent and full investigation.
We commend the announcement by Ukrainian President
Petro Poroshenko of an immediate ceasefire within a
40-kilometre radius around the crash site. Do we expect
a similar announcement from illegally armed groups
and their backers?

The responsibility for the downing of Flight
MH-l7 lies with those who have been orchestrating the
increasing flow of foreign fighters, arms and heavy
military equipment to the east of Ukraine. That is part
of the armed aggression.

Lithuania urges Russia to unequivocally distance
itself from any kind of direct or indirect support to
terrorists, separatists and foreign fighters in eastern
Ukraine.

The ongoing illegal criminal activities by the so-
called Luhansk People's Republic and Donetsk People's
Republic are appalling. The numbers of civilians killed,
injured or evicted increase every day. Armed gangs do
not care about civilians in Donetsk and Luhansk, their
human rights or their welfare. Both groups are headed
for the terror list.

Tomorrow the Foreign Ministers of European Union
will consider additional measures against those stoking
the conflict in Ukraine. We urge States to stop military
cooperation with Russia until Russia unequivocally
commits to the peace, security and stability of its
neighbours, including Ukraine.

