Mr. Zbogar (Slovenia): I first want to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of February. I also want to
commend you for taking the initiative on this issue of the
protection of United Nations and associated personnel and
humanitarian workers in conflict zones. Since we had the
privilege of serving with your delegation in this body last
year, and since we know Argentina's principled and
consistent position regarding human rights and
humanitarian issues, your initiative came to us as no
surprise.

My delegation associates itself fully with the
statement by the European Union presented earlier by the
Ambassador of Portugal.

We listened with interest to the comments of the
Deputy Secretary-General this morning on the steps that
the United Nations Secretariat is undertaking to improve
security procedures. We also took note of her comments
referring to action that is needed and the support that the
Secretariat expects from the Member States. We also
appreciate the contributions to today's debate made by the
Executive Director of the World Food Programme and by
the head of the delegation of the International Committee
of the Red Cross.

At the outset, my delegation wants to pay tribute to
the courage and dedication of all United Nations and
associated personnel and humanitarian workers, and
particularly to all those who have lost their lives or
suffered otherwise while serving the United Nations and
the noble ideal of humanitarianism.

 

The issue of protecting the protectors deserves a
prominent place on the agenda of the Security Council. The
nature of armed conflicts has changed, and civilians are
often deliberate targets of attacks. Consequently,
humanitarian workers are perceived as an impediment to
achieving political or military objectives of the parties to a
conflict. Arrests, criminality, hostage-taking, attacks,
injuries, killings and prosecution on espionage charges are
no coincidence but are rather the reaction of belligerent
parties to the presence of undesirable witnesses to grave
violations of human rights and international humanitarian
law. As the Secretary-General stated in his report on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict,

"The protective emblem of the International Red
Cross as well as the Red Crescent, and the United
Nations flag, which represent the impartiality of
relief workers, appear to offer less protection than
ever." (S/1999/957, para. 21)

Or as Ms. Bertini of the World Food Programme said this
morning, the United Nations flag is a target rather than a

shield.

The responsibility of the Security Council remains a
key element in the response of the international community
to humanitarian crises. A lesson re-learned in the past few
years is that prevention is better than cure. The Council
should as a rule engage itself at an early stage of an
emerging conflict. We are encouraged by the presidential
statement adopted on 30 November 1999 showing the
Council's resolve to give more attention to preventive
action, and we are looking forward to the first periodic
report of the Secretary-General on prevention.

Preventive action, while preferable, is not always
possible, and the challenges of protecting humanitarian
action in conditions of active armed conflict need to be
dealt with. In such cases, timeliness and adequacy of
response to emerging conflicts are crucial criteria for
judging the effectiveness of the Council. In this context, we
are encouraged by the draft presidential statement to be
read out later, which will reflect the Council's reiterated
preparedness to take further measures at its disposal.

The mandates and objectives of peacekeeping
missions have to be clearly defined and supported in order
for them to be successful. Lessons on the need to define a
clear line between peacekeeping and peace enforcement
have been learned by the United Nations the hard way. As
we heard today, mandates should also include special
provisions regarding the security and safety of United
Nations and associated personnel and humanitarian
workers.

While it is necessary that humanitarian activities,
especially those carried out by the International
Committee of the Red Cross and non-governmental
organizations, remain independent and that the
"humanitarian space" be respected, it remains equally
important that the humanitarian aspects of a United
Nations operation be properly placed within a
comprehensive approach which includes political, military
and humanitarian aspects. Humanitarian action is meant
to save lives and alleviate the suffering of the civilian
population. It cannot be a substitute for necessary political
action aimed at tackling the roots of the crisis.

States have the primary responsibility to ensure the
safety and security of all personnel. The Security Council
for its part should insist on the responsibility of all parties
to a conflict to respect international humanitarian law, and
should take appropriate action in that regard. Attacks
against such personnel clearly represent breaches of
norms of international law. Every incident must be fully
investigated, and the perpetrators must be brought to
justice. And yet the Deputy Secretary-General presented
the Council this morning with the astounding fact that
since 1992 only two persons have been brought to justice
and convicted. Such a culture of impunity must not be
allowed to prevail.

We welcome the inclusion of attacks against
humanitarian personnel among the crimes falling within
the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court. We
also welcome the entry into force of the Convention on
the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel.
At the same time, we recognize the need to explore ways
to address the scope of the Convention and its extension
to cover all situations in which United Nations and
associated personnel, including national staff, are
deployed, and of ensuring its implementation by non-State
actors.

We are pleased to see that today's open debate has
focused exclusively on the question of the protection of
United Nations personnel, associated personnel and
humanitarian personnel. The Security Council has itself
on many occasions addressed this problem when dealing
with country-specific situations, as well as with generic
topics. In addition, we would recommend that the Council
engage in a direct dialogue with humanitarian agencies
and organizations, including non-governmental
organizations, on the issue of protection of their

 

personnel. We would also particularly like to point to the
close link between the subject under discussion today and
the Council's consideration of the comprehensive issue of
protection of civilians in armed conflict, as well as the
concept of human security. We look forward to future
consideration of all these issues in the Council and in other
United Nations bodies.

Let me conclude by expressing Slovenia's full
support for all efforts aimed at creating safer conditions for
the work of United Nations personnel, associated personnel
and humanitarian personnel.

