Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the convening of this meeting and for
Mr. Yamamoto and Mr. Fedotov's informative briefings.
We also want to thank Ambassador Kairat Umarov
for his important work as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011). We
support all of them in their execution of their various
and complementary duties. We are also grateful for
the briefings by Ms. Ghizaal Haress and Ambassador
Mahmoud Saikal of Afghanistan.

Peru continues to closely follow developments in
Afghanistan, which we had the opportunity to visit
at the beginning of this year. We want to commend
the Afghan authorities and the millions of Afghan
women and men who participated in the parliamentary
elections on 20 October. We emphasize that the
large-scale participation of citizens in consolidating
and strengthening democracy is essential to combating
violent extremism and building sustainable peace. In
that regard, we would like to highlight the increase in
the participation of women compared to the presidential
elections of 2014, and we encourage more women and
young people to participate in the political life of the
country. In our view it is very important to ensure that
women exceed 30 per cent of the total numbers of voters
in the presidential elections to be held next April.

However, we condemn the terrorist attacks on the
country's population and civilian infrastructure, and we
are concerned about the serious political fragmentation
that unfortunately continues to foster instability and
insecurity in the country. In the light of the upcoming
presidential elections, it will be crucial for political
leaders and their supporters to conduct themselves
maturely, avoiding any exacerbation of differences,
fostering a spirit of democratic unity and a rejection
of violence and safeguarding the intra-Afghan dialogue
process in the quest for peace. We also want to underscore
how important it is that the competent authorities work
rapidly and transparently in counting and tabulating
votes. In order to foster the people's trust, national
institutions must show themselves to be effective in
preventing and avoiding the problems that result from
the kind of technical and logistical deficiencies that
were encountered during the parliamentary elections.
We also underscore the importance of fighting drug
trafficking, promoting alternative development and
combating the transnational organized crime that is
yoked in an evil nexus to terrorist groups in Afghanistan,
as Mr. Fedotov pointed out in his briefing this morning.

Finally, we wish to commend the efforts of
international partners in assisting Afghans in their
quest for the peace that has eluded them for so long.
Peru believes that the support of the international
community and neighbouring countries in Central Asia
is crucial to advancing the intra-Afghan dialogue with
a view to building sustainable peace. In that regard,
and in conclusion, we want to commend the convening
at the end of November of the Geneva Ministerial
Conference, which reaffirmed the commitment of
the international community to consolidating peace
and promoting development in Afghanistan. We also
pay tribute to the important work being done by the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
and the United Nations country team, in line with
their respective mandates, as well as the work of the
Netherlands as penholder on the Afghanistan issue.

