Ms. Citaku: It is a great honour to be in the
Security Council Chamber once again on behalf of the
youngest democracy in Europe, the Republic of Kosovo.
Nevertheless, I must admit that it is neither pleasurable
nor particularly productive to sit here and waste the
Council's valuable time, listening to representatives of
our northern neighbour tell their same old tales of a
parallel universe. Therefore, as befits the importance of
this occasion, I will share with the Council, as I always
do, nothing but facts.

I must say that I appreciate my Serbian colleagues'
interest in Kosovar political figures, although I must
also say it borders on the obsessive. I am proud of my
heritage and my past. I am a proud ethnic Albanian and
citizen of Kosovo. I am not sure that the same can be
said about Mr. Daeie.

My presence here today is not a sign of crisis but
of confidence. While the long shadows of conflict
continue to chase us, we meet today in an atmosphere
of rising hope. On 6 October, Kosovo successfully held
its fourth parliamentary elections since it declared
independence. These elections were not extraordinary
for their organization alone but were special in many
ways. For the first time in our history, a new generation
of citizens - children who were born in freedom and
raised in an independent country, Kosovars who did not
know war - had a chance to cast their ballots and elect
their future representatives.

Twenty years ago, 18-year-old Kosovars were
refugees, subject to the most brutal of ethnic cleansing
campaigns. Today, l8-year-old Kosovars are proud
citizens of Kosovo and agents of change. To a large
extent, this paradigm shift is a product of the efforts of
the United Nations and its various agencies that helped
us rebuild our country from the ashes and devastation
of war. We will be forever grateful to all of them for
being our voice when we did not have one. We will
never forget the support that they lent us in our darkest
hour of need. They should indeed take pride in how far
Kosovo has come.

Democracy is not easy. But Kosovo has consistently
proved that it is up to the task. After a competitive and
cordial campaign characterized by robust debate and a
plurality of ideas, Kosovo held free and fair elections
with record-high participation from all communities. If
that is not a sufficient testament to the maturity of our
democracy, then the expeditious roll-out of the results
and the manner in which the candidates greeted them
should speak volumes. The humility of the winners'
acceptance was paralleled only by the grace with which
the losers conceded, without drama or contestation.

During the electoral process, Kosovo's Central
Election Commission took all the precautions
necessary to ensure that each ballot box was treated
with adequate care. However, the fact of the matter is
that six commissioners had to be hospitalized because
they exhibited worrisome symptoms after counting
votes from a specific set of ballot boxes. We are not
pointing fingers in any direction. However, considering
the difficulties that these circumstances present,
and especially given the complexity of the historical
context, the truth is that extraordinary measures had
to be taken. Nonetheless, Kosovo authorities made
absolutely sure that every last vote was counted, no
matter what.

I am not suggesting that there is cause for self-
satisfaction here, but there is cause for hope and faith
in our democracy. The parties that received the most
votes during the recent elections, Vetevendosje and
the Democratic League of Kosovo, are currently in the
process of negotiating the formation of a new coalition
Government, which is on track to be concluded without
delay. Accordingly, the overall assessment is that the
climate of the electoral process was one of a healthy
competition of ideas, with one exception, the Serbian
citizens of Kosovo. Unfortunately, members of the
Serbian community were threatened, intimidated and
pressured to vote for one particular Serbian party.
These violations were documented and reported by
international observer missions. On 8 October, the
European Union Election Observation Mission warned
that the campaign had been marred by intimidation
targeting non-Srpska Lista candidates and supporters.

Needless to say, there is only one Government that
is perpetrating the disfranchisement of Serbs in Kosovo,
and that is the Government sitting in Belgrade. The
Government of Serbia is under the wrongful impression
that Serbs in Kosovo are an instrument of its jingoistic
foreign policy and not free citizens of Kosovo whose
rights they are infringing on. These intimidation tactics
are not a novelty. We see them being used every day on
Serbian members of the Kosovo Security Force (KSF),
who are constantly subjected to incredible levels of
pressure and harassment. Their houses are attacked
with grenades and their families are terrorized.
Just last month, two Serbian KSF officers were
unnecessarily detained for hours by Serbian authorities
while travelling in Serbia with their families. I would
also like to remind the Council of what happened to
one local Serbian leader who dared to speak his mind
independently from Belgrade. Mr. Oliver Ivanovic' was
assassinated in January 2018. The Kosovo police has
since carried out a thorough investigation of his murder,
questioning over 100 suspects and arresting several
of them. Unfortunately, the main suspect remains in
hiding. Can anybody guess where? He is hiding in
Serbia. These kinds of practices must come to an end
once and for all.

I want to take this opportunity to shed light on a
topic that has been misinterpreted for far too long by
our Serbian colleagues, which is the number of Serbian
citizens living in Kosovo. For over two decades, we
have tolerated the creative accounting of the Serbian
State. Over and over again, we have heard its claims
that 200,000 Serbs fled Kosovo after the liberation in
1999. Now, allow me to do some basic math. According
to the 1981 census, 209,798 Serbs lived in Kosovo at
that time. I am using data from 1981 because it provides
the highest possible estimate of the size of the Serbian
community in Kosovo, since the census that Kosovo
conducted in 2011 was purposely boycotted by the
Serbian citizens of Kosovo, who were pressured to do
so by the Government in Belgrade. If, as Serbia claims,
200,000 Serbs have left Kosovo, that would mean
almost all of them. If that is the case, can anyone tell
me who the 60,000 Serbs are who voted in the general
elections in Kosovo two weeks ago? Where in the world
did they come from? I would like to point out that this
number refers to Kosovo Serbs who are over the age of
18 and who actually chose to vote in the elections.

Despite Serbia's ambitions, we do not live in a post-
truth world. We must stop using false data to concoct
false narratives that are beyond belief even for those
who propagate them. There is something fundamentally
wrong with a people so consumed by bitterness and
hatred from the past that they cannot find peace in
the present. It will take an act of will for them to escape
this vicious cycle. I long to see the day when Serbia
owns up to the brutal savagery that it perpetrated in the
Balkans and denounces the monsters who slaughtered
our women and children. One must know when enough
is enough and realize that the time has come to make
a reckoning.

The fact of the matter is that Kosovo will never
be deterred or dictated to by Serbia. But for a moment
let us reflect on the level of resources and energy that
Belgrade used for its smear campaign against Kosovo
in order to prevent us from joining INTERPOL. It is
unfortunate that as a result of our current domestic
context we had to withdraw our bid for INTERPOL
membership this year, but the Council can rest assured
that we will be ready to apply again next year. Why would
anyone have anything against our police force joining
that organization? Who stands to win from Kosovo's
absence from this police organization? The answer is
criminals, terrorists and organized crime. Serbia is
willingly adding itself to that list of beneficiaries.

This Chamber is not a courtroom for our politicians
or our political leaders. Mr. Kurti has won the elections
in Kosovo. He has stated several times very clearly
that he is committed to dialogue. I must say that I am
amused that my Serbian colleague is defending the
Kosovar flag. I want to assure the Council that there
will always be a Kosovar flag in the office of the Prime
Minister of Kosovo. My Serbian colleague failed to
mention one very important element of Mr. Kurti's
biography, which is that he was a political prisoner in
Serbia when Mr. Daeie was a Cabinet minister.

Kosovo has already demonstrated its ability to make
a smooth transition from a consumer of security to a
contributor of it. Since its transformation, the Kosovo
Security Force has already made enormous strides in
capacity-building, modernization and harmonization
with NATO standards. We are an active member of the
Global Coalition against the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham (ISIS). Our police and intelligence agencies
have been part of operations that prevented several
terrorist attacks, both in our region and beyond, and
we are ready to do more. I would like to take this
opportunity to congratulate the United States military
forces on the successful operation that killed the
notorious ISIS leader Al-Baghdadi. The world will be
a safer place without him. However, that does not mean
that our struggle against extremism is over.

In Kosovo, we fight hard to preserve the secular
nature of our State, Constitution and society, which
affords the same rights to adherents of all religious and
non-religious denominations. The religious tolerance
and harmony that we have cultivated for centuries is a
badge of honour that we wear proudly. In Kosovo there
are cities where a Catholic church, an Orthodox church
and a Muslim mosque all share the same backyard.
There is no hierarchy of religions in Kosovo, and that is
a value we cherish.
I must touch on an issue that was debated ad
nauseam the last time we gathered here (see S/PV.8541).
I will be concise this time. The Kosovo police acted with
the utmost professionalism when it decided to arrest an
employee of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) who willingly decided
to become a human shield for criminal gangs in the
northern part of Kosovo and thereby prevent law-
enforcement institutions from carrying out their duty. I
asked the Council last time and will ask it again. What
would happen if any of us tried to prevent an ongoing
police operation against criminals here in New York
or Washington or in Berlin or Moscow or Paris or
anywhere else? The police operation was filmed and
made available to the public in its entirety. The footage
makes it clear that the UNMIK officers refused to show
identification or cooperate with the police. In addition,
we have information that the UNMIK leadership
provided prior notice to United Nations employees
in northern Kosovo about this operation and advised
them to avoid certain areas that day. This particular
employee nevertheless did the opposite. The question
that arises is this: was this individual in that spot on
that particular day on behalf of the United Nations or
someone else? Our police and judiciary are currently
in the process of conducting an investigation into the
matter. We will share the results with the Council as
soon as it is completed.

As we have stated many times before, we see no
purpose whatever in congregating this often in this
Chamber to discuss Kosovo. It is paradoxical that the
Council gathers here more often to discuss Kosovo than
it does to discuss Syria or other pressing issues that
need its attention. UNMIK's mandate was overtaken
long ago. Valuable resources that could be put to much
better use elsewhere are being wasted to maintain
a mission totally devoid of purpose. The bottom line
is that Kosovo is a free, independent and sovereign
country. That will never, ever change. The only thing
that these meetings are accomplishing is enabling
Serbia to maintain its acute case of denial and reduce
reality to sensational headlines. Let me make it crystal
clear. Just because Serbia refuses to recognize us as a
State does not make us any less of a State. That simply
makes us a young republic that has to deal with an
obnoxious neighbour.

That is what makes dialogue with Serbia so
important. But dialogue does not happen in a vacuum.
How can we believe that Serbia is earnest in its
intentions to participate in the process of reconciliation
leading to mutual recognition when so far all it has
done is fail to implement nearly everything that we
agreed on in Brussels? Dialogue is not about leaders
shaking hands in Brussels, Berlin or Paris. It is about
accepting each other as equals. Kosovo's right to
exist as a State is not and never will be a subject for
discussion. Kosovo is not a temporary project. It is here
to stay. As the International Court of Justice has clearly
stated, Kosovo was within its rights when it declared
independence and did not break any international law
by doing so. And there is no Greater Albania. That is a
myth. There are ethnic Albanians who live in Kosovo,
in Albania and elsewhere in the Western Balkans.

At the risk of sounding like a broken record, I will
once again state that Kosovo's independence was indeed
a product of decolonization. Serbia's only interest in
Kosovo was to exploit our territory and resources while
treating our people as inherently inferior, second-class
citizens. Ifthat is not colonization, I would like to know
what is. We want peace and we are prepared to continue
a dialogue, but not at the expense of the truth. We are
vigilant in defence of our hard-won freedom. It is an
ideal that we were prepared to die for and will fight
to preserve. Reconciliation must be both retrospective
and proactive. There can be no peace without justice,
and it is time to make justice a priority. We owe it to
the victims - those who made the ultimate sacrifice
and those who survived and have already suffered too
much. Most importantly, we owe it to our children.
We owe it to future generations to deliver peace not
just in our lifetime, but in all lifetimes to come. We
have to put an end to the culture of impunity. Is it too
much to ask that the perpetrators of systematic rape and
murder not remain at the helm of security institutions?
Resolution is not synonymous with absolution. Those
who committed these horrendous crimes must be
held accountable by the court of justice and the court
of conscience.

In our lifetime we have had to grapple with
moments of great crisis. Our lives have been marked by
debate on monumental issues, issues of war and peace
and prosperity and depression. But while we talk here
about the past, young Kosovars are writing the future.
They do not have time for pointless debates. They
are out there, working hard, often against the odds,
challenging the status quo and raising the bar for all of
us. Kosovar children are growing up with new heroes,
like the judoka Majlinda Kelmendi, who has raised our
flag on the highest podium and continues to bring home
an endless stream of gold medals. Thanks to athletes
like Majlinda Kelmendi, Nora Gjakova and Distria
Krasniqi, the phrase "fight like a girl" has acquired a
different meaning in Kosovo. We were overjoyed by
the international success of our fantastic soccer team.
Imagine - 20 years ago, English soldiers came to
Kosovo, like saints marching in, to liberate our country.
In November, we will be hosting Englishmen again, this
time for a soccer match, and hopefully beating them in
the European qualifiers.

We are driven and defined by the expectations
of our youth. Just last week, Open Data Kosovo
published a report that shows that the number of
information-technology companies in Kosovo has
increased by no less than 187 per cent during the past
10 years. That should come as no surprise, given the
quality of our workforce and our highly skilled young
people, who are eager to learn and compete in the
global market. We are emboldened by the grit of our
free media. Only days ago, three Kosovar journalists,
all of whom happen to be women, were presented with
awards by the European Union for their investigative
journalism and work in exposing and combating
corruption and crime. We are inspired by Fahrije Hoti
and the brave women of Velika Krusa, who used the
restorative power of freedom to turn misfortune into
hope and strength. After suffering so much loss, these
women rebuilt an entire village from the ashes of war.
When confronted with tragedy, resilience was the only
answer. These are the new heroes of our young republic.
They represent the best of us, and they will break the
cycle of fragility and violence. They will write the new
chapter of our history. It is because of them that I persist
in being hopeful for the future of my country.

