The President: On behalf of the members of the
Security Council, I should like to express profound shock
and sorrow at the recent passing of the King of the
Kingdom of Lesotho, His Majesty King Moshoeshoe II.
King Moshoeshoe II was dedicated to the cause of
international peace and security and played an important
role in the quest for stability and development in southern
Africa. I request the Permanent Representative of the
Kingdom of Lesotho to the United Nations to convey to the
Government and people of Lesotho and to the bereaved
family the Council's profound condolences.

I now invite the members of the Council to rise and
observe a minute of silence in tribute to the memory of the
late King of the Kingdom of Lesotho.

The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia

Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Somalia (S/1996/42)

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in the course of its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia,
document S/ 1996/42.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia
dated 19 January 1996 (S/1996/42) and is deeply
concerned about the absence of any credible progress
 

towards national reconciliation. It calls upon all
Somali political leaders and parties to return to an
inclusive process of consultation and negotiation
aimed at national reconciliation leading to the
establishment of a broad-based national government.

"The Security Council welcomes with
appreciation the efforts of the Organization of
African Unity, the Organization of the Islamic
Conference, the League of Arab States, the
European Union and neighbouring States in
promoting national dialogue in the search for a
solution to the Somali crisis. These efforts
demonstrate the commitment of the international
community not to abandon the people of Somalia. It
reaffirms that the people of Somalia bear ultimate
responsibility for achieving national reconciliation
and restoring peace. In this respect, the Council
urges the leaders of Somali factions to reject
violence and place the interests of the country and
people above their personal differences and political
ambitions.

"The Security Council also welcomes and
supports the Secretary-General's intention to
maintain the United Nations Political Office for
Somalia (UNPOS). It stresses the importance of its
maintaining close cooperation with the regional
organizations, monitoring developments in Somalia
and continuing contacts with Somali factions. It
looks forward to the return of the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia to Somalia as soon as
circumstances permit.

"The Security Council expresses deep concern
at the continuing conflict. The resulting insecurity,
banditry and general lawlessness increase the
suffering of the civilian population. The Council
condemns the harassment, beatings, abduction and
killings of personnel of international humanitarian
organizations, and underlines the responsibility of all
parties in Somalia for ensuring the safety and
security of humanitarian and other international
personnel. This atmosphere of insecurity has
regrettably forced the United Nations agencies to
relocate international personnel thus hindering the
smooth delivery of much needed humanitarian
assistance.

"The Security Council commends the valiant
efforts of United Nations and international
humanitarian agencies and their Somali personnel for

 
the courage and determination to render assistance to
the people of Somalia. The Council encourages
Member States to continue to provide humanitarian
assistance in order to avoid a further deterioration of
the current situation.

"The Security Council considers the
uninterrupted delivery of humanitarian assistance to be
a crucial factor in the overall security and stability of
Somalia. In this respect, the closure of Mogadishu
main seaport and other transportation facilities
severely aggravates the present situation and poses a
potential major impediment to future emergency
deliveries. The Council calls upon the Somali parties
and factions to open those facilities unconditionally.

"The Security Council reminds all States of their
obligation to implement fully the general and complete
embargo imposed by paragraph 5 of resolution

 

733 (1992) on all deliveries of weapons and military
equipment to Somalia. In this respect it calls on all
States to refrain from any actions which might
exacerbate the situation in Somalia.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to continue to keep it informed
about developments in Somalia. The Council
remains seized of the matter".

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1996/4.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda. The

Security Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 1.15 pm.

