Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation congratulates you, Sir, on your wisdom
in including this debate among the first actions on the
Council's programme of work for this month. The
subject of the illegal exploitation of the natural
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
clearly related to the establishment of an environment
of peace and security in the Great Lakes region.

We wish to express our pleasure at the presence
of the Ministers of Burundi, the Democratic Republic
ofthe Congo and Uganda; the envoy of the President of
Rwanda; and the members of the Panel of Experts on
the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other
Forms of Wealth of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which prepared the report. We have listened
with attention and interest to the statements made by
the representatives of those countries, which will allow
this Council and my own country's authorities to gain a
clearer picture of the facts relating to the disturbing
situation described in the report.

The exploitation of the natural resources of the
Congo is the subject of our deliberations today because
of its close connection to the persistence of the conflict
that continues to drain the lifeblood from that country.
According to recent figures, and as has also been
mentioned at this meeting, that conflict has directly or
indirectly claimed over 2.5 million victims since 1998.
200,000 deaths have been caused directly by the
fighting, while the rest have been the result of famine
and diseases that have afflicted the population in the
inhospitable places to which they have had to flee in
escaping the violence.

In such circumstances, tragic events occur, such
as last week's attack against the workers of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, to which a
number of speakers have referred. We offer our
condolences to the Congolese and other families that
have lost loved ones and we wish to offer thanks for
the expressions of sorrow and solidarity with us over
the loss of our compatriot in that incident.

My delegation believes that, in principle, the
exploitation of the mineral, timber or agricultural
resources of a country - apart from the issue of its
legality or illegality - must be condemned by the
international community if it contributes to creating a
tragedy of such proportions. It is unacceptable that
millions of persons must live in fear and poverty in the
midst of their own country's natural wealth.

The report of the Panel of Experts on the Illegal
Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other Forms of
Wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo also
warrants the following comments.

First, we believe that the Secretary-General
followed the criteria laid down by the Council to select
the Panel of Experts, presided over by Ms. Ba-N'Daw.
We favour an extension of its mandate for three months
and we await with interest its final report.

Secondly, we have found the information and data
provided in the report on the persons, armed groups
and countries that exploit and market the resources of
the Congo in order to finance the conflict to be
staggering. Without commenting on the evidence
presented, which is under study, analysis and
evaluation by our Government and our mission, we
believe that the Governments and groups mentioned
should proceed independently to investigate these data
and convey the results of their investigations to the
Panel of Experts during the following months of its
mandate.

Thirdly, we recognize that, for a long time now
and because of its geographical location, the eastern
part of the Congo has strong economic links to the
neighbouring countries. That is why it came as no
surprise to us that there is an active import-export trade
there. It is appropriate nonetheless to preserve the
mutual benefits of that trade with a view to the future
reconstruction of the economy of the Great Lakes
region. Any peace conference for that region should
take that aspect into account.

Fourthly and finally, we have taken note of the
sanctions proposed by the authors of the report.
Sanctions are indeed a legitimate mechanism whereby
the Security Council can effect changes in the conduct
of the armed participants in conflict situations.
Nevertheless, before considering the use of this
mechanism, we have always advocated a respectful
dialogue conducive to cooperation with the
international community, such as the one we are
holding today. We would hope that this will hold true
in the current instance.

I wish to conclude by stating our conviction that
any action by the Council on the item before us today
should be part of a vigorous effort to achieve a lasting
peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo - a
peace that respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the countries of the Great Lakes region, and
that also takes into account their legitimate security
interests.

It is in this spirit that my delegation has
expressed its wish to take part in the next mission of
the Security Council to that region of Africa.

