Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I would
like to thank Ambassador Quinlan for his briefing and
for his leadership of the Committee over the last two
years. Because of his diligence and commitment, the
Committee's work has been energized. He and his team
have done a great job helping the Committee carry out
its mandate, improve the transparency of its work and
tighten relationships with other international bodies.
I ask him to please accept the United States deep
appreciation of his efforts.

The Security Council established this Committee
eight years ago this month, back in 2006, because the
international community had serious doubts about
the peaceful intentions of Iran's nuclear programme.
Since then the Committee's work has been an integral
element of our broader diplomatic strategy. That
Committee has helped many countries implement the
increasingly robust United Nations sanctions. With
the support of its Panel of Experts, the Committee has
investigated serious sanctions violations and developed
an impressive understanding of Iran's proliferation
networks. The Committee has also cracked down on
Iran's arms smuggling, stemming the flow of weapons
to a volatile region. Yet today, several years later, the
international community still does not have confidence
in Iran's nuclear programme. To resolve these issues,
Iran is now in serious dialogue with the P5+l countries.
To give those negotiations the best chance of success,
last month we decided to extend them for an additional
seven months.

While we continue to believe that the best way
to achieve our goals is through diplomacy, we are not
going to sit at the negotiating table forever. As we have
said many times, we do not just want any agreement,
we want the right agreement. Plainly and simply, the
negotiations must find ways to ensure that Iran does
not, and cannot, acquire a nuclear weapon. As the
talk continue, we should consider how the Security
Council's Iran Sanctions Committee can best support
them. Our advice to the Committee is simple: keep
doing what it is doing.

During this period the Committee must absolutely
continue its vital work monitoring and improving the
enforcement of these critical sanctions. Similarly, the
Panel of Experts should continue its work in investigating
violations and reaching out to Member States. Unless or
until the Security Council modifies the sanctions, the
pace and intensity of this work should remain robust.
Recent reporting from the Panel of Experts reminds
us why that is so important. We know that Iran is
still trying to procure sensitive nuclear technology.
We know Iran is still smuggling arms in violation of
resolution 1747 (2007). And we know that Iran's leaders
forthrightly reject the Council's resolution, as they
speak publicly about their destabilizing arms shipments
to Syria, Hizbullah in Lebanon and Iraq.

Responding effectively to those violations is at
the core of the Committee's mandate. Any breach of
the sanctions is a serious matter, as it is dangerous,
violates international law and undermines the Security
Council's credibility. In the coming weeks and months,
we will continue to work with Committee members to
ensure that the Security Council's resolution are not
violated with impunity. The Committee's outreach
work in advising Member States and answering
questions about the sanctions is critically important.
The Committee and the Panel must continue to remind
Member States ofthe need to sustain the full and robust
implementation of the sanctions.

Our determination to prevent Iran from obtaining
a nuclear weapon remains clear. We are committed
to resolving this issue peacefully through diplomacy.
Sanctions are critical to that effort, and we intend to
ensure that this important body is able to carry out its
mandate effectively.

