Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): My delegation
welcomes the convening of this open debate at a time
when there is a growing realization of the challenges
and risks that rule-of-law deficits pose to international
peace and security. The United Nations has a
fundamental responsibility to maintain and strengthen
international peace and security in conformity with the
principles of justice and international law under the
Charter.

At a time when the world is facing ever-
increasing threats to international peace in the form of
transnational organized crime, terrorism, piracy and
climate degradation, it is fitting that the Council
highlight the centrality of the rule of law. The
strengthening of the rule of law is essential, not just to
maintain peace, but also to enable sustained economic
progress and the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals. Many organs and agencies of the
United Nations must therefore play a role in
contributing to the promotion and strengthening of the
rule of law at the international level.

In recent times, we have seen that it is ordinary
citizens' demands for the rule of law, accountability
and transparency, when unmet, that have propelled
momentous changes in societies. The basic principles
of rule of law contribute to the strengthening and
protection of the individual. Governments that have
upheld justice and the rule of law as key components
of their governance structure are therefore stronger in
terms of stability and effectiveness.

The rule of law is not a modern, abstract concept;
it is ingrained in the history of all nations. All cultures
reflect it. The right to improve the rule of law should
not be the right of a handful, nor should it be
selectively implemented. Selective implementation
would cause doubts to arise as to credibility.

Internationally, there have been longstanding
efforts on the part of States to create an international
community based on law. The linkages between the
rule of law at the national and international levels are
multifaceted. A key aspect of the rule of law at the
international level is the codification of international
law. In that regard, the multilateral treaty framework,
developed mainly under the auspices of the United
Nations, has played a seminal role. Today there is
hardly an area of human activity that is not regulated
by treaty law. The judgments of the International Court
of Justice and its advisory opinions have also
contributed immensely.

Increasingly, regional approaches have also
played an important role in addressing the growing
problem of transnational organized crime and
terrorism, which threaten international peace and
security. That involves close cooperation and capacity-
building at both the national and regional levels.
However, long-term solutions to, inter alia,
transnational organized crime, terrorism and piracy
will need to focus on the delivery of basic services by
justice and security institutions.

In addition, grievances based on violations of
economic and social rights have the capacity to spark
violent conflict that could spill over borders. The
United Nations has a vital role in the promotion of
dialogue on the realization of economic and social
rights for all peoples.

The principle of sovereign equality enshrined in
the United Nations Charter, which is intrinsic to the
international rule of law, must be maintained as
international rules are made and implemented. It is a
clear principle that Member States must respect; it
protects all States, especially the small and the weak.
Equally important is the maintenance of the principle
of non-interference in the internal affairs of Member
States, especially in situations that do not pose a threat
to international peace and security. Specific
circumstances may call for involvement, which should
be based on the agreement of all States. Unilateral and
selective applications of international law principles
must be avoided.

Sri Lanka has always advocated the settlement of
internal and international disputes by peaceful means.
Negotiations and other such peaceful means must be
the first essential resort.

Mindful of the fact that conflict and post-conflict
settings are complex environments with many
competing priorities, we must recognize the tensions
and difficulties that emerge in the process of
endeavouring to balance national security interests and
the maintenance of civil rights under trying local
circumstances. Despite the onslaughts on the
democratic fabric, countries with strong legal
foundations have the resilience and the capacity to
restore democratic institutions. Such countries can also
create their own local mechanisms to consolidate
peace, encourage reconciliation and, most importantly,

strengthen democratic institutions. There is therefore a
need to give countries such as these the much-needed
space to begin that restorative process so as to set
themselves on an even keel. In such contexts, the
United Nations must provide leadership in capacity-
building efforts to address the gaps by also factoring in
local sensitivities.

Sri Lanka's willingness to engage with the United
Nations to promote the rule of law based on
constructive, fair, non-selective and objective
assessments remains undiminished.

