Mr. Estreme (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate Guatemala on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the first time since itjoined the United Nations. We
would also like to express our pleasure at the fact that
today's debate is taking place under the Guatemalan
presidency, given the role that Guatemala has played in
the stabilization of Haiti and in providing assistance to
it over the years. The issue before us is one that brings
all countries of Latin America and the Caribbean
together.

I also wish to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ambassador Fernandez
Amunategui, for his briefing and for the considerations
he expressed, to which we fully subscribe. I also wish
to note that Argentina fully supports the statement of
Ambassador Jose Luis Cancela of Uruguay, who spoke
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti. For that
reason, I would like only to add a few remarks in my
national capacity.

First of all, I wish to reiterate the firm commitment
of Argentina to the institutional stability and
development of Haiti, which has been ongoing for 18
years now and is expressed today in our continued
participation in the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and our bilateral
technical cooperation with the Haitian Government.
Like the Secretary-General in his report (S/2012/678),
my delegation understands that MINUSTAH continues
to be a decisive factor in establishing an environment
of security and stability in Haiti on a permanent basis.
As the Secretary-General recognizes in his report, the
Haitian National Police is not yet in a position where
it can take full responsibility for the safeguarding of
internal security in the country. That is why my country
supports the extension of the Mission's mandate for an
additional year, as its presence is still needed by the
Haitian Government.

Although we support the extension and although
Argentina is aware that the political and social situation
in Haiti continues to be complex, we wish to highlight
the progress made in strengthening political institutions
and the rule of law. We also salute the establishment
by the Haitian Government of an aid coordination
mechanism that will ensure its full participation in
decision-making when it comes to the use of the funds
and other issues having to do with cooperation projects
in the country. We understand that the new mechanism
will provide consistency and organization with
respect to aid from the international community and
facilitate the development of the institutional capacity
of the Government itself to strengthen sustainable
development within the framework of the strategic
development plan.

In that sense, Argentina's understanding is that
progress in stabilization must be accompanied by
growth and development in the country on the basis of
priorities established by the Haitian Government. For
that purpose, it is important to strengthen the public-
sector institutions so that efforts for development
will be sustainable over time and so that the sector
can provide the basic services needed, even when the
United Nations is no longer present in the country.

Ambassador Fernandez Amunategui spoke
eloquently about the challenges for development,
particularly with regard to food security, that Haiti is
facing and will continue to face over the coming years.
We full share the views of the Special Representative,
and we believe that the international community must
give particular attention to those challenges in the
coming years.

Argentina considers that it is necessary to further
study the future of the Mission in order to prepare an
orderly drawdown strategy that will respond to the
interests of the authorities and the people of Haiti and
to the situation of the country when it comes to security
and its interrelationship with sustainable development.

We also understand that it is essential for Haiti
to participate in decision-making on issues having to
do with the peacekeeping operation deployed on its
territory. We believe it is important for the Secretariat
to periodically report to troop-contributing countries.

For Argentina, strengthening insitutional capacities
of the Haitian Government must be an essential
component for any drawdown strategy or any potential
transition pact. Furthermore, Argentina believes that
strengthening institutions, among other aspects in the
administration of justice, the promotion and protection
of human rights and economic and social development,
is key to carrying out MINUSTAH's mandate.

Before concluding, my delegation has said on
previous occasions at the Council that the goal of our
work in Haiti is should be that the presence ofthe United
Nations and the international community is no longer be
needed because Haitian authorities will be able to take
responsibility for economic and social development
owing to the strength of their own political institutions.

Finally, I would like to pay special tribute to the work
accomplished by Mr. Mariano Fernandez Amunategui
in his capacity as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Haiti and Head of MINUSTAH.
At the time of his appointment, Argentina warmly
welcomed the Secretary-General's decision. As he
nears the end of his tenure, I wish to express, on behalf
the Government of Argentina, our recognition for
his work and that of his team, and especially for all
the efforts they made over the years. We believe that
Ambassador Fernandez Amunategui has represented us
in an exemplary fashion, and we are certain that he will
conclude his term with the great satisfaction of having
done his duty and reached the objectives set for him at
the beginning of his work.

