Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I would like to begin
by expressing my sincere appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for raising this timely and important
topic. I would also like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his insightful briefing.

We witness almost every week terrorist attacks
all over the world. In March alone, they occurred in
Pakistan, Belgium, Turkey, Nigeria, Cote d'Ivoire
and Tunisia. I express my deepest sympathy and
condolences to the victims and their families, as well
as to the Governments and the peoples of each of
those countries.

Japan condemns terrorism in the strongest terms,
and we are determined work with the international
community to overcome terrorism. On Monday this
week, in Hiroshima, the Group of Seven Foreign
Ministers expressed their determination to stand united
in countering terrorism in all its forms and wherever
it occurs.

The fight against terrorism requires diverse efforts.
Today, I would like to focus on two issues. The first
is foreign terrorist fighters. It is estimated that around
30,000 fighters, from more than 100 Member States,
are attracted to the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
and their associated groups. In order to stem the flow of
such fighters, it is important to implement all relevant
Security Council resolutions, in particular, resolution
2178 (2014). Today, many of those fighters travel from
their countries of origin to another country before
travelling on to the final destination, which helps them
avoid detection; that is called "broken travel".

In order to detect broken travel, it is necessary
not only to obtain passport details through the
Advance Passenger Information System (APIS), but
also to obtain passenger name records (PNR), which
contain passengers' booking information, such as
their itineraries, the names of travelling companions
and payment methods. The Permanent Representative
of Uruguay already pointed out the importance of
those systems. The Security Council recommends
that Member States utilize both the APIS and the
PNR systems as outlined in resolution 2178 (2014) and
presidential statement S/PRST/2014/23, respectively.
To my knowledge, only about a quarter of the 193
Member States have introduced APIS, and even fewer
have introduced the PNR system. Only a small number
of Member States have adopted those systems, which is
not effective enough to detect broken travel. I therefore
urge all Member States to introduce the systems as soon
as possible. In that connection, I was very encouraged
to hear from the delegation of France that the European
Parliament approved the introduction of the PNR
system today.

No country is immune from terrorism. Japan is on
high alert for the risk of terrorist attacks in preparing
the upcoming important events that Japan will host,
such as the Group of Seven Summit in May this year,
the Rugby World Cup in 2019 and the Tokyo Olympic
and Paralympic Games in 2020. We are committed to
enhancing counter-terrorism measures, so that people
from around the world can feel safe and will be secure
when visiting Japan on those occasions.

The second aspect that I would like to address is
the importance of tackling the root causes of terrorism.
Many previous speakers, including my neighbour
Malaysia, have also highlighted the importance of that
aspect. Among the root causes, I wish to focus on how
we can prevent violent extremism that can be conducive
to terrorism.

One possible way to prevent violent extremism is
to provide assistance aimed at creating a society that
does not give in to violent extremism. In that context,
Japan attaches great importance to supporting women
and girls so as to make societies more resilient. By
empowering women, we can empower other members of
their families and communities. To that end, Japan has
continuously funded projects of UN-Women, as well
as those of the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
One of this year's projects seeks to reinforce women's
leadership through their engagement in political
dialogue in the Sahel region. I hope that women's
participation in political dialogue will contribute to
building communities that are resilient against violent
extremists, such as Boko Haram.

Finally, I would like to stress that violent extremism
has broad aspects in its nature, and so, preventing
it requires a comprehensive approach, utilizing all
the knowledge and experience of all United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes. Japan commends
and strongly supports the Secretary-General's Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674), which
provides the basis for an all-United Nations approach.
The Plan of Action and an all-United Nations approach
should be reflected in the review of the Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy to be held in June in the General
Assembly. I wish to conclude by expressing Japan's
willingness to participate constructively in that debate.

