The Secretary-General: I wish to thank and
commend the members of the Security Council for the
action they are about to take in relation to the agreement
that I secured last week from the Government of Iraq. If
respected, if honoured, and if sustained, this agreement
could constitute one of the United Nations most important
steps in addressing the consequences of Iraq's invasion of
Kuwait seven years ago.

I should like to take this opportunity to make clear
to the entire international community the nature, the
demands and the promise of this agreement.

I went to Baghdad with the full authorization of all
members of the Security Council, in search of a peaceful
solution to the crisis. I went to fulfil my constitutional
obligation under the United Nations Charter and my
commitment to the General Assembly at the
commencement of my term - a sacred, moral obligation
and commitment to act, any time, anywhere, without
seeking or accepting instructions from any Government,
whenever that action may be helpful in reducing a grave
threat to international peace and security.

No one can doubt or dispute that Iraq's refusal to
honour its commitments under Security Council
resolutions regarding its weapons of mass destruction
constituted such a threat. That threat has now been
averted.

The mandate of the Security Council has been
reaffirmed. The full and unlimited access of United
Nations inspectors to any and all sites has been restored.
The authority of the Executive Chairman of the United
Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) has been
acknowledged and strengthened. Whether the threat to
international peace and security has been averted for all
time is now in the hands of the Iraqi leadership. It is now
for them to comply in practice with what they have
signed on paper.

I am under no illusions about the inherent value of
this or any other agreement. Commitments honoured are
the only commitments that count. Indeed, this agreement,
and today's Security Council resolution, will merely be

 

empty words unless both parties now implement it fully,
fairly, and without delay.
For our part, the United Nations stands ready for that
implementation. We shall continue to fulfil our
long-standing obligation to act with respect for the
sovereignty and dignity of every member of the United
Nations. We shall continue to strive to improve in every
way the cooperation and effectiveness of every United
Nations agency. That includes UNSCOM, which, I am
proud to repeat, has already destroyed more weapons of
mass destruction in Iraq than did the entire Gulf War, and
which under this agreement remains in full operational
control of the inspection process.

For its part, the Government of Iraq must now fulfil,
without obstruction or delay, the continuing obligations that
it reaffirmed last week at the very highest level. That means
accepting all Security Council resolutions; cooperating fully
with United Nations inspection teams; and according
immediate, unconditional and unrestricted access to those
teams to every area, facility, piece of equipment, individual
and means of transportation. Those areas include the eight
sites delineated as presidential sites where members of
UNSCOM. and the International Atomic Energy Agency
will be joined by senior diplomats whom I will appoint.

Iraq's complete fulfilment of these obligations is the
one and only aim of this agreement. Nothing more and
nothing less will make possible the completion of the
United Nations-mandated disarmament process and thus
speed the lifting of sanctions in accordance with the
provisions of Security Council resolutions. With today's
Council resolution, however, the Government of Iraq fully
understands that if this effort to ensure compliance through
negotiation is obstructed, by evasion or deception, as were
previous efforts, diplomacy may not have a second chance.
No promise of peace and no policy of patience can be
without limits.

This agreement tests as never before the will of the
Iraqi leadership to keep its word. But it also serves as a call
for this union of nations to look to the future, beyond the
horizon and to the time when the disarmament process in
Iraq has been completed.

All of us can agree that sanctions have added greatly
to the Iraqi people's suffering; that the expansion of the
oil-for-food programme will reduce that suffering without
diluting the disarmament regime; and that someday, sooner
or later - and we pray sooner - a fully disarmed and
peaceable Iraq would be able to rejoin the family of
nations. The United Nations, founded even before the
close of the Second World War, over 50 years ago, has
an inherent obligation to remember that even the bitterest
of enmities among nations do not last for ever. It is
therefore not too early for us to think about reconciling
peoples once their Governments are at peace.

The agreement reached in Baghdad was neither a
victory nor a defeat for any one person, nation or group
of nations. Certainly the United Nations and the world
community lost nothing, gave away nothing and conceded
nothing of substance. But by halting, at least for now, the
renewal of military hostilities in the Gulf, it was a victory
for peace, for reason and for the resolution of conflict by
diplomacy. It underscored, however, that if diplomacy is
to succeed, it must be backed both by force and by
fairness.

The agreement was also a reminder to the entire
world of why this Organization was established in the
first place: to prevent the outbreak of unnecessary conflict
when the will of the international community can be
achieved through diplomacy; to seek and find
international solutions to international problems; to obtain
respect for international law and agreements from a
recalcitrant party without destroying for ever that party's
dignity and willingness to cooperate; to secure, in this
case, through on-site inspections and negotiations, the
assured destruction of weapons of mass destruction that
aerial bombardment can never achieve.

If this agreement is fully implemented and leads
over time to a new day in the Gulf; if this exercise in
diplomacy, backed by firmness, fairness and force, stands
the test of time, it will serve as an enduring and
invaluable precedent for the United Nations and the world
community.

If, ultimately, we have learned the right lessons of
this crisis, then this planet's age-old prayer for enduring
peace with justice may be within our reach. It was that
prayer, from people of every faith and every frontier, that
sustained me on my journey for peace in Baghdad. I
pledge today, before this Council and the world, to strive,
to seek, to find and not to yield in the fulfilment of my
duty.

