Mr. Milanovie (Serbia): First of all, allow me to
wish Egypt a very successful presidency and to thank
you, Sir, for convening this meeting. I willl High
Representative Inzko back to the United Nations. Since
I am speaking last, I thank all previous speakers for
their statements.

The Republic of Serbia is firmly committed to
promoting comprehensive bilateral relations with its
neighbours and invests continuous efforts in creating
conditions for a new kind and quality of relations in the
Western Balkans and South-East Europe. As a next-door
neighbour, Bosnia and Herzegovina is the key partner
of my country in the pursuit of this important goal. The
possibilities, as well as the need and interests, are there;
what we need to do, however, is to mobilize additional
resources and renew our energies to bring about a better
future for all our peoples. The Government of Serbia
and Prime Minister Vucie in particular, have launched
a number of initiatives recently, making important
breakthroughs in cooperation with partners from
Bosnia and Herzegovina and bringing us ever closer
to the common goal of each and every responsible
government in the region - reconciliation, mutual
trust, faster economic development and European
Union (EU) integration.

More than 20 years have elapsed since the signing
of the Dayton Peace Agreement, which put an end
to the killing and devastation wrought by a tragic
conflict and brought peace to Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The Agreement, which is in its third decade of
implementation, was an important stepping stone in the
process of reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the entire region. It provided a basis for restoring
trust among its constituent peoples and entities, which
is crucially important for the country's future at this
point in time as well. And although it is always possible
to do more, significant results have been achieved in
the consolidation of society, economic development
and the cooperation of Bosnia and Herzegovina with
its neighbours and in its integration efforts, which, not
unlike elsewhere in the region, are expected to have a
catalytic effect on its road to full EU membership.

As a guarantor of the Dayton Agreement, Serbia
has made every effort to be the best possible neighbour
to Bosnia and Herzegovina; after all, relations between
the two countries have a ripple effect on the entire
region. Abiding strictly by the provisions of the
Dayton Agreement, my country is firmly committed
to preserving the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, for it is only in conditions
of full stability that Bosnia and Herzegovina can be a
neighbour whose pace of development will continue
to rise and constituent peoples will enjoy a better
quality of life tomorrow than they do today. We believe
that, as the homeland of many Serbs as well, Bosnia
and Herzegovina stands at the cusp of a better future,
that its regional integration will tighten and that its
infrastructure, its economy and effective administration
will continue to develop as it progresses along the road
to European integration.

Dialogue and agreements among the two entities
and the three constituent peoples of Bosnia and
Herzegovina stand out as the most important values and
achievements of more than two decades of the Dayton
Peace Agreement. Aimed at reaching consensus, they
are the only proper and effective instruments for
addressing the issues relevant for the present and future

of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Always at a premium,
dialogues are particularly important in times of reform
when we seek to fulfil the criteria and reach the standards
in the process of European integrations, as they help us
bridge the differences that sometimes shape our vies
and positions. Proceeding from its own experience and
the experiences of others, my country is convinced that
Bosnia and Herzegovina and its political actors have the
will and energy to achieve, through mutual agreements,
solutions that will benefit and be acceptable to all. Such
agreements and their implementation will help improve
the understanding and trust among the Serbs, Bosniacs
and Croats and energize and provide additional impetus
to the European integration and reform processes.

We have been witness to a number of divergent
views and opinions in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the
past period. Serbia considers them to be internal issues,
best addressed by agreements among its political actors
within the existing legal system of the country, in an
atmosphere of constructiveness and mutual respect.

My country has initiated a number of political
dialogues at the highest level, aimed at promoting
the development of a wide range of bilateral relations
with Bosnia and Herzegovina. A joint session was held
between the Government and Serbia and the Council
of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina in Sarajevo
last November. Serbian Prime Minister Aleksandar
Vucie took part in the Business Investment Forum at
Srebrenica on 11 November 2015, and the Government
of Serbia allocated sizeable financial resources, in the
overall amount of €5 million, to help carry out the
projects important for the town of Srebrenica and the
surrounding area. In view of the tragic events that took
place at Srebrenica and the suffering of that and many
other towns and villages in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
my country believes that partnership aimed at reaching
reconciliation and creating a better future is the best
platform for the promotion of good-neighbourly
relations with Bosnia and Herzegovina. On 12 April,
Prime Minister Vucie visited Mostar for the opening
of the Mostar Economic Fair, where he met all the
members of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The Republic of Serbia is ready to continue to
work not only on maintaining but also on promoting
the achievements made in cooperation with the central
Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which it
considers an important link in the quest to bring about a
stable and prosperous Western Balkans and South-East
Europe. Proceeding from the provisions of the Dayton
Agreement, Serbia is also committed to furthering
transparent relations with the Republic of Srpska and
to cooperating and expanding cooperatibn with the
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Recently, Bosnia and Herzegovina submitted an
official request for admission to the European Union.
Serbia welcomes that step and expresses its readiness
to share its experience from the negotiation process.
Bilateral European Union integration consultations with
Bosnia and Herzegovina were held at the Ministry for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia last February.
On that occasion, the interlocutors from Bosnia and
Herzegovina were handed a copy of Serbia's replies
to the questionnaire of the European Commission,
which we hope will help Bosnia and Herzegovina in
its next step on its own road to Europe. Although the
two sides may be at different stages of the process,
they actively support one another and exchange views
and experiences, for which the memorandum of
understanding provides a convenient framework.

It is in my country's ongoing interest to promote
economic cooperation with Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In that context, we are pleased to note that the level of
the cooperation and the scope of trade are increasing
year in, year out. In 2015, trade exchange amounted
to 61.441 billion and, with about €900 million in
investments, Serbia is one of the largest investors in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, including in the areas of
infrastructure, energy and joint ventures.

Serbia is firmly committedto promoting reconciliation
and working towards a better future for all peoples of
the region. Relations with Bosnia and Herzegovina, my
country's first neighbour, its stability and prosperity
are of paramount importance. We are ready to intensify
our contacts and cooperation and to invest additional
efforts in pursuit of peace, security and a better future,
to which all peoples of the region are entitled and which
they well deserve.

The meeting rose at 12.15 pm.
