Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I would like to
thank Mr. Jens Anders Toyberg-Frandzen, Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General for the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra
Leone, for his briefing and for the tremendous work
he has done in ensuring the successful completion
of the mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL). I also
wish to thank Ambassador Guillermo Rishchynski of
Canada, Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission
configuration for Sierra Leone, for briefing us,
especially on his visit to the country from 25 to
28 February, and for his dedication in steering one of
the most successful peacebuilding processes.

I also take this opportunity to welcome
Mr. Samura M.W. Kamara, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of the Republic
of Sierra Leone, and to thank him for the tremendous
achievements registered by his country over the past
15 years.

As UNIPSIL completes its mandate at the end of
this month, we can say without the shadow of a doubt
that, after 15 years of presence in Sierra Leone, the
United Nations peace operations in that country have
decisively achieved their goal of supporting Sierra
Leone and its people. Despite the indelible scars left by
the terrible civil war in Sierra Leone, the country has
made remarkable progress, in particular in the security,
political, socioeconomic and human rights sectors.
We note with great satisfaction that Sierra Leone
has successfully embarked on the path to sustainable
security, democratic governance facilitated by strong
institutions, respect for human rights and the rule of
law, economic growth and regional cooperation.

In this regard, we congratulate President Ernest Bai
Koroma on his leadership and extend our congratulations
to the Government and the resilient people of Sierra
Leone. We especially commend President Koroma
for his outreach efforts to promote political dialogue
through his regular informal meetings with the 10
registered political parties in Sierra Leone. We believe
that this will further reduce political tension and build
harmony to the benefit of everyone, in particular as
political space is increasingly being given to women
and youth.

However, as noted by the Secretary-General, Sierra
Leone must build on these political gains and address
the root causes of conflict, which are mainly related
to poverty, corruption and political exclusion. In this
respect, we call on the two major political parties in
Sierra Leone - the All Peoples Congress and the Sierra
Leone People's Party - to build on the positive trend
and resolve their internal tensions through dialogue.
In this context, we welcome the ongoing constitutional
review aimed at addressing issues ofgovernance, human
rights, natural resources and land tenure, but we call on
all parties to conduct that process with diligence and to
ensure public ownership through inclusive nationwide
consultations.

We note with satisfaction that the general security
situation in Sierra Leone has remained calm and
stable. We hope that the national authorities, with the
support of development partners, will soon complete
the creation of a national infrastructure for peace
to prevent and address conflict, and also implement
the planned project to cement the culture of seeking
peaceful solutions. In the meantime, Sierra Leone
needs to continue strengthening its coordination with
countries of the region in order to counter transnational
organized crime and drug-trafficking. We therefore
welcome the close coordination with the Economic
Community of West African States and the Mano
River Union in efforts to tackle transnational crime,
ensure cross-border security and promote stability.
Furthermore, we commend the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime for its support to the Government
of Sierra Leone in implementing the West Africa Coast
Initiative to combat transnational organized crime.

Our country, Rwanda, which had to face the terrible
consequences of the genocide committed against the
Tutsi 20 years ago, highly appreciates the tremendous
achievements of Sierra Leone in addressing transitional
justice through the hybrid Truth and Reconciliation
Commission. While every country emerging from
conflict follows its own path in dealing with post-
conflict challenges, it is clear that experience-sharing
among fellow African countries is of paramount
importance to ensure permanent peace on the continent.

We take this opportunity to echo the draft
presidential statement to be adopted, which we endorse,
and congratulate the Special Court for Sierra Leone on
the completion of its mandate. Rwanda was honoured to
be part of that process, having received convicts from
the Court in our correctional facilities.

Rwanda welcomes the positive socioeconomic
advances in Sierra Leone, as well as the International
Monetary Fund projection that gross domestic product
will increase by 15 per cent in 2014 and by 12.4 per cent
in 2015. In order to sustain peace and development and
to create greater opportunities for all Sierra Leoneans,
without any distinction, we encourage the Government
of Sierra Leone to establish an attractive business
environment and to combat all forms of corruption. In
that regard, Rwanda welcomes the signing of the mutual
accountability framework by the Government and
development partners, confirming their commitment
to working closely to strengthen Government-donor
relations within the framework of the New Deal for
Engagement in Fragile States. Also encouraging is the
fact that development partners have discussed the post-
UNIPSIL engagement with the Government and agreed
on the development partners' continuing efforts during
the transition, especially in support of the Agenda for
Prosperity.

As I said earlier, Sierra Leone's success should
also be attributed to the PBC configuration chaired
by Ambassador Rishchynski. We commend the
configuration for its activities and advocacy, and
we support the proposed scale-down of the PBC
engagement in Sierra Leone to a lighter and more
responsive approach and the establishment of a small
steering group composed of close partners of Sierra
Leone. We believe that such a configuration will
maintain international attention on Sierra Leone while
preparing for the country's smooth exit from the PBC's
agenda.

To conclude, I would like to express my gratitude
to Mr. Jens Toyberg-Frandzen and the whole UNIPSIL
team for a job well done in the service of Sierra Leone
and the United Nations.
