Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in French): Cameroon would like to congratulate you, Mr.
President, on having convened this meeting of the
Council on the situation in the Middle East, including
the question of Palestine, at the request of the League
of Arab States. We welcome the Secretary-General
here today and once again commend his tireless efforts
for peace in general and in the Middle East in
particular. We thank him for his important statement,
which was well-balanced and made points that were
commensurate with what is at stake: peace, which has
been greatly threatened in the Middle East. Cameroon
shares his Views.

On 12 March 2002, the Security Council, at the
initiative of the United States, adopted resolution 1397
(2002). That was a historic resolution because of the
fundamental provisions that it contained. It set out a
vision of a region in which two States, Palestine and
Israel, live side by side within secure and recognized,
borders, with the immediate cessation of all acts of
violence, including all acts of terror, provocation,
incitement and destruction, and the implementation of
the Tenet plan and the Mitchell report
recommendations with the aim of resuming
negotiations on a political settlement.

Cameroon fully supported that resolution,
because its provisions were in keeping with what we
have always believed. We pinned great hope on it, and
we still do. The situation prevailing now on the ground,
which has justified the convening of this meeting,
could, unfortunately, divert us from the spirit in which
we had committed ourselves. This situation concerns
and greatly saddens us, particularly because it has
come about at a time when at the Beirut summit the
League of Arab States was sending a strong signal to
the peace process through the adoption of the plan
proposed by Saudi Arabia.

Now all of our hopes have been dashed by the
new cycle of violence and reprisal in the region. It is
clear to Cameroon that terrorism cannot be accepted on
any pretext. We wish to reaffirm here our
condemnation of acts of terrorism, particularly those
against innocent civilians. We must encourage both
sides to resume the path of negotiation towards a
lasting peace.

In order to negotiate, there must be two; they
must acknowledge, accept and respect each other. That
is a necessary precondition, which prompts me to ask
the following question. Are the measures of laying
siege, the attacks and the actions that hamper the
normal activities of the Palestinian Authority truly in
keeping with the new momentum that we wish to see in
the search for peace in the Middle East?

We must recall that peace in the Middle East
means the creation of the Palestinian State and the
recognition of Israel, its right to existence within
secure, recognized borders. As Cameroon has always
stressed, this means that all parties must strictly
implement Security Council resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973) and 1397 (2002). These put forward the
immediate and strict application of the fundamental
principle of land for peace.

These are the elements and conditions for a just
and lasting peace.

That is why, in addition to the deterioration ofthe
situation and because of it, the Security Council must,
more than ever before, end its deafening silence and
reaffirm forcefully, today, resolution 1397 (2002) and
call for its implementation without delay. That is what
the peoples of the United Nations who live in the
Middle East expect ofthe Council.

