Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We, too, are grateful to Under-Secretary-
General Guehenno, to Ambassador Nishimura and to
Ambassador Braun for the extremely interesting and
very technical and useful briefings today. I believe that
the material that they have given us will be important
to us as we carry out our work in the coming years.

We have questions for all three briefers.

Our first question is addressed to Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno. There have been reports
about the possibility of getting NATO involved in
securing peace and security in Afghanistan. Have there
been any contacts with the United Nations Secretariat
in that regard?

Our second question is the following. Is work
being done on the possibility of extending the security
zone, which can be protected by international forces in
Afghanistan, beyond the capital, Kabul?

Next, a question for Ambassador Nishimura. The
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
process will be difficult, given the very specific
complications of the situation in Afghanistan. We will
face a situation in which people are unwilling to give
up their weapons voluntarily, not necessarily because
they are part of an armed group, but because the
situation is insecure and people might want to keep
weapons merely to protect their families. From the
briefings of Mr. Nishimura and of Mr. Braun, it seems
clear that there is a desire to coordinate the
disarmament process and to enhance the security
situation in the country. But Mr. Nishimura said that
disarmament would be completed within a year, and
Mr. Braun said that police reform would require up to
2005. So our question is, are the problems encountered
in demobilization the same in all provinces, and, if not,
which parts of the country require greater efforts? How
does Mr. Nishimura see the process being coordinated?

Finally, we have a question for Mr. Braun. As we
understand it, one of the main tasks of the Afghan
police - primarily the border police - will be
combating drug trafficking. How does he see the
interaction between the Afghan security forces and the
services of the neighbouring countries, which are also
trying to block the flow of drugs from Afghanistan?
How could the United Nations assist more in that
effort, and how could we accelerate such work?

