Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I welcome Mr. Abdurahman
Ibrahim, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of
Fisheries and Maritime Resources of Somalia, and
thank him for his remarks. I also thank Mr. Ould
Abdallah for his briefing and for his commendable
work as Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Somalia. I welcome African Union
Commissioner Lamamra and thank him for his
statement. Through him, I would like to convey our
appreciation to the African Union for its support to
Somalia.

The Transitional Federal Government (TFG) has
been able to withstand fierce armed opposition and to
make progress in some important areas of the Djibouti
process and the transitional agenda. Nevertheless,
many challenges still remain on the path towards a
peaceful, stable and prosperous Somalia.

The signing on 15 March of the framework
agreement between the Transitional Federal
Government and Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama'a was an
important achievement in the reconciliation policy
adopted by President Sharif. We look forward to the
implementation of the agreement and urge other armed
groups to renounce violence and join the Djibouti
process. The decision by the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolutions 751
(1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and
Eritrea to list Al-Shabaab and eight individuals should
be seen as a wake-up call to all recalcitrant groups.

Unity within and among the Transitional Federal
Institutions will remain essential to achieving further
progress towards peace and stability.

The security situation in Somalia remains a
matter of great concern, despite progress in
international support for the restructuring of
Transitional Federal Government security forces and
for the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).
My delegation deplores, in particular, the attacks
against that Mission, including the one directed against
its headquarters on 27 April. We once again pay tribute
to the troops from Uganda and Burundi for their
contribution to the stabilization of Somalia. We are
encouraged by the efforts of several Member States to
train, equip and fund AMISOM. troops and Transitional
Federal Government security forces. We note, in
particular, the launching of the European Union
training mission to Somalia.

We are encouraged by the progress reported by
the Secretary-General regarding United Nations
activities in Mogadishu. We hope that security and
political conditions will be soon in place to allow for a
more substantive United Nations presence in the
capital.

As the Transitional Federal Government rebuilds
its security forces, steps must be taken to avoid the
civilian population continuing to bear the brunt of the
conflict. Fleeing conflict zones, such as Mogadishu, is
not always a guarantee against violence. We strongly
condemn the taking of a medical compound by armed
groups on 7 May. Blatant disregard for the principle of
distinction was also displayed in the attack against the
mosque in the Bakara market, on 2 May, which killed
and injured scores of innocent people.

Against this background, it is disquieting to learn
that World Food Programme operations Somalia
remain suspended in all of south-central Somalia
except Mogadishu and that the World Health
Organization has had to reduce its activities in the
country due to lack of funding. In addition, it is
disturbing to learn that the 2010 consolidated appeal is
only 15 per cent funded.

Resolution 1918 (2010) represents an important
step against piracy. We encourage all stakeholders to
engage with Kenya in addressing its concerns with
regard to its efforts to fight impunity at sea. Brazil also
welcomes the establishment of a regional centre to
prosecute suspected pirates in Seychelles. Not only
States from the region but all affected States, including
flag States and States of the nationalities of victims,
have a common responsibility in tackling the problem.

I should also stress that a comprehensive solution
to piracy off the coast of Somalia will be achieved only
by addressing its root causes on land, as has been
pointed out by many delegations this morning. In this
regard, Brazil is encouraged by the increasing
cooperation on anti-piracy between the TFG,
Somaliland and Puntland noted in the Secretary-
General's report (S/2010/234). This could also build
confidence and have a positive influence on other core
issues related to Somalia's future.

Before concluding, I would like to say a few
words on reconstruction and development. Progress in
revenue collection and the TFG's renewed focus on
delivering basic services and rehabilitating
infrastructure are commendable. Tending to the
fundamental needs of the population and fostering
income generation are as important as the restructuring
of security forces. Socio-economic development can
greatly reduce the appeal of the insurgency and the
pirate militias. The TFG should be actively supported
in this regard, including through capacity-building. We
welcome the convening of the Istanbul Conference on
Somalia and look forward to its outcome.

The situation in Somalia is among the most
difficult challenges on the Security Council's agenda.
The partnership between the TFG and the international
community should be strengthened. It has already
borne some fruit and is the most promising way to
peace and stability in the Horn of Africa.

