Mr. Matjila (South Africa): I thank you, Sir, for
organizing this open debate on the working methods of
the Security Council. I wish to commend Japan for its
sustained efforts over the past 10 years in working to
improve the working methods of the Security Council,
particularly with regard to its work on strengthening
presidential note S/2010/507. The note remains a useful
guideline in improving the transparency, efficiency
and inclusiveness of the Council. The consistent
implementation of the provisions of note 507 is key to
ensuring its success. South Africa reiterates that the
reforms to working methods, as reflected in note 507,
as well as the Council's provisional rules of procedure,
should become permanent so that this organ can be held
accountable and have predictable and transparent rules.

We wish to align ourselves with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Islamic Republic
ofIran on behalf ofthe Non-Aligned Movement (NAM).
In addition to the proposals put forward by NAM, I wish
to also focus on four practical suggestions, as requested
by the concept note for this meeting (S/2016/585, annex),
which South Africa believes can further contribute to
creating a more effective Security Council.

First, the Council has consistently agreed,
including in note 507, to continue to expand
consultation and cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations, undertaking to invite
relevant organizations to participate in its public and
private meetings, when appropriate. Additionally, in
note 507 the Council commits itself to continuing to
informally consult with regional organizations when
drafting, inter alia, resolutions, presidential statements
and press statements, as appropriate.

During South Africa's presidency of the Security
Council in 2012, we championed strengthening
strategic cooperation between the Security Council and
the African Union (AU) Peace and Security Council,
as well as the promotion of the rule of law in conflict
and post-conflict situations. The Security Council also
adopted several outcomes, including resolution 2033
(2012), which recognizes that regional organizations are
well placed to understand the nuances and complexities
of conflicts and that their proximity to a given conflict
allows them to directly influence its prevention or
resolution. The resolution provides, among other things,
concrete action for the Council to undertake to foster a
more strategic relationship with the AU.

Currently there are processes under way in Africa
to verify the readiness of the African Standby Force
to enable the AU to intervene in conflicts within a
short time. The AU has the political will and human
resources to deploy troops anywhere in the continent, as
reflected by the fact that the majority of peacekeeping
troops in Africa originate from the continent itself.
What is required is the consistent and regular strategic
consultation and coordination between the Council and
regional bodies, as well as assistance with regard to
capacity-building.

Secondly, while there has been significant
improvement in consultations between the Council
and troop-contributing countries (TCCs), as called
for in note 507, we believe that more can be done.
In that regard, regular and timeous consultations
and coordination between the Council and TCCs are
required, specifically when considering new or the
renewal of mandates.

Thirdly, the Security Council has committed itself
in note 507 to seeking the views of Member States
that are parties to a conflict and/or other interested
and affected parties. That commitment should be
uniformly applied. It would therefore be necessary for
the Council, as a matter of principle, to always consult
with all relevant parties to the conflict to ensure that
the Council has at its disposal all relevant facts before
deliberating on a matter.

Fourthly, briefings by the Council's presidency to
the general membership at the beginning and end of the
month have become a regular occurrence. The Council
has agreed that the Council presidency should provide
substantive and detailed briefings to Member States
in a timely manner, preferably shortly after informal
consultations of the whole. We encourage members of
the Council to ensure that they maintain this practice
to promote transparency and keep Member States
informed about its work.

This meeting is being held in the context of the
implementation of seminal reforms related to the way
in which the United Nations selects and appoints its
Secretary-General. South Africa urges the Security
Council to provide the membership with regular
updates on its consideration of the candidates so as to
ensure the transparency and credibility of the process.

In conclusion, the Council should continue to work
towards increasing and improving its transparency
and accountability, thereby ensuring the greater
effectiveness and legitimacy of its work. Furthermore,
superficial changes to the working methods do not
detract from the fundamental need for a reform of the
Council and the expansion of its membership in both
the permanent and non-permanent categories. We must
therefore speed up the reform of the Council if we
are to avoid the further erosion of the legitimacy and
credibility of this organ.

