Mr. Mayong Onon (Malaysia): At the outset, I
wish to thank you, Sir, for convening this important
open debate, which allows non-members of the
Security Council to express their views on the
worrisome situation in the Middle East. We hope that
the views expressed here will be considered seriously
by the Council members in all their deliberations on the
maintenance of peace and security in the region.

Malaysia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

The situation in Palestine remains dire. A peaceful
resolution of the longest man-made conflict remains
elusive. That is largely due to the continued defiance
by Israel - the occupying Power - of various relevant
Security Council resolutions, including resolution
2334 (2016). The excessive use of force by Israel in
responding to the Palestinians involved in the peaceful
Great March of Return, which Malaysia strongly
condemns, is totally uncalled for and unacceptable.
We therefore demand that Israel stop all violations and
illegal activities and fully comply with all its obligations
pursuant to all the relevant resolutions.

It is the responsibility of all Members of the United
Nations to contribute to finding a just and peaceful
solution to the conflict. It is in that context that
Malaysia reiterates its deep concern about the decision
taken by the United States to recognize Jerusalem
as the capital of Israel and to relocate its Embassy
from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem. That decision, which
regrettably is being emulated by a number of other
States, undermines efforts to finding a comprehensive,
just and durable settlement to the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict. It has led to the dismay and frustration of a
majority of Member States, the Palestinians and the
Muslim world in particular, and those who wish to
see peace, stability and security in the region. The
decision not only contravenes and undermines the
relevant Security Council resolutions, but it would also
embolden Israel, as the occupying Power, to continue
to execute its brutal occupation and repressive policies
in the occupied Palestinian territory - a clear violation
of international law, including humanitarian law, while
inflicting immense suffering on the Palestinians.

For its part, Malaysia will continue to provide
assistance, within its means, to the Palestinians as
well as the efforts of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
in providing assistance, protection and advocacy for
Palestinian refugees. We therefore urge all Member
States to strengthen their support for the Agency so as
to ensure that the basic needs of Palestinian refugees
are met, which include educational access, emergency
food assistance and other support, as well as primary
health care.

Malaysia sincerely hopes all Members of the United
Nations can provide a positive contribution in breaking
the impasse in the Middle East peace process, based
on the relevant Security Council resolutions, as well
as international laws and norms. Malaysia continues
to believe that a two-State solution, with Palestinians
and Israelis living side by side in peace, based on the
pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as the capital
of Palestine, is the only viable solution to this long-
standing conflict.

Besides the situation in Palestine, Malaysia remains
deeply concerned about the continued deteriorating
humanitarian situation in Syria. In that regard,
Malaysia stands in solidarity with the international
community in addressing this issue and urges all parties
to the conflict to adhere to their obligations under
international law, including international humanitarian
law and human rights law. The parties must also
fulfil their responsibilities in enabling unfettered
humanitarian access to reach those in need, critically
sick or wounded.

On numerous occasions, Malaysia has expressed its
view that there is no military solution to the conflict
in Syria. A political solution is the only way forward,
and that hinges on the political will of the parties to
the conflict themselves. Prolonging violence will not
benefit any party and will only be exploited by terrorist
groups and lead to further humanitarian catastrophe.

Malaysia condemns in the strongest possible terms
the use of chemical weapons by any parties under any
circumstances. The use of such weapons is abhorrent
and a flagrant violation of international law, especially
the Chemical Weapons Convention. Malaysia also
strongly believes that the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) is the sole
organization mandated to undertake investigations on
the use of chemical weapons. In that regard, Malaysia
urges all parties concerned to cooperate with the OPCW
to ensure an impartial and thorough investigation of
Douma incident.

Malaysia has always believed that, in dealing
with matters of peace and security, all parties must
act in a manner consistent with the Charter of the
United Nations and international law. In that regard,
Malaysia believes that no military solution can bring
about an end to any conflict in the world, as ultimately
only the innocent would suffer. We therefore urge all
parties involved to bridge all political divides to find
a political solution through dialogue and negotiations
in all conflicts, be it in Palestine, Syria, Yemen or
anywhere else in the world. We appeal to all parties to
demonstrate restraint and avoid any actions that could
escalate conflicts further, which would only worsen the
suffering of our fellow human beings.

