Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, my delegation appreciates the convening of
this meeting and the briefing delivered by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Chambas,
on the situation in West Africa and the Sahel. Peru
especially welcomes the work of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) as
a sui generis tool for effective action, especially in
relation to prevention. Its regional and holistic vision
gives it a special ability to take action, together with its
flexibility and adaptability to the various challenges of
the current subregional scene.

At the same time, the Office is the appropriate
platform for coordinating regional and subregional
efforts and alliances that address the existing complex
cross-border threats to peace and security in the area,
while promoting both the full exercise of human
rights and a gender perspective in the prevention and
peace consolidation processes. Given the Office's
fundamental role recognized by various international
actors, we would like to underscore three successful
areas for action that reveal its important potential.

First, in the area of preventive diplomacy, Peru
believes that UNOWAS stands out particularly in its
capacity to be an active agent of conflict prevention.
Its monitoring and early warning functions have helped
to ease tensions and offer peaceful political solutions
in various States. Of special note is the development of
mediation and good offices, which have prevented the
emergence and aggravation of political crises. Those
capacities must be strengthened and enhanced.

Secondly, in the area of promoting development
and institutional strengthening, it is precisely the
ability of UNOWAS to see the big picture that has
allowed it to do outstanding work in coordinating with
the African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States and various regional organizations in
the implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel, for example.

Peru believes that such a multidimensional
approach can contribute to the achievement of the
common objectives of creating inclusive governance
in the region and establishing programmes aimed
at promoting development. One commitment of
UNOWAS that we deem relevant is the strengthening
of political institutions to make them more efficient and
transparent. Similarly, the recent agreement between
UNOWAS and the United Nations Office for Central
Africa to work together and increase cooperation and
assistance in the Lake Chad basin is noteworthy. It is
a shared vision that is vital and of the utmost urgency
that seeks to respond to the difficult living conditions
in the region.

Thirdly, in the area of fighting against terrorism and
violent extremism, in the aforementioned articulating
framework with various African organizations,
UNOWAS has demonstrated efficiency in contributing
to a cross-cutting approach to address the serious
threat posed by the actions of Boko Haram. Peru
would like to highlight the reintegration programmes
that have been developed with people associated
with that terrorist group, as well as actions aimed at
supporting the fight against impunity by strengthening
the judicial institutions responsible for prosecuting the
group's members. The contribution that UNOWAS is
able to make to addressing transnational organized
crime, which in many cases provides financial support
for such terrorist activities, will also be important to
those efforts.

In conclusion, we recognize the advantages
of having this Office in the subregion, but we also
emphasize the importance of ensuring that it can rely
on resources that are adequate to ensuring its ability
to continue its important work. We also welcome
complementary initiatives, such as the Alliance for the
Sahel, launched in July 2017 and led by the European
Union, with the participation of the World Bank, the
African Development Bank and the United Nations
Development Programme.

