Mr. Acharya (Nepal): Let me begin, as others
have done, by expressing our condemnation of the
United Nations offices in Abuja, Nigeria, this morning.
We express our sincere condolences to all those who
were killed in the dastardly attack, and our sympathies
to the bereaved families.

Let me express my delegation's sincere
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for having
organized this open debate in the Council on the theme
"Peacekeeping: taking stock and preparing for the
future", and for preparing an excellent and
comprehensive concept paper on the subject
(S/20ll/496, annex). This is a very timely and
important debate. I should also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his important statement this
morning. We also endorse the statement made by the
representative of the Kingdom of Morocco on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement.

Peacekeeping, as a flagship enterprise of the
United Nations, is constantly evolving. The increased
demand on the United Nations to respond to a growing
and diverse number of situations is testimony both to
the growing confidence reposed in the world body and
to the multifaceted challenges that the international
community has to grapple with. Likewise, the
assumption of a peacekeeping role by some regional
organizations and the participation of an ever-
increasing number of troop-contributing countries
(TCCs) and police-contributing countries (PCCs) in
peacekeeping operations underscore peacekeeping's
indispensability as a legitimate instrument of the global
body for the maintenance of international peace and
security.

In the space and time continuum, peacekeeping
operations have gone well beyond their traditional
modes of operation. Protecting peace and ensuring
security, providing security guarantees, including the
protection of civilians, and political and peacebuilding
support to assist countries' transition to peace are the
principal tasks assigned to peacekeeping missions
today. They represent a mixed bag of old and new
mandates. In their present-day incarnation,
peacekeepers are performing as early peacebuilders.
They undertake many of the tasks pertaining to
peacebuilding and nation-building, particularly by
creating the necessary environment for the tasks of
monitoring elections, building necessary governance
institutions, establishing the rule of law, supporting
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
security sector reform, and laying foundations for
sustained economic growth and development.

The dramatic growth in peacekeeping operations
is thus accompanied by new, complex and
multidimensional mandates; diverse, challenging and
often hostile operating environments; and growing
interaction among a number of players. It is
unfortunate that the growth in the United Nations
budget is not proportionate to the growth in the number
of peacekeeping operations and the magnitude of the
mandate. The evolving trend has also brought to the
fore the critical issues of State sovereignty and
consent, building national capacity, the right to
protection and a host of other related issues.

This indicates that peacekeeping has moved into
a newer and broader territory. We believe that overall
peacekeeping has been largely successful, but we have
to make it better, as it has become a versatile
instrument of the United Nations. We should bridge the
gap in our strategy, financing and capacity not only to
ensure immediate peace and security, but also to
support economic, social and political recovery in
order to promote longer-term security and peace in the
countries concerned. After all, the root causes of
conflicts have to be looked at critically if we are to be
successful in the field. Moreover, strategy alone,
without corresponding resources and capacity in the
related fields, has never succeeded anytime or
anywhere. And United Nations peacekeeping cannot be
an exception to that.

There is no doubt that a higher standard of cost-
effectiveness, agility and operational efficiency must
be ensured. We concur with the view articulated in the
concept paper before us that United Nations
peacekeeping operations do not only carry
international legitimacy, but are also the most cost-
effective tools through which international peace and
security can be strengthened. It is our hope that
implementation of the global field support strategy and
a capability-driven approach will strengthen United
Nations peacekeeping further in the days ahead.

As there is no alternative to peacekeeping, it
should remain a partnership and a responsibility shared
among the General Assembly, the Security Council, the
TCCs and PCCs, regional partners, the host country
and the Secretariat. An enhanced level of
understanding and partnership among all the
stakeholders, right from the initial phase of mandate
design to the ultimate phase of withdrawal and exit, is
required for any peacekeeping operation to be
successful. In addition, doctrinal and conceptual
understanding must be simplified and defined in terms
of operational activities, and must be understood by all
stakeholders.

Based on our experiences gained along the
evolving path of peacekeeping, and looking at the
challenges ahead, my delegation emphasizes the
following key elements.

First, the Security Council must be guided by
unity of purpose and mobilize its entire political
capital, based on merits and principles, to ensure that a
coherent strategic framework is in place to achieve the
desired objectives, which must be explicitly
articulated.

Secondly, peacekeeping should be guided by an
integrated three-pronged strategy. It has to stabilize the
security situation, support national political processes
and ensure economic regeneration. All the three pillars
need to be strengthened in a holistic manner from the
very beginning. Therefore, greater coherence and
coordination are required in dealing with these
challenges and conflicts.

Thirdly, a framework for consultation with TCCs
and PCCs on the mandating process should be
substantive, institutionalized and structured in terms of
content and timing. The comprehensive and continuous
involvement of TCCs and PCCs in all stages of United
Nations peacekeeping is essential to making operations
effective and successful on the ground.

Fourthly, a strong provision of necessary
resources and effective arrangements of enablers is key
to rapid deployment and to making missions
operational. Therefore, field support needs to be
strengthened in order to overcome the increasing risks
faced by peacekeepers and changing nature of security
and growing expectations.

Fifthly, civilian capacity in diverse fields is in
increasing demand in the new generation of
peacekeeping operations. We should strengthen the
capacity of the United Nations to respond to such
demands with an inclusive approach shared by all. The
proper and effective use of civilian capacity, together
with a military contingent, will have a salutary impact
on building necessary institutions and national capacity
in conflict-affected countries, which will make peace
deep-rooted and sustainable.

Finally, the safety and security of peacekeepers
should be given due priority. Equally important is for
the morale and dignity of peacekeepers to be kept high
at all times through appropriate incentive structures,
including timely adjustment of their salaries and
facilities in line with ground realities.

My country attaches great importance to United
Nations peacekeeping in line with its foreign policy
objectives. Nepal's association with United Nations
peacekeeping is consistent and long-standing. Without
interruption since 1958, Nepal has contributed
peacekeepers for the maintenance of international
peace and security under the aegis of the United
Nations, with the cumulative figure of more than
80,000 personnel deployed in 40 different
peacekeeping missions around the world. Nepalese
peacekeepers have served in the most challenging
missions with the utmost commitment and
professionalism. To date, some 62 Nepalese
peacekeepers have sacrificed their lives in the line of
duty.

In conclusion, my delegation reiterates its
profound commitment to United Nations peacekeeping
and assures the Council of its continued participation
in peacekeeping missions for the sake of a secure,
stable and prosperous future for all.

