Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia) (spoke in French): Please
allow me at the outset, Sir, to congratulate you and all
the other members of your delegation on your
accession to the presidency of the Council. Let me
assure you as well of our complete cooperation in the
fulfilment of your duties. My congratulations go also to
your predecessor, Ambassador Tafrov, for his excellent
leadership of the work of the Council last month.

Please allow me also to thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this meeting, which marks one year
since the first meeting of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC). Today's meeting gives us the
opportunity to report to members of the Council about
the measures that Tunisia has taken to combat the
grave threat posed by international terrorism. But first,
I would like to join those who spoke before me to pay
tribute to the sustained efforts made in this regard by
Sir Jeremy Greenstock, the Vice-Chairmen of the
Committee, the other representatives of CTC members,
the experts and the Secretariat staff.

Tunisia, which was among the first nations to
warn against the dangers of terrorism, is firmly
committed to continue its work to strengthen
cooperation aimed at effectively countering and finally
eliminating this scourge. Therefore, beyond its multi-
dimensional, comprehensive national counter-terrorism
policy, Tunisia has signed bilateral agreements with 30
countries with a view to strengthening its cooperation
with those countries in the legal and security areas.
Furthermore, Tunisia has adhered to regional
conventions adopted by the League of Arab States, the
Organization of African Unity and the Organization of
the Islamic Conference, as well as to the 12
international conventions on specific terrorism issues.

Tunisia has also made many initiatives. Among
these was the call by President Ben Ali to hold an
international conference that would lay down common
parameters for a code of conduct for all States. It
would help initiate a responsible dialogue that would
avoid double standards in regional conflicts and
mitigate the feelings of deprivation and oppression
experienced by many peoples.

As a member of the Council at the time, Tunisia
actively participated in the formulation of resolution
1373 (2001). In compliance with this resolution, we
have submitted to the Counter-Terrorism Committee
two reports dealing with the measures taken in this
regard, and we remain ready to respond to any new
request from the Committee. Furthermore, my country
has given effective support to the CTC, in particular by
designating an expert in counter-terrorism law.

During its term in the Council, Tunisia stressed
the need to guarantee maximum transparency in the
Committee's work. We also urged that technical
assistance be provided to the States to enable them to
fulfil resolution 1373 (2001) and called for equitable
geographic representation in the selection of experts
working with the CTC. One year later, we note with
great satisfaction that the Committee is working
resolutely in that direction.

In that regard, we are grateful to Sir Jeremy for
organizing periodic briefings with non-member States.
We are also pleased by the Committee's increased
cooperation with international, regional and
subregional organizations and institutions, as well as
by its continued efforts to obtain financing and
specialized technical support.

(spoke in English)

Before concluding, I wish to underline two points
of major importance to my delegation. First, the
comprehensive strategy to prevent and fight terrorism
should not jeopardize the inalienable right of peoples to
self-determination or the legitimate struggle of peoples
against foreign and colonial occupation. It is essential
not to confuse those rights, recognized and protected
by the Charter and by international law, with acts of
terrorism targeting civilian populations. A clear
definition agreed upon by all States would definitely
help avoid that confusion.

Secondly, the fight against terrorism requires that
we attack its root causes. Thus, it is necessary to tackle
all manifestations of poverty and underdevelopment
wherever they occur, work resolutely to eliminate
causes of frustration and deprivation and resolve major
pending issues so that they cannot be exploited by
terrorist groups wishing to harm international stability.

