Mr. Horoi (Solomon Islands): This is the first time
that a representative of Solomon Islands has sat at this
table. I thank you, Mr. President, the other members of the
Security Council and the President of the General Assembly
for making the participation of Solomon Islands possible.

The idea for the United Nations was born in the
Second World War, and out of that conflict came the
impetus for the independence of my country. The people of
Solomon Islands experienced at first hand the deprivation
and destruction of modern warfare. We were displaced in
our beautiful islands, and we witnessed the ravaging of
their delicate environments by acts of war. Thus, I welcome
this opportunity to contribute, however briefly, to this
debate on protection for humanitarian assistance to refugees
and others in conflict situations, since this is now emerging
as a problem in the south-west Pacific.

Before there was a United Nations Organization, there
was the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation
Administration. Established in 1943, it provided assistance
to the civilian population of liberated areas in Europe,
Africa and Asia. With the end of the war, non-
governmental agencies and the newly founded United
Nations took on the formidable problem of meeting the
needs of millions of refugees and displaced. Those
providing the humanitarian assistance did not generally face
the prospect of being attacked or having their supplies
destroyed. Soon, a growing number of internal armed
conflicts in widely separated places significantly changed
the nature of the problem, as attacks against civilians and
those bringing humanitarian assistance became less unusual.

In response, in 1977 the international community
formulated the additional Protocols to the Geneva
Convention of 1949. The problem persisted and became
worse. In 1983 the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF) introduced the idea of children as zones of
peace. UNICEF sought, and achieved, days of tranquillity
when assistance could be provided during brief
suspensions of armed conflict and worked to establish
corridors of peace through which aid for the civilian
population could be safely moved by the United Nations
and non-governmental organizations.

Protecting humanitarian assistance in situations of
conflict is indeed difficult. In View of the fact that the
United Nations Department of Humanitarian Affairs, the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
UNICEF, the International Committee of the Red Cross
and many non-governmental organizations know much
about dealing with these emergencies, as even a quick
review of their reports and studies shows, I, as
representative of Solomon Islands, can only ask some
fundamental questions.

This list is not exhaustive. First, do we not need an
international convention specifically for the protection of
humanitarian aid personnel and assistance mate'riel?
Secondly, do we not need an international commitment to
the vigorous pursuit and prosecution of those who violate
the proposed convention as well as the Geneva Protocols?
Thirdly, do we not need to include, among the crimes
under the jurisdiction of the proposed international court
of criminal justice, planning and carrying out the
harassment of those engaged in humanitarian aid or
attacks against them? Finally, do we not need to move
beyond this one-day debate, in this beautiful Chamber, to
the planning of a special session of the General Assembly
designed to generate the necessary political will that we
have all been engaged in discussing today, to do what is
required?

I conclude with those few questions in mind.

