Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to begin by thanking
Mr. Lacroix, Lieutenant General Ngondi and Major
General Pearce for their briefings. I will not read out
a statement, since it would be very similar to what
we have already heard. I will focus on some specific
African-related issues.

We underline the significance of peacekeeping
operations in the history of the United Nations. They
have played a very important role in bringing about
peace after many conflicts. At the same time, they face
serious challenges. I believe that one of the tasks of the
Council is to seek ways to streamline peacekeeping
operations to ensure that they are more efficient. Of
course, speakers have mentioned the importance of host
countries, relations between peacekeeping operations
and host countries and the consent of those countries,
which are very important to success.

However, I want to focus on the issue of funding
operations in Africa with United Nations financial
support. I think that for us as Africans that continues to
be a crucial issue. We know that there is not unanimity
in the Council on this particular matter. But we think
that this model of cooperation could be very valuable
in the sense that we as Africans know our environment
better than anyone else and Africa is where most of the
conflicts under the Security Council's consideration
emerge. Many of our partners, many of whom are here
in the Chamber, and the United Nations itself have
the resources that we as Africans need to be able to
deal with the problems and resolve the conflicts that
plague us.

In that regard, I would like to ask a specific
question, which I think is directed more to
Mr. Lacroix, since the discrepancies that we have
in the Security Council on the issue are to do with
financing. Does he think that such financing by
partners and the United Nations is viable to ensure that
peacekeeping operations in Africa are more effective?
With regard to the issue of Cyprus, I would like
to know what the most serious challenges being
faced by the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in
Cyprus are given the complexity of dealing with two
different communities.

Regardingthe AfricanUnion-UnitedNations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur, I would like to ask the following.
In order for the mission to be successful, what should
the Security Council do to ensure that the mandates are
fully implemented without being amended?

Lastly, I would like to know - I do not know if
someone asked this question before I arrived - if
peacekeeping operations, specifically the two cases that
we are considering, have any programmes in place to
promote reconciliation, including confidence-building
measures to improve coexistence in such complex
situations, should the local populations become hostile
towards the troops that are basically in their countries?

