Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the presence in the Chamber of
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of
Timor-Leste, Mr. Jose Luis Guterres. We thank the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ian
Martin, for his report on the United Nations future role
in Timor-Leste.

We believe that the main conclusions and
recommendations contained in the report are correct.
We welcome the formation of a new Timorese
Government headed by Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta and we
take note of the measures adopted by the new
leadership, aimed at stabilizing the situation in the
country and enhancing dialogue with Timorese
political movements and society. Thanks to those
efforts, the situation has recently improved
considerably. We note the important stabilizing role
played by the international force made up of
contingents from Australia, New Zealand, Portugal and
Malaysia. We are grateful to the Governments of those
countries for their rapid response to the request for
assistance made by the Timorese authorities.

At the same time, it is clear that the situation in
Timor-Leste remains fragile and that many problems
facing the country are still far from being resolved. Of
particular concern for the near future are the situation
with regard to the disarming of former participants in
the recent crisis and the still unresolved problem of the
tens of thousands of internally displaced persons.

The recent crisis clearly showed the extent and
complexity of the problems in Timor-Leste. Given its
own continuing inadequate capacities, Timor-Leste
requires long-term substantial external support. We
support the recommendation of the Secretary-General
to establish, for an initial period of 12 months, an
integrated United Nations mission in Timor-Leste. It is
important that the planned mission should include a
strong police component to deal with the important
task of supporting law and order in Timor-Leste and
helping with the creation and strengthening of the
national police force which has practically
disintegrated.

We agree that the civil-sector priorities of the
future mission should be support for national
reconciliation, support for the upcoming election
process, assistance in the design and implementation of
national socio-economic strategies and support in
creating a justice system and other State structures.

Given the diminished capacity of the Timorese
armed forces and the clear request from the Timor-
Leste authorities, we support the recommendation of
the Secretary-General to include a small military
capacity in the future mission.

With regard to the report of the Secretary-General
on justice and reconciliation for Timor-Leste
(S/2006/580), we believe that the approach proposed in
the report is the correct one, given the position of the
interested States and the fact that the approach is aimed
at strengthening Timor-Leste's capacity in the justice
sector. We believe that the proposal of the Secretary-
General with regard to the force's format and
international composition is acceptable.

