Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome
the holding of this meeting and the informative
briefings by Special Representative Leila Zerrougui
and Ms. Anny Tenga Modi.

Peru welcomes the first acts of the Government
of President Felix Tshilombo Tshisekedi aimed at
achieved badly needed political de-escalation in the
country, in particular the pardoning of 700 political
prisoners, many of whom had been arrested in the run-
up to the elections last December, and the agreement for
the return of the representative of the European Union
to Kinshasa. We likewise welcome the commitment
undertaken by the Government to tackle corruption and
strengthen State authority throughout the territory, as
well as the progress aimed at facilitating the holding
of the forthcoming elections in the cities of Beni
and Yumbi. We believe that those efforts aimed at
consolidating reconciliation in the country are essential
prerequisites for overcoming the major challenges still
facing Congolese society.

We are concerned at the prevailing insecurity in
various parts of the country, primarily in the Kivu,
Kasai and Tanganyika regions, with the presence
of numerous armed groups, as well as ongoing
inter-communal violence.

In addition, the humanitarian situation in the
country is critical - with almost 3 million people
still dependent on assistance and protection - which
is aggravated by the fact that there are millions more
Congolese internally displaced or in third countries
as refugees.

We also note with alarm the continued spread of
the Ebola virus in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We are confident that the third
strategic response plan prepared by the Ministry of
Health with the technical support of the World Health
Organization and other United Nations agencies will
make it possible to finally contain the crisis caused by
that scourge.

In that regard, we recognize the courageous and
hard work of officials of the Government, the World
Health Organization, the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic ofthe
Congo (MONUSCO) and humanitarian agencies, who
are in the field under difficult security circumstances
undertaking outstanding prevention work through
vaccination campaigns and humanitarian support to
the population. Those efforts should continue to be
supported by the international community as a whole.

Meanwhile, the stated desire to ensure a climate
of trust and calm among the population cannot be
achieved if measures are not taken at the same time to
protect and promote human rights, particularly those
that deal with the ongoing incidents of sexual violence.
We welcome the efforts being made to that end, such as
those mentioned by Ms. Tenga Modi, but they must be

complemented by robust measures to combat impunity
through transparent and impartial investigations that
will allow for those responsible for atrocity crimes to be
brought to justice. In that regard, we wish to highlight
the work of MONUSCO aimed at establishing effective
measures to address the recruitment of children by
armed groups.
I conclude by expressing our full support for the
crucial role of MONUSCO in the country, particularly
in protecting civilians and defending human rights, as
well as its efforts to help bring about greater stability
and lasting peace. We fully support the renewal of the
MONUSCO mandate.

