Mr. Bakhtiar: It is a great honour to speak in the
Security Council in my capacity as the Afghan Youth
Representative to the United Nations at a time when
many Afghans feel forgotten by the international
community and overwhelmed by a merciless war. The
Council is communicating an important message to our
people by giving a young Afghan this platform as well
as expressing support for the active participation of
youth in decision-making, in line with resolution 2250
(2015) and 2419 (2018).

I realize that this is an opportunity for me, as
someone living and working in that country as a
youth activist, to draw attention to the more complex
and nuanced reality of Afghanistan. Afghanistan has
suffered so much and for so long. It is our reality. I am
pleased to say that it is also a reality that our resilience,
progress and aspirations keep us focused on working
for a better tomorrow.

We are not a failed nation; we are a resilient nation
that has been tested and challenged in a way very few
other nations have ever been. We ourselves are not only
the victims of global terrorism; we are also fighting it
on behalf of all others. Afghans are at the front lines of
the battle against our common enemy.

The young generation of Afghanistan shares
common values and interests with our global partners
and friends that allow us to strengthen and deepen our
partnership with our friends in the region and with our
allies throughout the world.

Two thirds of Afghanistan's population is under the
age of25. These young people barely remember the time
of the Taliban, let alone previous regimes. They belong
to a new Afghanistan. They have ambitions similar to
those of their fellow youth in other parts of the world.
The youth of Afghanistan are different in their way of
thinking, in their approach and in the way they define
and see our relationship with the world in the next 10
to 20 years. They are true partners to the rest of the
world; they do not just expect permanent dependency
on it but are trying hard to achieve interdependency,
trust and cooperation.

Our ambition is to make our country a hub for
regional connectivity and a land of opportunities. We
want the world to explore our culture and music and
learn our history. We were a nation that embraced
diversity as an asset and respected our religious beliefs.
Our generation is committed to reviving our historical
values once again.

The young generation of Afghanistan has been
the key driver of many of the successes of the past
17 years. The media is one shining example. In 2001,
independent media were virtually non-existent. Today
Afghan journalists are doing heroic work under
incredibly difficult circumstances. Afghan media play
an increasingly significant role in giving a voice to
voiceless Afghans and in holding power to account.
We have lost 53 journalists in a little less than four
years. Before coming to New York, I lost two of my
colleagues and friends from TOLOnews TV, Samim
Faramarz and Ramiz Ahmadi, in twin bombings as they
were reporting live from a blast site. Their colleagues
were simultaneously mourning, reporting and looking
after their families. That is our reality of both pain
and strength.

We are certain that Afghanistan will never go back
to the past, because there are thousands of like-minded
youth who are hopeful and are working fearlessly to
remake their country with their own hands, and they
have the hope that the international community will not
abandon them halfway.

Terrorism has affected all Afghans. More than
anyone else we want peace in our country. We are
holding the fort with our resilience and hope. We expect
the Council to focus on the real causes of terrorism and
force all regional players to play a constructive role
in Afghanistan.

A few days ago, Kabul lost 17-year-old Rahila, who
was killed by a suicide bomber along with 47 other
students in an educational centre. She had written in
her diary about her dreams and future goals:

"I can be the Rahila that society desperately needs
in its pursuit of prosperity and progress. This
society will overcome its current crisis through
solutions drawn from the knowledge and education
of its youth".
A few days after Rahila was killed just for going to
school, her brother established a library under her name
in Kabul to complete his sister's dream of educating
girls in Afghanistan. That is a clear demonstration of
Afghan resolve.

In another attempt at peace, earlier this year a
caravan from the southern province of Helmand started
walking - barefoot - to Kabul, demanding peace.
One of the members of the Helmand Peace March is
22-year-old Zaheer Ahmad Zindani, who was blinded
five years ago by a roadside bomb. In August 2018, I
met with the caravan in Kabul, and they asked me to
convey this message:

"Afghans are now going through the deadliest days,
weeks, years and decades. We have lost our finest
ones to this bloody war. But we want peace, and
peace in Afghanistan cannot come without the
support and the will of the international community,
in particular the United Nations. We therefore
call on all countries involved with the issue of
Afghanistan not to spend resources and human
capital on the excesses of war but on bringing long-
lasting peace to Afghanistan".

The caravan is still walking and just reached
Mazar-e-Sharif. They have said that they will not stop
walking until peace has been achieved. That is the
resolve and resilience of our generation.

Our generation also believes in democracy. We
expect our elections to happen next month. We fear
that because of various challenges the elections will
trigger nationwide unrest. The Council has a key role in
keeping our Government focused on national priorities,
including holding acceptable elections, fighting
corruption and supporting our security forces in their
tough fight.

Let me say by way of conclusion that I drafted
my speech on 9/11, but in 2018. This brought to mind
the terrorists' most heinous attack on the World Trade
Center Twin Towers. This should be a reminder of the
fact that terrorism is a global phenomenon that threatens
us all. We all have the responsibility to ensure that such
an atrocity never happens again. This can be ensured
when we all shoulder our share of responsibility and
fight against terrorism together.

On behalfofall Afghans, I am grateful for everyone's
sacrifices and contributions in rebuilding Afghanistan.

