Mr. Ryan (Ireland): May I congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council. I
should like also to compliment Ambassador de La
Sabliere and the French delegation for a very effective
presidency during the month of March.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union (EU). The acceding countries -
Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia,
Lithuania, Malta, Poland, the Slovak Republic and
Slovenia; the candidate countries - Bulgaria, Romania
and Turkey; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania,
Croatia, the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
and Serbia and Montenegro; and the European Free
Trade Association (EFTA) countries Iceland,
Liechtenstein, and Norway, members of the European
Economic Area, align themselves with this statement.

The European Union is grateful for the
opportunity today to review the outcome of last week's

conference in Berlin - "Afghanistan and the
international community: a partnership for the
future"- and looks forward to Afghanistan's

development from this point on.

Since the Bonn Agreement of December 2001,
there have been many significant and positive
developments in Afghanistan which have confirmed
the resolve of the Afghan people to determine freely
their own political future.

The Berlin conference held last week was a very
clear demonstration of the unprecedented cooperation
between the Transitional Administration, the United
Nations and the international community in the
reconstruction and development of Afghanistan. The
work plan presented by President Karzai in Berlin will
ensure that a functioning democracy is the only way
ahead for Afghanistan.

The European Union greatly values the
commitment of the United Nations and of individual
nations to assisting Afghanistan in reconstruction and
security sector reform. The contribution made by non-
governmental civil society and humanitarian
organizations is also vital.

The European Union, for its own part, has been,
and will continue to be, one of the major partners and
donors backing Afghanistan's reconstruction. There is
much that the European Union and its member States
are doing to help deliver those goals; it would take too
long to review all of those efforts this morning.
However, it is worth noting, as an indication of our
commitment to Afghanistan, that the combined
contributions for 2004 from the European Commission
and the Union's member States total some 700 million
euros.

The provision of security remains absolutely
critical to everything the Afghan Transitional
Administration and its international partners are trying
to achieve. The expansion of the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) is a demonstration of the
international community's commitment to Afghanistan
and will play a key role in assisting the Transitional
Administration in providing security for the electoral
process. Individual EU member States continue to
make very significant commitments to providing for
Afghanistan's security through participation in ISAF
and provincial reconstruction teams, as well as serving
alongside their allies under Operation Enduring
Freedom. The sacrifices that have been made, both by
Afghans and non-Afghans, are not forgotten.

The people of Afghanistan, however, also
experience insecurity as a result of weak rule of law;
the absence of an effective national police force and
army; and the spread of opium production, which fuels
crime and corruption. Afghanistan's efforts, in
partnership with lead nations, to address these issues
must be supported by the entire international
community.

With the approval of the Constitution by the
Constitutional Loya Jirga, the people of Afghanistan
have taken the reins of their own political destiny. The
men and women of Afghanistan, of whatever ethnic or
regional identity, may now aspire to live in a society
governed by the principles of freedom, justice and
democracy.

The election and formation of a fully
representative Government should be a priority for all
parties in Afghanistan. In this regard, the
announcement by President Karzai in Berlin that direct
presidential and parliamentary elections will be held in
September this year is a very positive development.
The European Union will endeavour, with the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and the
Afghan Transitional Administration, to ensure that the
elections can be held in accordance with the principles
agreed at the 2001 Bonn conference. Efforts to develop
Afghan civil society and a free media are an important
part of this undertaking.

The European Union firmly believes in the
protection and promotion of human rights, especially in
relation to women and children, and in this regard
welcomes the Afghan Transitional Administration's
commitment to meet its obligations under international
human rights law, as well as the progress made to date.
The European Union commends the work of the
Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission in
carrying out its mandate, despite the difficult
environment in which it operates. It is important to
ensure that the Commission remains independent, with
proper financial and political support, and that its
mandate is clearly articulated in law.
The European Union urges the Afghan
Transitional Administration and future Governments to
enable the full participation of women and girls in
Afghanistan's civil, cultural, economic and political
life, and we emphasize their responsibility to ensure
the full implementation of the Constitution's provisions
on human rights. The European Union will continue to
encourage and support efforts in Afghanistan to
promote a society in which the human rights of all are
fully respected.

In the past two years, Afghanistan has made great
progress. While many challenges remain to be
overcome - and their complexity may seem
daunting - the European Union believes that the
people of Afghanistan have the courage and
determination necessary to overcome them. They can
rely on the support of the European Union, its member
States and the entire international community.

