Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): I would like to thank
Ambassador Gary Quinlan for his work as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006) and for presenting the 90-day report of the
Committee. We also take note of the midterm report of
the Panel of Experts established pursuant to resolution
1929 (2010) and its activities during the reporting
period.

Azerbaijan attaches great importance to the
work of the Committee and to the implementation of
Security Council measures, the objective of which
we have seen as contributing to a political solution to
the problem based on international law. The Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT),
relevant Security Council resolutions, the Statute of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and
the NPT safeguards agreements provide a solid basis
to that end.

We are encouraged by the intensification of talks
between the Islamic Republic of Iran and the P5+1
during the reporting period, which resulted in reaching
an interim agreement between the parties in Geneva on
24 November. Furthermore, Iran and the IAEA signed
a joint statement on a framework for cooperation,
confirming that they had agreed to strengthen their
cooperation and dialogue aimed at ensuring the
exclusively peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear programme
through the resolution of all outstanding issues. As the
report of the IAEA Director General of 14 November
(see S/2013/668, annex) pointed out, that agreement
marked an important step forward.

During the reporting period, the Committee
continued to receive information from Member States
related to actions taken to implement the sanctions
regime. It is essential that Member States cooperate
with the Committee and the Panel of Experts by
providing information on the implementation measures.
The Committee also continued to assist States and
international organizations to implement the relevant
Security Council resolutions. As part of its efforts in
that regard, we take positive note of the open briefing
for States on 18 November, jointly convened by the
chairs of six subsidiary bodies and the President of the
Financial Action Task Force (FATF), on the respective
roles of the Security Council and FATF in combating
the financing of terrorism and proliferation. We share
the View that the briefing was effective in raising
awareness among States of the measures imposed
by the Council and the related recommendations and
guidance developed by FATF.

We also note the Panel's visits to several Member
States and the participation of its members in a number
of international meetings during the reporting period.
It is essential that the Panel continue its outreach
activities, which play an important role in increasing
the number of national implementation reports from
Member States. We hope that diplomatic efforts and
the recent important progress in the negotiations will
help move the resolution of the problem forward. A
diplomatic solution based on strict compliance with
international law and the relevant Security Council
resolutions is the only way to preserve peace and
stability in the region.

