Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this debate. Ten years ago,
resolution 1540 (2004) filled what was then a very
significant gap in multilateral disarmament and
non-proliferation regimes - the lack of any coherent
and consistently applied global framework for
preventing humankind's most destructive weapons from
falling into the hands of non-State actors. At that time,
we hoped that despite the less than ideal circumstances
surrounding its negotiation and adoption, resolution
1540 (2004) would be effective in filling that gap and
that it might do so in a manner sensitive to the differing
circumstances and capacities of individual Member
States. And so we are pleased that, 10 years later, we
can judge resolution 1540 (2004) to be a success.

What, might we ask, has underpinned that success?
The approach of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) has been a critical factor in
overcoming the initial misgivings and concerns that
were held and expressed by many Member States. Its
efforts to engage constructively with Member States on
their capacity needs and to coordinate assistance with
other relevant national capacity-building priorities,
rather than imposing a punitive, one-size-fits-all
approach, should be applauded; so too should its
proactive attempts to capture the synergies between
implementation of the resolution and other development
and capacity-building needs - an approach that has
been particularly important for small States with
limited institutional capacities.
But even more significant has been the collective
political will of States to apply considerable effort
and resources to securing existing weapons of mass
destruction (WMDs) and to place effective controls
on the materials contributing to their manufacture and
use - as, for example, was outlined somewhat earlier
by the representative of Kazakhstan. New Zealand
takes this opportunity to recognize the strenuous efforts
undertaken by some of the smallest States Members of
the United Nations, for which compliance on almost
any issue requires considerable resources and attention.

We have played our own part in those efforts. New
Zealand is one of the 47 countries providing assistance
to others in implementing the requirements of resolution
1540 (2004), both bilaterally and in partnership with
the United Nations and with others. We have put
resources - more than $7 million since 2004 - into
the Group of Eight Global Partnership against the
Spread of Weapons and Materials of Mass Destruction,
the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism,
the Nuclear Security Summits, the Proliferation
Security Initiative and the additional security and
non-proliferation programmes run by the International
Atomic Energy Agency and the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons. New Zealand is also
looking to include a practical resolution 1540 (2004)
implementation component in the tabletop exercise
it will host for Asia-Pacific regional partners in
September 2015, in connection with the Proliferation
Security Initiative.

But it is an understatement to say that challenges
still remain. Last year's confirmed use of WMDs
against a civilian population in Syria was a stark
reminder of the horrific power of those weapons and
justifies even greater political support to efforts to
prevent their proliferation. We can today say that so far,
our combined efforts appear to have been successful in
keeping such weaponry out of the hands of non-State
actors. That is what resolution 1540 (2004) is all about.
But when it comes to such powerful and horrific
weapons, phrases such as "so far" and "appear to have"
are quite simply not good enough. We cannot afford to
relax our vigilance or our efforts.

Looking forward, the comprehensive review of
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), to be
reported to the Council by the end of 2016, will provide
a very useful stocktaking to help identify where we need
to focus our future efforts. And, given the constantly
evolving nature and scope of all the global and regional

WMD proliferation threats that the Committee has to
address, it will be vital to ensure that the Committee's
priorities and activities remain strictly relevant to those
threats.

But ultimately, only continuing stringent
verification and, as the representative of Mexico
emphasized, the complete elimination of nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons will ensure security
for all. New Zealand has long called for the elimination
of all such weapons, and that remains our foremost
objective, as it is, we know, of many other like-minded
countries.

