The President: The Security Council will
continue its consideration of the item on the agenda.
The Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council takes note of
resolution 2004/18 of the Board of Governors of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
regarding the implementation of the safeguards
agreement of the Socialist People's Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, a State party to the Nuclear Non-
proliferation Treaty, by which the Board
requested the Director-General of the IAEA to
report a case of non-compliance to the Security
Council for information purposes only, while
commending the Socialist People's Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya for the actions it has taken to date and
those it has proposed to take to remedy it.

"The Security Council welcomes the
decision by the Socialist People's Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya to abandon its programmes for
developing weapons of mass destruction and their
means of delivery and the positive steps taken to
fulfil its commitments and obligations, including
its active cooperation with IAEA and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW).

"The Security Council takes note that in its
resolution 2004/18 the Board of Governors of
IAEA recognized the decision of the Socialist
People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya as a step
towards the realization of the goal of an Africa
and a Middle East free of weapons of mass
destruction and at peace.

"The Security Council reaffirms the need to
seek to resolve proliferation problems by peaceful
means through political and diplomatic channels.

"The Security Council welcomes existing
and future efforts to assist the Socialist People's
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya in this task and expresses
the hope that the steps taken by the Socialist
People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya would facilitate
and improve international cooperation with and
enhance the security of that country.

"The Security Council encourages the
Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to
ensure the verified elimination of all of its
weapons of mass destruction programmes. It
welcomes the roles played in that regard by IAEA
and OPCW in facilitating the fulfilment of the
Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya's
commitments, demonstrating the importance and
usefulness of existing international treaty
regimes.

"The Security Council expresses the hope
that resolution 2004/18 of the Board of Governors
of IAEA will be implemented in the spirit of
continued cooperation."

After consultations among members of the

Security Council, I understand that this statement will
be issued as a document of the Security Council under
the symbol S/PRST/2004/10.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.

The meeting rose at 9.45 am.
