Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): Let me also thank
Mr. Oshima for his briefing and commend him for the
work which he and his team are doing in his
department. We are very pleased to note that he is
organizing some very important workshops on the
various issues relating to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, in anticipation of the report, which we
look forward to receiving next November.

We agree with the Ambassador of Colombia that
the members of the Security Council could contribute
positively to the work of those seminars, and we would
like to be invited as and when appropriate. We have
listened very carefully to some of the statements made,
especially by Ambassador Eldon and by my colleague
from Mali. He has very effectively raised one of the
points that I had, on recommendation 14 of the
Secretary-General's report of March of this year. I
think that it is extremely important that there be not
only coordination among the various agencies of the
United Nations, but also some kind of interaction and
coordination between the United Nations and regional
organizations. Recommendation 14 does discuss that
point and says we should have meetings with the
regional arrangements so that there can be a more
informed decision-making process, integration of
additional resources, cooperation and reporting
mechanisms and briefings, which would be very useful.
This is one of the recommendations that we think
should be followed up as quickly as possible.

We also share the concerns that have been
expressed by the representative of Singapore on the
lack implementation of a large number of the
recommendations of the Secretary-General's report. In
that same vein, I would like to refer in particular to the
recommendation concerning the rapid deployment of
peacekeeping forces. We all know that there is the
greatest and heaviest loss of civilian life at the very
beginning of a conflict. It is extremely important that,
at that very critical phase, there should be some kind of
rapid deployment to be able to protect the civilians. I
note that in the recommendation made by the
Secretary-General, he had talked about the possibility
of setting up this kind of rapid deployment force. That
same question was again reiterated during the
Millennium Summit discussions.

The question that I would like to ask is the
following. I know that there has been what we call here
the "High Readiness Brigade", which was apparently
set up with from 80 to 88 countries participating in it or
expressing their readiness to do so. I also know that
funds were appropriated. So the question I have is:
"Has this brigade ever been deployed and, if so, where?
And what has been its impact on the overall protection
of civilians in armed conflict?

