Mr. Al-Ashtal (Yemen)(interpretation from Arabic):
Allow me at the outset to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your delegation's assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. We are confident in your
statesmanship and your ability to guide the work of the
Council in an exemplary manner, as did your predecessor,
to whom we extend sincere thanks and appreciation. I
commend your decision, Sir, to convene this open formal
meeting to discuss the question of the embargo imposed by
the Security Council against the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
unjustly and without a convincing legal reason.

There is no doubt that the entire world strongly
denounces the terrorist acts that resulted in the explosion of
Pan Am flight 103 and UTA flight 772 and we, too,
condemn them. We express anew our full sympathy for and
condolences to the victims of those two painful incidents
and their families, affirming the importance of continuing
investigations to identify the perpetrators so they can be
punished for committing those terrorist acts, provided that
the trial is held in accordance with the law and due process,
which has not been the case so far.

On 21 January 1992 the Security Council, basing itself
on Chapter VII of the Charter, adopted Security Council
resolution 731 (1992), imposing sanctions on the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, including an air embargo, because two
Libyan citizens were suspected of being involved in the
explosion of Pan Am flight 103 over Lockerbie in Scotland.
The truth of the matter is that the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
has shown a remarkable degree of flexibility and
cooperation by agreeing to a trial for its suspected citizens,
while rightly insisting that the trial be held in a neutral and
just manner, and anywhere other than the United States of
America or Scotland.

The only response Libya received was insistence on
the extradition of its citizens to be tried in the United States
or Scotland. Thus, the unjust embargo from which the
Libyan people have been suffering has remained in effect
until now. While the Security Council has refused to
reconsider the embargo it imposed on Libya, the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya has responded positively to regional
organizations, including the League of Arab States, the
Organization of African Unity, the Organization of the
Islamic Conference and the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, expressing its readiness to cooperate in holding
a fair trial of the suspects in the Pan Am explosion.

By way of continuing its diplomatic efforts, Libya
resorted to the International Court of Justice, which handed
down two Judgments on 27 February, affirming that the
dispute is a legal one, that the competent authority is the
International Court of Justice and that the legal frame of
reference for this dispute is based on the 1971 Montreal
Convention.

The Judgment handed down by the International
Court of Justice in this case in which the Security Council
has taken a definitive position, including the imposition of
an embargo, was very timely, as the Security Council has
recently begun to veer away from respecting international
law and has tended to take such interested political
positions that some have rightly wondered whether the
Security Council has been transformed into an instrument
in the service of certain States. We have recently noted
that the Security Council has resorted to imposing the
sanction of embargo without any precise criteria or legal
bases and without defining a time-frame or a specific
objective leading to the review or lifting of the embargo.
That has occurred in the case of Libya, and it is
tantamount to a collective punishment inflicted on the
fraternal Libyan people.

We hope that the Judgment handed down by the
International Court of Justice will be a turning point for
the working methods of the Security Council, leading to
a harmony between political positions and legal
requirements based on the Charter.

In this vein, we hope that the Security Council will
respect the Judgment handed down by the International
Court of Justice and decide to lift or suspend the embargo
imposed on Libya, while deferring the entire question to
the consideration of the competent authority, in
accordance with the Montreal Convention, which is the
legal framework for this question.

