Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman and Mr. Tete Antonio for their
briefings. I would also welcome Mr. Moussa Faki
Mahamat, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Chad, for
his initiative in convening today's open debate and for
presiding over it. I thank him warmly and congratulate
him more broadly for Chad's excellent presidency of
the Security Council this month.

I align myself with the statement to be made by the
observer of the European Union.

Terrorism is a global scourge that affects all
States. This phenomenon is even more worrying
when it develops in fragile States or States that are
under reconstruction. That is why it is particularly
useful for the Council, upon Chad's initiative, to have
an opportunity to address the issue of terrorism and
organized crime in Africa.

The terrorist threat is increasingly present on the
African continent. In the Maghreb and the Sahel, the
Secretary-General states in his report (S/2014/397),
terrorist attacks increased by 60 per cent in 2013 as
compared to 2012. Elsewhere in East Africa, in Kenya,
the terrible attack at Westgate Shopping Centre in
September 2013 is still fresh in our memories.

The growth of organized crime is in itself a threat
to the stability of States. It is also a breeding ground
for terrorist movements, which now tend to thrive on
all types of trafficking - in charcoal by Al-Shabaab in
Somalia, in human beings and drugs in West Africa, in
arms in Libya - as well as theft and looting that enable
these groups to fund themselves, or, as we were shocked
to see again this week, kidnappings by the Boko Haram
sect in Nigeria. These are among the many situations
where the links between terrorism and organized crime
combine to give birth to a real gangrene for African
States and the world.

The international community must do everything
possible to prevent some African countries falling
into the hands of terrorists or become for them a
sanctuary. France has taken on all its responsibilities
by intervening in Mali to prevent the progression of
terrorists who threatened Bamako. Today, my country
has a new strategy for the Sahelo-Saharan zone
designed to address all at once the issues of security,
development and governance. This strategy covers
cooperation with six countries - Senegal, Mauritania,
Mali, Burkina Faso, the Niger and Chad - and it
aims in particular to strengthen the capacity of States
to give them the means to fight against terrorism and
large-scale trafficking, but also against radicalization
and to facilitate regional cooperation.

The French Sahelo-Saharan strategy represents
more than €400 million of bilateral development
assistance each year. In addition, the French military
Operation Barkhane, launched in 2014 at the request of
five countries of the Sahel, represents the contribution
of France to the fight against terrorism and the
improvement of security in the Sahel, with a view
in particular to stemming the movement of terrorist
groups in the area.

But it is crucial that African responses to the various
crises be found. Efforts at the regional and subregional
level should continue. We welcome, in that regard, the
holding of the Dakar International Forum on Peace
and Security in Africa, which ended on 16 December
and which aimed to bring together stakeholders in the
security sector. We also welcome the work carried out
by Mr. Buyoya and his team.
The diversity of the initiatives on Sahel - the United
Nations strategy or those of the African Union and the
European Union - is a sign ofa strong mobilization on
the part of the international community. I also welcome
the establishment of the Group of Five Sahel, aimed at
coordinating the efforts of key countries. Indeed, we
must ensure the proper coordination of these initiatives.
At the United Nations, we welcome the ongoing
work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, led by Jean-Paul Laborde, on the issue of
borders in the Sahel, and the Integrated Assistance for
Countering Terrorism initiative, led by the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force. The work
undertaken by the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime is also of great importance and must continue.

All these efforts are moving in the right direction,
but they must be pursued so as to lead to concrete
projects in all areas. Capacity-building should be a
priority for the United Nations. The United Nations is
also called on to help States of the region and African
organizations to strengthen their cooperation in the fight
against terrorism. We support the operationalization of
such initiatives in the context of the African Peace and
Security Architecture.

Resolution 2195 (2014), which we have adopted
today, will give us a better overview of the ongoing
United Nations efforts to address the issue of the
support afforded by organized crime to terrorism and,
on that basis, to strengthen the Organization's reponse
to that challenge. My country has chosen to co-sponsor
the text. In general, France will continue to provide
national support in the European framework and in
the Security Council for initiatives to assist African
countries in the fight against terrorism and organized
crime.

