Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Angolan presidency for convening
this meeting, whose topic underlines the importance
of ensuring peace and security in the Great Lakes
region. I would also like to thank today's briefers - the
Secretary-General, his Special Envoy for the Great
Lakes Region, the African Union's Commissioner for
Peace and Security and the representative of the World
Bank - for their valuable contributions.

Georgia aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the obseraver of the European Union (EU),
and in my national capacity I would like to make some
brief comments.

We believe that a transition from fragility to
stability and from conflict to peace in the Great
Lakes region is fully attainable, but only with strong
and inclusive national ownership, vibrant cooperation
between the countries of the region and a long-term
commitment to, and collaboration with, that region on
the part of the wider international community, including
the United Nations. As those critical conditions are
secured, they will ensure that development accelerates
and local communities enjoy the full benefits of the
extraordinary human, material and natural resources of
the Great Lakes region.

The political instability and conflicts in the
region have a considerable international dimension,
and therefore require a concerted effort to promote
sustainable peace and development. In that context,
we would like to reiterate our full support for the steps
taken by the Security Council and the international
community, and we commend the United Nations, the
African Union and the European Union for their efforts
aimed at stabilizing the situation on the ground, while
maintaining full respect for the political independence,
national sovereignty and territorial integrity of all
States Members of the United Nations.

Peacekeeping continues to be one of the most
important activities of the United Nations. It is a
significant mechanism paving the way for sustainable
security, peace and development in States trying
to overcome crisis and destabilization. We also
believe in the importance of the Organization's
peacebuilding activities in the region, and as a member
of the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission, we fully support the Commission's
dedicated efforts to help to improve the situation in
the Great Lakes region, including through sharing our
own experience of reforming State institutions. We
would like to take this opportunity to commend the
Angolan delegation, in its capacity as a co-facilitator
with Australia, for its important role in the ongoing
negotiations for comprehensive General Assembly and
Security Council draft resolutions related to the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture.

Despite the fact that 20 per cent of my country's
territory remains under illegal foreign military
occupation, and that hundreds of thousands of internally
displaced persons and refugees from Georgia, victims
of ethnic cleansing, are denied the right to return to their
homes, we as a country are committed to international
peace efforts across the globe. Georgia has extensive
experience as a contributor to international security
and stability, including on the African continent. In
2014, a Georgian military contingent took part in the
EU-led operation in the Central African Republic,
whose aim was to support regional and international
efforts to restore stability there and to promote a
political transformation process. The following year,
Georgia continued to participate in the ongoing EU-led
missions in the Central African Republic and Mali. As a
participant in the world leaders' summit on peacekeeping
last September, we continue to look for ways to enhance
our support to United Nations peacekeeping.

We find it encouraging that the Pact on Security,
Stability and Development, adopted in Nairobi in 2006
at the second Summit of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region, clearly outlines four
major areas of cooperation in the region - peace and
security, development and good governance, economic
development and regional integration, and humanitarian
and social issues. I would like to recall that an
auspicious turning point in the consolidation of peace
and stability in the region was the signing, in Addis
Ababa on 24 February 2013, of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region by 11 countries and four
important regional and international institutions,
and the Security Council's subsequent adoption of

resolution 2098 (2013). The full implementation of
both the Framework and resolution 2098 (2013) will
help to stabilize the situation on the ground and, more
important, pave the way for addressing the root causes
of the cycle of conflict in the countries of the Great
Lakes region.

In conclusion, I would like to assure the Council
of Georgia's continued commitment to the international
community's sustained efforts to achieve lasting
peace and security in the Great Lakes region, with the
meaningful participation of all interested actors at the
local, national, regional and international levels.

