Mr. Thoresson: First of all, I would also like to
thank you, Madam President, for having organized
this very important meeting. Our deepest gratitude
also goes to Dr. Chan and Dr. Nabarro in particular for
their important briefings and tireless efforts throughout
this period. I also wish to highlight, and express my
gratitude to, the African Union for its absolutely crucial
contributions in fighting the Ebola outbreak.

I am honoured to take the floor today on behalf of
the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission. As is well
known, the three worst-affected countries are all on the
agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission, and we have
been closely engaged from the very beginning of the
Ebola crisis. International attention and support at the
outbreak of the Ebola epidemic must now be matched by
equal levels of commitment for the long-term recovery.
In that regard, we welcome the successful outcome of
the Ebola recovery conference on 10 July, where the
international community pledged more than $5 billion
in long-term recovery efforts. We must now make
sure that the donors deliver on their commitments,
because only by staying the course will we ensure that
this does not happen again and that progress made in
peacebuilding can be sustained.

The crisis has exposed gaps in international
peacebuilding efforts during the last decade in
terms of institution-building, security sector reform,
reconciliation and economic recovery. We must
therefore step up our support in the recovery period,
by building strong institutions and supporting inclusive
politics. There is also a need to emphasize regional
approaches by supporting regional frameworks and
capacities. In that regard, we warmly welcome the
important role that the Mano River Union continues to

play.

Moving forward, the Peacebuilding Commission
would like to highlight the following three points.

The firstpoint is the need to strengthen State-society
relations, including institution-building. The successful
national and local community leadership in the Ebola
response should also be built upon now for the coming
recovery phase. Strengthening national and local
institutional capacity should be the focus, including as a
way to improve State-society relations. During the peak
of the crisis, heightened levels of grievances among the
population added further impetus to the need to support
recovery efforts in a way that also strengthens social
cohesion and establishes trust.

Our second point is the importance of the provision
of basic social services throughout the affected
countries. Decentralization of public services is key
to extending State authority and ensuring that citizens
have a stake in the governance of their own countries.
It also contributes to restoring trust between citizens
and the State. Improved access to health care in all
areas of the affected countries is key to achieve real
resilience. That will require capacity-building to enable
the operation of local Government in remote areas and
strengthen governance in the health sector.

The third point is that socioeconomic recovery in
the aftermath of Ebola needs to be a top priority. The
socioeconomic impact of Ebola has been absolutely
devastating. Economic revitalization is a key priority
for the affected countries to be able to emerge out of this
crisis as stronger and more resilient nations. Generating
employment and providing access to education, in
particular for the youth and women, will be critical.
Diversification of the economy will also help to ensure
more inclusive growth and reduce dependency on the
extractive sector. Responsible investments, an improved
business environment and financial inclusion are also
key levers that can help in propelling development.

Before concluding, let me stress the importance
of better investment in preventive action. We must
move beyond the fire brigade mode of doing business
and build back more resilient institutions and stronger
national systems in the Ebola recovery process. The
Peacebuilding Commission looks forward to continuing
engaging the Security Council and other relevant
parties on the important Ebola recovery process. We
stand ready to continue advocating for long-term
recovery and peacebuilding needs and to accompany
the affected countries on their journey to sustainable
development and peace.

