Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome this meeting of the Security
Council to address so topical an issue as that of
mediation and settlement of disputes. Mediation, quite
clearly, is a very cost-effective political method for the
international community to respond to conflict
situations. We are grateful to the Secretary-General for
having presented his first report on this topic
(S/2009/189), and of course to Under-Secretary-
General Pascoe for today's comprehensive briefing and
for his efforts to enhance United Nations mediation
activities.

The description in the Secretary-General's report
of the situation of United Nations mediation assistance
to parties to a conflict requires study and analysis, and
all the more so as a number of its provisions raise
several questions. Inter alia, it sets out the rather
overreaching objective of having a standing rapid-
response mediation capacity. There is a reference to the
formulation by the Department of Political Affairs of a
long-term programme to assist mediation efforts. We
believe that this aspect of the Secretariat's plan
requires additional clarification, first and foremost as
regards sources of financing. We expect this long-term
programme not to involve allocating to the Department
additional resources from the regular budget in
addition to those provided by the relevant General
Assembly decisions.

The report legitimately notes that the United
Nations does not have a monopoly on mediation. The
use of regional agencies and arrangements is an
important mechanism provided for in Article 33 of the
United Nations Charter. In turn, Chapter VIII of the
Charter indicates to Member States the priority to be
given to resolving local disputes using those agencies
and arrangements before referring them to the Security
Council. A number of regional organizations have
accumulated significant mediation experience. The
United Nations should utilize this in its activities and
approach issues of mediation on the basis of the

principle of a judicious division of labour with regional
and subregional structures.

In addition to cooperation with the recognized
partners in this field, including the African Union, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the European Union, cooperation with
organizations actively accumulating experience, such
as the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization, is promising.

The work of a mediator requires great
craftsmanship and finesse. It is the result of
commitment, tact and knowledge of the historical,
cultural and other specificities of conflicts. We note
here the importance of a careful selection of United
Nations mediators on the basis of objective, universally
accepted criteria. One should approach this in a
balanced way, avoiding any excessive bias towards a
particular political or regional group. Quite clearly,
mediators' activities should be carried out transparently
via the Security Council, and, when the Council has
provided them with a mandate, they should be
accountable to it.

In mediation, one cannot impose unilateral
decisions or provide any grounds to suspect the
mediator of any prejudice or bias in favour of one side
or the other. Failure by the mediator to fulfil even one
of those conditions unavoidably leads to the emergence
of problems. It is enough to recall the situation of the
settlement around Kosovo.

Experience in conflict prevention and resolution
clearly shows that only mediation, which does not use
force or the imposition of conditions to resolve a
conflict but rather aligns the parties' positions and
searches for areas of agreement and mutually
acceptable solutions, stands any chance of success. On
the basis of these fundamental principles, the Russian
Federation participates in mediation activities and
actively supports such efforts by the United Nations
and other international and regional organizations.

