Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Like our colleagues, we are grateful to the
Secretary-General for his report. We are delighted to
welcome Harri Holkeri, and we are grateful to him for
his briefing.

The assessments in the report and those presented
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
are largely consonant with our view of the processes
that are taking place in Kosovo. We have repeatedly
stated that view at meetings of the Security Council.

We continue to believe that, despite some positive
changes in bringing about substantial autonomy and
self-government in the province, pursuant to resolution
1244 (1999), a number of important tasks are still very
far from being resolved. Key demands of that
resolution continue to be unimplemented, particularly
those parts that refer to the non-Albanian inhabitants of
Kosovo and the return of refugees and internally
displaced persons.

There is no reliable and equal security for the
entire population of the province. There are no equal
fundamental rights and freedoms for everybody,
including the right to fair employment conditions.
There is no adequate representation of minorities,
particularly of the Serbian minority, in the structures of
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government.

Despite an overall drop in the crime rate, serious
incidents involving violence still take place, including
incidents that are clearly ethnically motivated.
Unfortunately, persons guilty of perpetrating a whole
series of atrocious crimes against the representatives of
the Serbian community in the province have still not
been identified and therefore have not been duly
punished. Suffice it to recall here the murder of a
Serbian family in Obilie and an armed attack on
Serbian school children in Gorazdevac. These crimes
have no justification and are simply manifestations of
terrorism. We note the steps taken by the international
presence to apprehend the perpetrators and prosecute
them.

However, we must also note that even the few
positive changes that have taken place in the situation
of the minorities and in support of the process of
returning non-Albanian refugees to the province,
changes noted in the report, were brought about, to a
large extent, only thanks to the constant pressure
exerted by the international community.

We fully agree with the Secretary-General's view
that statements by the leaders of the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government regarding their
commitment to multi-ethnicity must be backed by
action. Unfortunately, we see that, in practice, those
organs are very often continuing to disregard minority
interests and are in no hurry to shoulder the
responsibilities that they must assume in transferring
the so-called non-reserved competencies, in conformity
with the Constitutional Framework and resolution 1244
(1999).

Like other members of the Security Council, we
are convinced that, unless there is radical change for
the better in these areas, the dream of building a multi-
ethnic, democratic society in Kosovo will continue to
be deferred. That will create unhealthy illusions in the
minds of the extremist forces remaining in the
province, which will in turn create a breeding ground
for more violence.

With regard to the preservation of certain
elements of the parallel structures in Kosovo, that
problem must be resolved on the basis of mutually
acceptable agreements. It is very important that such
agreements be conducive to meeting the daily needs of
all the communities - particularly the minority
communities - in Kosovo.

We commend Mr. Harri Holkeri for assisting in
the organization of the meeting that took place in
Vienna on 14 October, with the purpose of launching a
direct dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina on
practical problems of mutual interest. We note that, at
the Vienna meeting, both sides stated their support for
the international community's efforts to launch such a
dialogue and reaffirmed their willingness to facilitate
its advancement in the working groups.

Of course, we cannot fail to express our regret
that, at the Vienna meeting, the head of the provincial
Government, Mr. Rexhepi, refused to participate.
Nevertheless, we hope that discussions in the working
groups on practical issues, such as the return of
refugees and internally displaced persons, determining
the fate of missing persons and cooperating in the areas
of energy, transportation and communications, will
begin very soon and that such discussions will be
conducted in a non-politicized, businesslike and
constructive atmosphere.

International efforts should be aimed essentially
at full implementation of resolution 1244 (1999) and
based on the agreed principle of "standards before
status"; consideration of the political aspects of the
problem of Kosovo - including Kosovo's future
status- is premature at this stage. The Russian
Federation will continue to participate actively in joint
efforts to find a just, balanced and lasting solution to
the problem of Kosovo.

