Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Syria for his briefing
this morning. We commend Mr. Staffan de Mistura's
intensified efforts to reach a political solution and bring
an end to the conflict in Syria. We very much appreciate
his update today following his visit to Damascus,
although I have to say that the content of what he has
reported on, the response from Damascus, is not what
we had hoped for. We are deeply disappointed by the
continued lack of cooperation on the part of the Syrian
Government regarding the constitutional committee,
which contradicts the Sochi final statement that was
circulated by Russia to the Council. We support Mr. De
Mistura's approach and his insistence on credibility,
balance and international legitimacy. We therefore call
again on the Syrian Government to fully cooperate
with the United Nations, and on those with close
relations with Damascus, especially Russia, to support
such efforts.

We fully support Mr. De Mistura and his mandate
to establish the constitutional committee, which
constitutes the first step towards a political solution
in line with resolution 2254 (2015). The Sochi final
statement made clear that it was via the Geneva process
and the facilitation of the Special Envoy that the final
selection of the committee would be made. Therefore,
the Special Envoy's intensified efforts in many ways
constitute a make-or-break moment for the United
Nations efforts to convene a credible constitutional
committee and for the legitimacy that comes with
that. Mr. De Mistura therefore needs and deserves
the wholehearted backing of the Council, because it
is only through a United Nations-led process that we
can achieve a political solution that is acceptable to
all Syrians and the international community. At this
critical time, we want to reiterate our strong call on
the Syrian Government, which I believe everyone in
the Council agrees on, to fully engage and support the
United Nations-led political process and make sure that
there will be real progress in time for the next meeting
in November, as previous speakers have said.

