Mr. Tesfay (Eritrea): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and the members of the Security Council
for giving my delegation the opportunity to participate
in a meeting on an agenda item that directly affects
my country. I wish to extend my sincere thanks to the
Chairman of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 751
(1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea
and those representatives of different countries who, in
defending the principles of impartiality and objectivity
and the procedures of the Security Council, have played
a constructive role in ensuring that resolution 2244
(2015) would reflect the reality in Eritrea, the Horn of
Africa and the Red Sea region.

The two justifications for the imposition of the
unjust sanctions against Eritrea were crystal clear. They
were Eritrea's alleged support to Al-Shabaab in Somalia
and the Djibouti-Eritrean conflict, in the context of
their implications to regional and international peace
and security. They were nothing more and nothing less
than that.

The Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea has
concluded that it has found "no evidence that Eritrea
was supporting al-Shabaab" in Somalia (S/2015/802. p. 3). With regard to the disputes between Eritrea
and Djibouti, the Presidents of the two countries
have entrusted the State of Qatar to mediate their
disputes. Therefore, since the two justifications for the
imposition of the unjust sanctions against Eritrea are
non-existent, the correct, logical and legal action should
have been for the Security Council to immediately
and unconditionally lift the unjust sanctions against
Eritrea and terminate the mandate of the Monitoring
Group's connection with Eritrea. Any other pretext is
unacceptable. It is a political agenda.
Unfortunately, because of the misguided
geopolitical agenda of the United States Administration
in the Horn of Africa and the Red Sea region, the
Security Council has sadly decided to maintain the
unjust sanctions against the people and the Government
of Eritrea for another year. Sanctions, as everyone
knows, affect the poor, especially those who are the
most vulnerable: women and children. Moreover,
sanctions restrict Eritrea's capacity and capability to
maintain its security and defend its sovereignty and to
effectively contribute to the implementation of Security
Council resolutions calling on all of us to fight against
global terrorism and extremism.

Concerning resolution 2244 (2015), which has
just been adopted, it is a decision that defies logic and
legality. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Eritrea has
put out a statement, which I will share for the record.
The title of the press release is, "Security Council
action that undermines its own legal authority" and it
reads as follows:

"In a resolution adopted today, the United
Nations Security Council has sadly decided to
maintain yet for another year the unwarranted
sanctions that were originally imposed against
Eritrea on the Christmas eve of December 2009
and its follow-up resolution that was adopted in
December 2011.

"At the time, Eritrea was falsely accused of
dispatching 2000 troops to Somalia in support
of Al-Shabaab. The pattern of unsubstantiated
allegations was repeated in 2011 when Eritrea was
wrongly accused - just one month prior to the
adoption of resolution 2023 (2011) - of sending
three plane loads of arms to Al-Shabaab through
the airport of Baidowa.

"All these allegations were patently false. But
trumped up charges were Vital for the architects
of the sanctions resolutions against Eritrea who
used their diplomatic clout to ram through the
unjust measures against Eritrea in a largely pliant
Security Council.

"Six years on, all Security Council members
and the international community as a whole, are
fully aware of the false testimonies that were
concocted against Eritrea to serve some political
ends.

"Indeed, the United Nations report this
year - as it was also the case last year - states
categorically that the 'Monitoring Group' has found
no evidence of Eritrean support to Al-Shabaab.
"Under normal circumstances, the United
Nations Security Council should drop its case
against Eritrea and rescind the sanctions resolutions
which were unjust in the first place. But these
are not normal times. And, instead of redressing
these injustices - and making due reparations to
Eritrea - the United Nations Security Council,
despite the reservations and objections of several
of its members, has opted to dwell on its misguided
course under the heavy-handed prodding of the
United States and its usual allies. As it happens,
the United Nations Security Council is invoking
non-existent facts and potential 'threats to regional
peace and security' in its dogged desire to harass
Eritrea.

"There is one unfathomable fact that the United
Nations Security Council cannot gloss over as it
unfairly Victimizes Eritrea. Ethiopia continues to
occupy sovereign Eritrean territories, including the
town of Badme, in flagrant violation of the Charter
of the United Nations. Ethiopia's acts also violate
the Algiers Peace Agreement - guaranteed by the
United Nations Security Council - and the final
and binding arbitral decision. This must surely be
an affront to the United Nations Security Council
in as much as it wishes to hide it.

"The United Nations Security Council is
mandated by Articles 39 to 410f the United Nations
Charter to take appropriate measures against
Ethiopia. But the United Nations Security Council
cannot contemplate this action as Ethiopia enjoys
the full protection and tutelage of the United States.
But in submitting to the United States political

wishes andprcfcrenees, the UnitedNations Security long term, the real casuality is international law, as
Council is compromising and undermining its well as the corrosion ofthe United Nations Security
own legal mandate and authority. Eritrea and the Council' legal authority in the maintenance of
region will suffer the consequences of unwarranted international peace and security."

nited Nati n acti n in the .h rt-term. But in the
U 0 s 0 g 0 The meeting rose at 10.40 am.
