Mr. Mwakawago (United Republic of Tanzania):
My delegation is pleased to see you, Sir, presiding over
this open debate on children and armed conflict. We
commend the Namibian initiative in holding this debate,
open to the participation of all States Members of the
Organization. To you, Mr. Minister, and members of your
delegation, we extend sincere congratulations.

At the outset, permit me to express the appreciation
of my delegation for the opportunity accorded to us to
address the Security Council in this important debate on
children and armed conflict. This debate, which comes in
the wake of a similar one held in the Council on 29 June
1998, is most welcome by my delegation.

As we meet today, some positive developments are
happening in Africa. The agreement in Sierra Leone and
the prospects for peace in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo require forward planning for the reintegration of
children in society. It is our hope that the Council will
adopt a strong resolution that will seriously address the
problem in all its manifestations.

 
Tanzania has had the unfortunate experience of being
a first-hand witness to the plight of children fleeing from
situations of armed conflict in neighbouring countries.
Nothing is so heart-wrenching as the doleful looks of the
innocent children who do not understand why they have
been uprooted from a life that they knew to strange and
unfamiliar surroundings. It is unfortunate that, in today's
international relations, the change in the nature and scope
of conflict has invariably drawn children, who are least
responsible for the conflicts, into the power struggles of the
adversaries. Nothing is so sad as a child whose only
purpose in life is to live to avenge the death of a parent or
relative. The Council needs to address this problem
squarely by sending an unequivocal message that the use
and abuse of children will not be tolerated or condoned
under any circumstances. It is time for those responsible for
such abuses to be held responsible for their actions.

We have read the report of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ambassador Olara Otunnu, and we cannot but commend
him for his eloquence in sensitizing the international
community to the plight of children who have been
victimized by armed conflict. The priorities and
recommendations identified in the report call for serious
attention and necessary action. Indeed, it is with a sense of
gratification that we recognize the efforts that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict is making in giving the matter of children
and armed conflict the high profile that it correctly
deserves.

In his report to the Security Council in April 1998 on
the causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace
and sustainable development in Africa, the Secretary-
General of the United Nations pointed out that

"poor economic performance or inequitable
development have resulted in a near permanent
economic crisis for some States, greatly exacerbating
internal tensions and greatly diminishing their capacity
to respond to those tensions". (A/52/87], para. 79)

The alleviation of poverty should therefore be a common
concern as a necessary step towards ending conflicts and
protecting the rights of our children.

Statements made in the Council today have further
recognized the important work being done by Ambassador
Otunnu. That recognition needs to be elevated to tangible
action by giving him the requisite support - financial,
human and material - to enable him to fulfil the mandate
he has been entrusted with. The situation is urgent and
actions of the Council will have a very important bearing
on the way the problem is tackled. In stressing the need
to properly equip the special unit, we are not unmindful
of the critical roles played by the United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF), the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO), to mention but a few, and the
community of non-governmental organizations in that
area. What is crucial now is to intensify the cooperative
efforts of the various players. It is a huge undertaking
with multiple requirements that cannot be handled by a
single entity.

