Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We, too, are grateful to the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative, Ambassador Brahimi,
for participating in today's meeting. This meeting is
very timely. We are grateful to you, Mr. President, for
having convened it.
The counter-terrorist operation by the
international coalition and the major military successes
of the United Front, which in recent days has
succeeded in liberating from the Taliban a significant
portion of Afghan territory, including Kabul and other
towns, give particular relevance - even urgency - to
defining the international community's task of
providing assistance to the Afghan people for post-
conflict peace-building, in particular for the political
reconstruction of their country.

Of course, it is, without a doubt, up to the
Afghans themselves to find a solution.

However, it is clear that, without the active
assistance of the international community, the Afghans
alone will find it difficult to deal with these tasks. It is
necessary to resolve these issues effectively, not only
for the Afghan people but for the entire international
community. Otherwise, it will be impossible to
neutralize the threats emanating from Afghanistan -
terrorism, the drug trade and other threats that affect
the interests of the whole of humankind.

We are convinced that the United Nations should
play the central role in facilitating the transformation
of Afghanistan into a normal, stable and prosperous
state - not only because averting the threat to regional
and international security emanating from Taliban-
controlled territory falls squarely within the purview of
the Security Council and the General Assembly, but
also because we believe that only within the context of
the United Nations can we find practical solutions that
would be acceptable to all parties to the peace process,
thereby ensuring the parties' cooperation in their
implementation.

What is our view of the principles of the future
political dispensation in Afghanistan?

First of all, it must be a peaceful and truly
independent state, one that has friendly relations with
its neighbours and with the international community as
a whole. Its government should not be pro-anyone -
only pro-Afghan. It is essential that in future that
country not pose any threat to regional and
international security.

Secondly, given historical realities in
Afghanistan, it is clear that the viability of its future
political system will depend directly on whether the
new government is broadly representative and multi-
ethnic in nature. It is important that, in the new
political system, no one ethnic group should have
dominance over any other. It is essential to work out
acceptable forms of partnership among the Afghans,
Pashtuns, Tajiks, Hazaras and Uzbeks. Only on that
basis will it be possible to ensure a stable political
regime.

Thirdly, the Taliban movement, which has
discredited itself because of its support for
international terrorism, can have no place in the power
structures in Afghanistan. Unless this criminal
movement, which has no popular support, is
eliminated, we cannot hope to see the definitive
eradication of terrorism in Afghanistan.

Here we must draw a clear distinction between
the Taliban on the one hand and the Pashtuns and the
traditional Afghan clergy on the other, most of whom
do not share the radical views of the Taliban.

Clearly, the time has come to give serious thought
to the convening, under the auspices of the United
Nations, of an international conference on Afghanistan,
which would act as a guarantor of post-conflict state-
building in the country and would elaborate a broad
programme for the economic recovery of the country.

We believe that the "six plus two" group is an
important forum, in whose context we can find an
effective balance between the interests of the various
parties concerned. We deem to be an absolute sine qua
non the fact that work in that group should be based on
close partnership and on the search for options for a
post-conflict political system in Afghanistan that would
be agreeable to the international community as a
whole, and to the countries of the region in particular.

We attach great importance to yesterday's
meeting of that group, with the participation of Foreign
Ministers, at which a thorough exchange of views took
place as to the tasks facing the international community
in the process of helping the Afghan people building a
new life for themselves. The joint declaration that was
adopted following that meeting gives an accurate and
substantive assessment of the situation in Afghanistan
and of ways to redress that situation.

We deem it important that the Ministers
condemned the Taliban's ties with international
terrorism and supported the efforts of the Afghan
people to rid themselves of that regime. However, our
understanding is that the task of facilitating the search
for ways to resolve the Afghan crisis is not the sole
prerogative of the "six plus two" group. It is very
important here to involve other countries in resolving
these issues through the flexible use of the available
mechanisms.
We would welcome in particular the revitalization
of the work of the Group of 21. We also believe that, as
the task of post-conflict rehabilitation in Afghanistan
becomes more urgent, the role and responsibility of the
Afghanistan support group will grow. We are prepared
to engage in a constructive consideration of proposals
on how to improve the work of the "six plus two"
group itself.

We have received information that currently, in
Kunduz province, in the northeastern part of
Afghanistan, a large military group of Taliban is now
fully surrounded. That group consists of about 10,000
people, including members of international terrorist
organizations and foreign mercenaries. The rank-and-
file members of the Taliban movement may benefit
from the amnesty proclaimed by the United Front if
they voluntarily hand over their weapons. With regard
to non-Afghans, we believe that, if they surrender, the
United Front leadership will also treat them with
clemency and spare their lives. Thus their subsequent
fate could be determined by judicial means, pursuant to
Security Council resolutions 1333 (2000), 1368 (2001)
and 1373 (2001).

We call on all States Members of the United
Nations with influence on the Taliban and on the
foreigners who are fighting on their side to exert the
necessary pressure on them in order to put an end to
their resistance and to any further bloodshed.

Like our colleagues, we believe that the
immediate priority is to step up humanitarian
assistance to the Afghan people. Russia will continue
effectively to coordinate its large-scale efforts in this
area with international efforts, primarily through the
United Nations. But at the same time, we must start
planning, in the context of the United Nations, for a
long-term strategy for international assistance in the
rehabilitation and development of Afghanistan, as a
reinforcement of the political efforts to resolve the
Afghan conflict.

In conclusion, I should like once again to stress
the importance that we attach to the efforts of the
Secretary-General and of Ambassador Brahimi, and we
reaffirm our willingness to work very closely with the
Special Representative on the whole range of problems
facing Afghanistan. The ideas and assessments that we
heard today from Ambassador Brahimi will doubtless
be taken into consideration in the work of the Security
Council on the new resolution on Afghanistan.

