Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): Mr. President, it
is a pleasure to see you preside over this meeting and I
thank you for your initiative in convening this
important debate.

We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
and the set of actionable recommendations contained in
it. Even when limited to conflict and post-conflict
societies, the topic of the rule of law and transitional
justice is a very vast one, and we thus need a clear
focus in our debates. We therefore think it might be
useful if the next report - and we support a follow-up
report to be submitted in six months' time - could
give Member States some guidance as to what topics
could be central to our next debate.

The rule of law is an indispensable element of
sound domestic policies, often referred to as good
governance, and thus of sustainable development
worldwide. Liechtenstein attaches great importance to
the rule of law and is willing to assist other States
through capacity-building in areas where we have
relevant expertise. Our authorities are currently
discussing with the United Nations Development
Programme office in Belgrade the modalities for
hosting an international conference on strengthening
international cooperation in combating financial crime.
That event will offer an opportunity for judges,
prosecutors and other officials to exchange their
expertise and experiences in the area of best practices.

It is clear that the United Nations must play a
central role in the promotion of the rule of law. We
therefore support the relevant efforts undertaken in the
Security Council and elsewhere and welcome the
leadership exercised by the Secretary-General.

The rule of law at the domestic level, as we are
debating it today, must be complemented at the
international level through full and unconditional
respect for internationally recognized standards, and
transparent and fair rules in international decision-
making. Such respect for the rule of law is a
prerequisite for credible international assistance efforts
to foster the rule of law at the national level.

The concept of the rule of law as defined in
paragraph 6 of the report before us makes it clear that
the rule of law has both a formal and a substantive
component. Governance must not only be in
accordance with the law, but the law itself must be in
conformity with international human rights standards.
It is thus crucial that the United Nations, in assisting
societies emerging from conflict, promote respect for
those standards. The rejection of any endorsement of
amnesty for genocide, war crimes or crimes against
humanity is but one such standard. Helping countries
to cope with their transitional justice needs is not a
purely technical, juridical exercise, but a substantive
political process. In providing such assistance, the
United Nations must uphold fundamental standards,
while at the same time working with the specifics of
any given situation.

There are - and this debate has made this very
clear - no standard solutions or models that can
uniformly be applied to all conflict or post-conflict
situations. One of the most important lessons from the
past in our view must be the principle of ownership.
The goal of international or internationally assisted
efforts must always be to enable the country concerned
to ensure respect for the rule of law on its own.

The International Criminal Court is an institution
that can play an instrumental role in that respect. The
principle of complementarity upon which it is based
constitutes a strong incentive for States parties to
strengthen their national judiciaries, a key component
of the rule of law. Bringing the perpetrators of the
worst crimes to justice is one key function of the
Court. Another is to be a component of international
efforts, led by the United Nations, to ensure effective
and independent prosecutions and trials at the national
level worldwide.

A continued and intensive working relationship
between the United Nations and its specialized
agencies and programmes on the one hand, and the
Court on the other, is therefore a necessity. We are
confident that the relationship agreement signed
between the two institutions just two days ago will be
the basis for a constructive and mutually beneficial
working relationship. As stated in the report before us,
the Security Council has a particular role to play with
regard to the International Criminal Court. The referral
of situations to the Court is a unique and potentially
powerful tool for the Council in ensuring that the worst
crimes do not go unpunished.

The lessons learned from the ad hoc tribunals
established by this Council will show the way forward
for the ICC, as well as for other forms of assistance to
national criminal justice systems, such as hybrid
tribunals or other mechanisms that might, in certain
cases, be the preferred or, indeed, complementary
solutions. Once again, national ownership and a long-
term contribution to the administration of justice in the
society concerned must be key goals. We continue to
support the ad hoc tribunals in their efforts to finish
their work by 2010.

The Secretary-General's report shows that the
United Nations has for many years been very active in
helping countries strengthen national justice systems.
These efforts and the availability of relevant expertise
need to be systematically enhanced. The Executive
Committee on Peace and Security should look into
these matters, as suggested in the report, and make
proposals for a number of institutional arrangements,
including the development of a comprehensive roster
of experts. As the importance of these activities
increases gradually, the work carried out by the
relevant players should be better coordinated and more
accessible to Member States. A coordinating body,
such as a unit or focal point within the Secretariat, is
therefore needed, and we strongly support relevant
discussions on this topic. We particularly welcome the
non-paper submitted and introduced this morning by
Germany, also on behalf of Finland and Jordan.

