Mr. Maiga (Mali) (spoke in French): I should
like to welcome to the Council the Minister for Justice
of Rwanda and to thank Judges Jorda and Pillay and
Ms. Del Ponte, the Prosecutor of both Tribunals, for
their comprehensive briefings on the work and
activities of the Tribunals and the indictments of those
responsible for serious crimes committed in the
territories of the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda.

My delegation believes that the International
Criminal Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and
Rwanda have a special responsibility and must be both
functional and effective to that end. Indeed, the work
accomplished by these Tribunals is extremely
important in that, through their institutions, they seek
to put an end to the culture of impunity that is still
enjoyed by some who have committed the most hateful
crimes in Rwanda and Yugoslavia. Through their roles,
they are pioneers, in the primary sense of the word, in
setting the stage for the establishment of the
International Criminal Court, which, in the view of
Judge Jorda, is extremely imminent. Similarly, the
Tribunals are helping the United Nations in the creation
ofjurisdictions for Sierra Leone and Cambodia.

With regard to the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, we believe that its mission is to
dispense justice in order to contribute to the restoration
of peace in the Great Lakes region and to reconciliation
in Rwanda, which are priorities of the Security
Council. To that end, the Tribunal is working to
implement its mandate speedily, effectively and
diligently. We believe in the timeliness of the proposal
to amend the Tribunal's statute so as to establish a pool
of 18 ad litem judges in order to strengthen its capacity
to render verdicts, in view of its caseload. My
delegation therefore wishes at this stage to express its
satisfaction to the President of the Tribunal and her
colleagues for the proposal to improve the Tribunal's
functioning and effectiveness. My delegation welcomes
the proposal and expresses the hope that the Council
will soon take a decision on the proposed amendment
so as to strengthen the effectiveness of the work of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. In so
doing, we are of the view that the Council would
thereby help the Tribunal to accomplish its work within
a reasonable time-frame.

With respect to the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, we welcome the
reforms under way, referred to by Judge Jorda at some
length in his briefing this morning. These reforms
should enable the Tribunal better to carry out its
mandate and, in the long run, to assist reconciliation in
the Balkans. In the same vein, my delegation is pleased
with the important political changes that have occurred
in the Balkans, allowing for the recent arrest and
transfer to The Hague of Slobodan Milosevic. We feel
that this not only demonstrates the readiness of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to comply with its
international responsibilities, but is also a concrete sign
of a substantial and sustained improvement in the
cooperation which the Tribunal can hope to receive. As
we can see from the Tribunal's report, it is also an
event of great historical significance. For the first time
ever, a former head of State is being tried under
international legal jurisdiction for criminal acts
committed when he was in office.

However, we remain gravely concerned by the
fact that some well-known indicted criminals have not
yet been apprehended, even when, in some cases, their
indictments are more than five years old. We therefore
call upon all States to offer their full cooperation so
that we may achieve a lasting and genuine peace in the
Balkans.

The cooperation of Member States, we feel, is of
crucial importance to the success of the work of the
Tribunals, which, as we know, have no real means of
coercion and depend entirely on States in that regard.
States should therefore arrest and bring to justice
before the Tribunals those in their territories who have
been accused. As Judge Jorda reminded us, these
people gravely threaten the international public order,
of which our Council is a guarantor.

The cooperation of States is even more crucial
with regard to the judgements of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. In that connection, I
would assure Judge Pillay that the authorities of Mali
are prepared to deal with the five people condemned by
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, whom
she mentioned in her statement, and we appeal to other
Members of the United Nations to strengthen their
cooperation with the Tribunal.

Through you, Madam, I would like to pose some
questions to our guests.

My first question refers to the statement made
earlier by the Minister for Justice of Rwanda to the
effect that the crimes being prosecuted by the Tribunal
for Rwanda were perpetrated in that country some
seven years ago. We wonder whether, seven years after
the Tribunal began its legal work, it might not be time
for it to be transferred from Arusha to Kigali, since its
principal mission is not solely to dispense justice, but
also to work for reconciliation in Rwanda and the Great
Lakes region. Would it not therefore be timely to
consider today the transfer of the Tribunal's
headquarters from Arusha to Kigali?

My second question is for the Prosecutor. We all
know that the two Tribunals share the same
Prosecutor's Office. The crimes under their jurisdiction
were committed in Africa and in Europe, but, after so
many years of existence, the Tribunals continue to
share the same Prosecutor. In view of the experience
acquired by the Office of the Prosecutor and given the
heavy caseloads of both Tribunals, would it not be
appropriate for us to consider giving each its own
Prosecutor's Office to address matters of exclusive
interest to each?

