Mr. MacKay (New Zealand): At the outset, may
I express our condolences to the Government of
Indonesia on the recent tragic terrorist bombing. It is a
tragedy in which New Zealand shares. I would like to
express our solidarity with the people and Government
ofIndonesia at this very tragic time.

New Zealand welcomes this open debate. The
issues being considered by the Security Council are of
vital importance to us all. They are about how the
international community deals with threats to regional
and global peace and security, and about the role and
credibility of the United Nations.

We approach this debate with a number of givens.
First, Iraq needs to comply with the Security
Council's demands for inspection for weapons of
mass destruction. Secondly, Security Council
resolutions cannot be constantly flouted with
impunity. Thirdly, the United Nations Charter, as
the pre-eminent international legal instrument,
sets out the proper multilateral process for
dealing with threats to international peace and
security. Fourthly, if Iraq fails to fully comply
with the inspection regime, the Council will need
to take a clear decision on further action. Let me
address each of these in turn.

First, Iraq has consistently ignored Security
Council demands for inspection for weapons of mass
destruction. It has in the past used chemical weapons
against its neighbours and against its own people. It
has possessed biological weapons. There are strong
grounds to suspect that it has sought the capability to
produce nuclear weapons. Iraq has been in breach of
international disarmament treaties to which it is a party.
Without inspection the Security Council cannot be sure
that Iraq does not possess or has no intention to
develop these weapons.

When the Government of Iraq signed the Gulf
War ceasefire agreement in 1991, it unconditionally
accepted the terms of Security Council resolution 687
(1991) requiring the destruction and removal, under
international supervision of all of its weapons of mass
destruction. Since then, Iraq has consistently violated
these commitments, making false declarations of its
weapons capabilities and repeatedly obstructing the
work of mandated weapons inspectors.

Secondly, Security Council resolutions cannot
constantly be flouted with impunity. As a State that is
strongly committed to the multilateral system, New
Zealand believes that States must comply with Council
resolutions. It must be clear to Iraq that there will be
serious consequences if it does not do so. The
international community will therefore be watching
very closely to see how Iraq fulfils its obligations. If
Iraq fails to meet them, then we expect the Council to
take firm action.

In saying this, New Zealand proceeds from a
longstanding position of support for the total
elimination of weapons of mass destruction.

Thirdly, the United Nations Charter, as the pre-
eminent international legal instrument, sets out the
proper multilateral process for dealing with threats to
international peace and security. As a first step, it is
essential that weapons inspectors are immediately
readmitted so that the Council can effectively assess
the state, nature and extent of Iraq's weapons
programme. New Zealand has offered to provide a
support group to the inspection team for this purpose.

This requires full cooperation and unrestricted
access by Iraq. Should Iraq not comply with its
obligations, any decision on further action should come
back to the Council for consideration. It is the Security
Council that must remain the arbiter of Iraq's
compliance, based on the reporting and assessments of
the United Nations Monitoring and Verification
Commission (UNMOVIC). It is the Council's proper
role to make such decisions. Any resolution or
resolutions, adopted by the Council should reflect this.

Clarity will be important. The rules governing
Iraq's compliance must be clear to the Security
Council, Iraq and UNMOVIC. There should be no
room for misunderstanding or reinterpretation. In
setting conditions for compliance, it is important that
the inspection process remains credible. Equally, the
Council must ensure that these conditions are not
couched in such a way that Iraq cannot comply. The
rules must strengthen the hand of the inspectors, not
make their already difficult task more onerous.

We note that there has been a suggestion to give a
special role in the inspection regime, to the permanent
members of the Security Council. It is true that under
the Charter, the permanent members have certain
voting privileges and responsibilities, but substantively
they are not distinct from other Council Members.
Introducing such a distinction here would be neither
constructive nor acceptable.

Fourthly, if Iraq fails to comply with the
inspection regime, the Council will need to take a clear
decision on further action. Iraq cannot fail to be aware
ofthe strengthening of resolve on the Council's part. In
the event of Iraqi non-compliance, the use of force is
clearly not beyond the Council's contemplation. This
would mean a significant loss of lives, including those
of innocent Iraqis. There would be a risk of instability
within the region and beyond, particularly as the use of
force is likely to be perceived by some, however
wrongly, as having an ethnic or religious dimension.

There is also the question of what happens in Iraq
afterwards. If the Council has a firm and united front,
some of these risks may be alleviated because this
action will be seen as clearly being taken on behalf of
the international community at large. It is therefore
important that decisions on future action are taken by a
united Council acting as a whole.

Finally, may I make two brief comments; it is
regrettable that such momentous decisions have to be
contemplated at a time when other Security Council
resolutions remain unimplemented in the Middle East,
and in the absence of a comprehensive settlement there.
It is also regrettable that this issue should face us when
the multilateral disarmament environment, and
progress towards the elimination of weapons of mass
destruction more generally, is disappointing. This
setting will not make the Council's task in maintaining
international peace and security, or the situation of
Governments in the region any easier.

