Mr. Al-Shara' (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at the outset to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month. I also welcome the presence in
the Chamber of the members of an Arab committee
established at the Sharm el-Sheikh Summit of the
League of Arab States held six days ago. The
committee membership includes the Kingdom of
Bahrain in its capacity as current Chairman of the Arab
Summit, the Republic of Lebanon as former Chairman
of the Arab Summit and the Republic of Tunisia as the
next Chairman of the Arab Summit, as agreed at the
Sharm el-Sheikh Summit. The committee also includes
Syria, Egypt and the Secretary-General of the League
of Arab States. During its short visit to New York, this
Arab committee will be able to meet with some
members of the Security Council.

The Security Council met in this Chamber three
weeks ago to discuss the question of Iraq. That was
only a short while ago, yet the rapid and important
developments that have taken place since then in the
Middle East should be recalled briefly if only because
of their grave impact not only on the region, but
perhaps on the future of international relations.

The day after our meeting here on 14 February,
millions of people in more than 2,000 cities around the
world took to the streets to say no to war against Iraq.
This phenomenon was unprecedented in history.

On the day that followed those demonstrations,
the Arab ministers for foreign affairs held an
emergency meeting in Cairo. The Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Greece attended that meeting in his capacity
as holder of the current presidency of the European
Union, as did representatives of the European
Commission. All the participants expressed their
opposition to war and stressed the need for a peaceful
solution to the Iraqi crisis in implementation of
resolution 1441 (2002).

France, Russia, China and Germany have
repeatedly and most clearly stressed that there is an
alternative to war. Those countries are confident that
the elimination of Iraq's weapons of mass destruction
can be achieved by peaceful means if inspections are
enhanced and the inspectors are allowed freely to
pursue their tasks.

On 25 February, the Non-Aligned Movement held
its summit in Kuala Lumpur, which was attended by
representatives of 116 States. In its final declaration,
the summit called for a peaceful settlement to the Iraqi
crisis and stressed the need to allow the inspectors
more time to finish their work. The participants
stressed the importance of the role of the United
Nations and international legitimacy, along with the
need to avoid double standards.

On 1 March, the regular Arab summit was held in
Sharm el-Sheikh. In serving as an emergency session,
the summit adopted its first decision expressing its
categorical opposition to a strike against Iraq. The
summit stressed the need to give the inspectors
sufficient time to fulfil their mandate and underlined
the Security Council's responsibility in protecting the
Iraqi people and in preserving Iraq's independence,
unity and territorial integrity. The Arab leaders
expressed their solidarity with the Iraqi people, called
for a lifting of the sanctions and established the follow-
up committee to which I referred earlier and which
included Bahrain, Lebanon, Tunisia, Syria, Egypt and
the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States.
The committee is entrusted with transmitting the Arab
point of view to the five permanent members of the
Security Council and the Secretary-General of the
United Nations, as well as to Baghdad should the
situation warrant. The Arab summit was immediately
followed by an Islamic summit in Doha at which
Islamic countries confirmed the decision and themes of
the Arab summit.

In this context, we Arabs and Muslims should
recall with appreciation the appeals that have been
made for months now by the leaders of churches
throughout the world that peace should be pursued and
war averted. These appeals were crowned by the
message that the emissary of the Holy See conveyed
two days ago to the President of the United States, in
which he clearly conveyed the opinion that war against
Iraq is illegitimate and unjust.

As for Iraq, Mr. Blix informed us earlier today
that it has cooperated actively. As Mr. ElBaradei
explained, this cooperation has also been positive,
procedural and substantive. The destruction of missiles
that is currently under way in Iraq is tangible and
material evidence of that cooperation, which can
neither be considered deceptive nor dismissed as
insignificant. It is being extended at the very moment
when inspectors are achieving tangible progress in
implementing resolution 1441 (2002). We believe that
it is the right of any State or individual to ask: Why
insist on adopting a new resolution allowing the use of
military force, as if war were the best and not the worst
option?

In the light of all this, one cannot also but wonder
what logic can explain the cooperation of the United
States with Israel in developing sophisticated missiles
that cost American taxpayers billions of dollars, while
the United States denies such an opportunity - even
more modest missiles with shorter range and less
capability - to the Arab countries that need them to
defend themselves. What logic allows Israel to possess
all kinds of weapons of mass destruction, although it
continues to occupy the territories of its neighbours
and to threaten them, in contravention of all norms of
international law? President Bashar Al-Assad has
asked: "They fear for our safety from Iraq, but not
Israel?" Given that resolution 1441 (2002) does not set
a time limit for the inspectors' work, what is the basis
of arguments that time has run out and that Iraq has
only days left to comply or else?

It is truly ironic and somewhat naive to claim that
war against Iraq will uncover its undeclared weapons
of mass destruction, despite the fact that the inspectors,
with all the unprecedented facilities provided to them,
cannot find these weapons. Contrary to the wisdom
which holds that backing away from an improper
position is a virtue, some believe that the huge build-up
of forces is by itself sufficient to justify war against
Iraq and to destroy it, merely because no one with any
sense of realism can accept that these forces should
return to their barracks empty-handed. If that is the
case, are we witnessing action in a just cause or merely
armed robbery?

Regardless of the accuracy of arguments
advanced internationally on the possible objectives of
the American military campaign - be they to control
the oil fields or to change the map of the Middle
East- the Arabs in particular and the international
community in general are very apprehensive. We are
gravely concerned over the possibility of heinous
massacres of the Palestinian people, the demolition of
their homes and their forced transfer when war against
Iraq is in full swing. Our apprehensions are well
founded, given developments in the occupied territories
since 11 September 2001, and the Security Council
must take them into account as we approach the
moment of truth, which we hope will never arrive.

We are confident that the United Nations, which
represents the will of the international community, will
opt for peace. We are confident that this option will
prevail over the use of force. The United Nations and
its Charter shall remain the main instruments of
humankind for the achievement of international peace
and security.

