Mr. Djani (Indonesia): First of all, I would like to thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Under- Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for their updates. Unfortunately, after months of hope, we are confronted with heart-breaking indications of the very direction we were trying to avoid. Nonetheless, as long as there is political will on all sides, progress is attainable. Before I highlight three points that Indonesia believes could save the future of Yemen, let me take this opportunity to underline Indonesia's support for Yemen's sovereignty, unity, territorial integrity and independence. Those must be our guiding principles for Yemen. My statement will focus on the humanitarian impact arising from the conflict. First, we would again like to stress that the Yemeni crisis can be resolved only through a political process. Sadly, each component of the conflict has become a political bargaining chip for the parties, even as they inflict greater suffering on the people of Yemen. While Mr. Lowcock has alluded to the fuel crisis in Yemen, Sana'a airport will be closed, even to humanitarian assistance. This development will further affect the availability of health and medical supplies for humanitarian assistance. As clearly stated by both Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Lowcock, we appeal to those controlling the airport to open it for the sake of humanity. Indonesia therefore urges the Houthis and the Government of Yemen to continue to work with the Special Envoy, particularly with a view to reaching a joint declaration and achieving a nationwide ceasefire. We support the call of Mr. Griffiths to engage and finalize a joint declaration. Failing to do so would mean that instead of peace, the parties prefer war. After years of conflict, it is clear that the military approach has succeeded only in bringing further misery to the people of Yemen. We therefore condemn the continuous Houthi attacks, including on the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. We also call for the implementation of resolution 2532 (2020), and in particular endorse the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire. Indonesia fully supports the push of the Special Envoy for an inclusive Yemeni-led and -owned peace process facilitated by the United Nations. Secondly, we must avoid a humanitarian catastrophe as aresult of the conflict in an era of depleted resources and the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Alongside the economic and food insecurity crises, we all know about the depletion of funding for humanitarian assistance, the collapsing health-care system and the impact of COVID-19. In the face of growing violence, Yemen is on the brink of famine. Mr. Lowcock is once again ringing the alarm on the spectre of famine. These factors underline the depth of the crisis and the precipitous danger facing Yemen at a time when there is no movement on the three proposals made by the Special Envoy. My delegation therefore again highlights the wisdom of a political solution. On the FSO SAFER oil tanker, two months have elapsed since our previous Council meeting on this issue (see S/2020/721) and we should continue that discussion. It is disappointing that the tanker has not yet been assessed and repaired, and my delegation again urges the Houthis to expeditiously allow the United Nations team to begin its work. We hope that progress can be made on each and every element of the five urgent priorities highlighted by Mr. Lowcock. Thirdly, agreed commitments are the building blocks to a broader political solution. All previous agreements and the input of the Council remain relevant in charting the political settlement to end the conflict. We reaffirm the importance of the inclusiveness of all relevant demographics and the implementation of all previous agreements and relevant Council resolutions, including resolution 2216 (2015). These are all legally binding commitments. The Council should therefore play the role of custodian. Parties should also abide by international humanitarian law and protect civilians and civilian infrastructure. In conclusion, I would like to once again quote Secretary-General Guterres, who said that "the pursuit of peace is a continuous process based on choices and decisions we make every day". It is therefore a matter of choice of all parties as to whether they will allow the worst thing to happen to their people and nation or choose to pursue peace and save their people. I, for one, choose peace for the people of Yemen for the sake of every Mohammed, Jamila, Samia and Abdulrahman, as well as all Yemeni brothers and sisters that have yearned for peace for too long.
