Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We welcome the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2401 (2018) on the humanitarian
situation in Syria. We voted in favour because we believe
that the resolution can make a positive difference on the
ground in the alleviation of the continued tragedy of
the Syrians. Having discussed the severe humanitarian
crisis in Syria almost weekly, it was clear that what
was required from the Council was concrete and
collective action that would contribute to alleviating
the intolerable suffering of Syrians in all areas of the
country. We are pleased that the Council has acted
and sent the right message to bring about a cessation
of hostilities that will allow the United Nations and
its humanitarian partners to have safe, sustained and
unimpeded humanitarian access to deliver the much-
needed humanitarian assistance to all Syrians in need.

I wish to express our sincere appreciation to the
delegations of Kuwait and Sweden, which effectively
and efficiently led the process of negotiations. We all
know that it was not an easy task, but they did excellent
work in accommodating the concerns of all delegations
with a high sense of responsibility and patience. We
also thank all delegations for their flexibility during the
negotiation process. We hope that the positive spirit that
led the Council to adopt the resolution will prevail, not
only in ensuring its effective implementation, but also
in laying the bases for greater mutual understanding
among all those with enormous influence over
developments in Syria, whether in the humanitarian
or political and security domains. We know, given the
realities, that this is a tall order.

One matter needs to be stressed on this occasion.
The security situation in Syria is perhaps more
complicated today than it has ever been over the past
few years. We should not overlook the fact that the
source of the humanitarian tragedy that we see today is
the result of the difficult political and security situation
in the country. We trust that all those, including those
whom Ambassador Delattre referred to, will continue
to play a role in contributing to the creation of the basis
for progress in the peace process. That is extremely
critical for ensuring that the humanitarian tragedy is
Syria is brought to an end.

We can only hope that what the Council has
achieved today will lay the basis for averting an even
greater humanitarian tragedy in Syria.

