Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil) (spoke in French):
I thank you, Mr. President, for having organized the
open debate.

(spoke in English)

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his leadership on this important issue, as well as
President Faustin Archange Touadera and Peter Maurer
of the International Committee of the Red Cross for
their briefings.

Enhancing the protection of civilians in armed
conflict is a topic ofjustifiable interest for the Security
Council. Although the individual responsibility of
Governments cannot be minimized, the protection of
civilians is also a collective responsibility and a core
obligation of the United Nations.

After our collective failure in avoiding the
tragedies of Srebrenica and Rwanda, it has been often
repeated that doing nothing is not an option. While
sharing the moral frustration behind that notion, it is
equally important to be wary of attempts to translate
that legitimate perception into an inaccurate - and
sometimes irresponsible - assumption that military
action would be a panacea for the protection of civilians.

As stated by the Secretary-General in his latest
report on the responsibility to protect, our choice
does not lie "between inaction and the use of force"
(S/2015/500, para. 38). The first 15 years of the twenty-
first century have taught us that resort to military
action more often than not increases the vulnerability
of the very individuals whose protection is supposedly
being sought.

The situation in Libya, for example, is a reminder
of the consequences of ill-conceived strategies.
A military intervention allegedly undertaken to
implement resolution 1973 (2011) and a post-conflict
scenario in which genuine peacebuilding efforts were
absent resulted in the erosion of local institutions and
widespread violence - both in the country and in the
region - paving the way for the spread of Da'esh and
forcing millions to seek refuge elsewhere.

This is not an argument against resorting to robust
mandates under any circumstances. It is a statement in
recognition of the importance of developing an adequate
understanding of what the use of force can and cannot
accomplish. Because of its unintended consequences,
in particular to the civilian population, military action
cannot be a first option.

Allow me to stress that this observation is not only
demanded by international law, with the Charter of the
United Nations at its centre; it is also evidence-based
and in line with the fundamental principle of "first, do
no harm". The 2000 Brahimi report (see S/2000/809)
stressed how peacekeepers - troops and police - who
witness Violence against civilians should be presumed
to be authorized to stop it, within their means, in support
of basic United Nations principles. However, the report
also questioned the credibility and achievability of a
blanket mandate to protect civilians, acknowledging
that United Nations operations can protect only a
small fraction of the civilian population exposed to the
potential risk of violence. Sixteen years later, the gap
between expectations and resources available remains
one of the key issues echoed by the United Nations
peace operations review. In the same vein, former
Secretary-General Kofi Annan, in his report entitled
"In larger freedom: towards development, security
and human rights for all" (A/59/2005), suggested that
a list of proposed criteria, including the seriousness of
the threat, proportionality and the chance of success,
be applied for the authorization of the use of force
in general.

It is clear that United Nations peacekeeping
operations are not designed or equipped to impose
political solutions through the sustained use of force.
When the use of force is contemplated and duly
authorized, action must be judicious, proportionate and
strictly limited to the objectives of the agreed mandate.
Furthermore, the international community has a right to
expect full accountability from those to whom authority
is granted by the United Nations to resort to force. These
are all notions for which Brazil has been consistently
advocating. At the same time, there are numerous
non-military tools available for the protection of
civilians, including strong political advocacy, credible
reporting and liaison with communities. There are also
several modalities of support for national authorities.

When it comes to protecting civilians in situations
of conflict, Brazil fully supports a people-centred
approach, including through engagement with local
actors and those affected by conflict, as underlined by
the High-level Panel on Peace Operations and by the
Secretary-General. That is essential for peace to be
sustainable, as those on the receiving end need to lead
the way to recovery and peace.

It can also improve proper conflict monitoring and
local ownership of protection mechanisms, thereby
building a protective environment through the important
role of unarmed-civilian-protection strategies.
Protecting 200,000 civilians for several months and
providing adequate humanitarian assistance to avert
disease has been a significant achievement of the
United Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan
and humanitarian actors in South Sudan, for example.

Nonetheless, compliance with international
humanitarian law and human rights law has to be
further enhanced, as recently stressed by many
during the World Humanitarian Summit in Istanbul.
The spectrum of concrete measures could include
the training of States' armed forces, ratifying core
international treaties, advocating their universalization,
and education and awareness-raising. It is also crucial
to enhance the protection of women and girls against
sexual Violence and improve monitoring and reporting
of violations.

The denial of humanitarian access deprives people
of human dignity. Unfettered humanitarian access
is imperative, and more systematic approaches to
responding to access constraints are essential. Brazil
welcomes the Secretary-General's decision to deploy
senior protection-of-civilians advisers in all missions
with explicit protection mandates, with a direct reporting
line to the Head of Mission, to advise on the development
of strategies and coordinate implementation.

The principles of peacekeeping operations did not
come into existence by chance; they aim to preserve
space for dialogue and diplomatic activity. We wish to
express a word of caution regarding certain flexible
understandings of the use of force by peacekeeping
operations, as defended by a few. Rather than pointing
towards more effective protection for civilians, such
flexibility can be counterproductive and compromise
the credibility of the United Nations. It is conceivable
that, in very specific circumstances, a preparedness to
use force to protect civilians will enhance the standing
of the United Nations. But such understandings
must be the outcome of careful, inclusive and
multilateral deliberation.
In conclusion, I would like to highlight the fact
that the Brazilian troops and police officers currently
deployed in 10 United Nations peacekeeping operations
and special political missions have been, and will
continue to be, trained and equipped to be able to
deliver on their responsibility to protect civilians.
Since 2004, Brazilian troops and force commanders
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
have played a decisive role in reducing violence and
building a safer environment in critical areas of Port-
au-Prince, such as Cite Soleil. In September 2015, the
Brazilian vessel en route to lead the Maritime Task
Force of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
rescued 220 refugees adrift in the Mediterranean Sea.
These examples demonstrate that Brazil stands ready
to continue to contribute to alleviating the suffering
of civilians affected by conflict, according to the
relevant peacekeeping mandates, in full respect of
the Charter of the United Nations and established
peacekeeping principles.

