Mr. Ryan (Ireland): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The acceding
countries Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia
and Slovenia, the candidate countries Bulgaria,
Romania and Turkey, the Stabilization and Association
Process countries Croatia, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and Serbia and Montenegro,
and the EFTA countries Iceland, Liechtenstein and
Norway, members of the European Economic Area,
declare that they align themselves with this statement.

The EU has expressed its deep concern at the
ongoing and seemingly endless cycle of retaliatory
violence involving Palestinian groups and the Israeli
Defence Forces. The EU condemns the extrajudicial
killing of Hamas leader Abdel Aziz Al-Rantisi by
Israeli forces and the suicide bombing at the Erez
Crossing.

The EU has repeatedly condemned the terrorist
atrocities committed by Hamas, which have resulted in
the deaths of hundreds of Israelis. The EU recognizes
Israel's right to protect its citizens against terrorist
attacks. The EU calls for an immediate end to such
violence. The EU also again reminds the Israeli
Government that extrajudicial killings are contrary to
international law. The EU has pointed to the futility of
the current violence either as a means of freeing
Palestinians from occupation or bringing long-term
peace and security to Israelis. The EU recalls its firmly
held position that a negotiated settlement is the only
means for achieving a just and lasting peace that will
satisfy the legitimate concerns of both Israelis and
Palestinians.

The EU reaffirms its commitment to a negotiated
two-State solution agreed between the parties that
would result in a viable, contiguous, sovereign and
independent Palestinian State existing side by side in
peace with an Israel living within recognized and
secure borders. The Union reaffirms its belief that the
road map represents the only route to achieving such an
outcome. The Union is determined to pursue
vigorously the course set out in the road map, and calls
on both sides to fulfil their obligations under the road
map.

The EU recalls its established position, restated
by the European Council of 25-26 March, that the
Union will not recognize any change to the pre-1967
borders other than those arrived at by agreement
between the parties. The Union emphasizes that no
declared views on the possible shape of a final
settlement can pre-empt the negotiation of that
settlement.

The EU also notes that the refugee question and
the manner in which the right of return may be realized
is also a final status issue and that the road map states
that a final and comprehensive permanent status
agreement that ends the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
must include an agreed, just, fair and realistic solution
to this question.

In this context, the Union notes President Bush's
reaffirmation of the United States commitment to the
road map and to a negotiated settlement.

The EU emphasizes the principle, shared by
President Bush, that final status issues are a matter for
negotiation and agreement between the parties
themselves and must not be prejudged.

The EU notes President Bush's agreement that
secure and recognized borders should emerge from
negotiations between the parties, in accordance with
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973). These and other relevant Security Council
resolutions must form the basis for a just and lasting
settlement of the conflict.
The EU welcomes the prospect of Israel's
withdrawal from the Gaza Strip. The European Council
has stated that such a withdrawal could represent a
significant step towards the implementation of the road
map, provided that it is carried out in accordance with
certain conditions. This is an opportunity that the
international community, led by the Quartet, should
seize.

The proposed withdrawal should be properly
orchestrated with the international community, so as to
ensure that an orderly situation in Gaza results, which
will permit the maintenance of security as well as
rehabilitation and reconstruction. The Union urges all
parties to undertake urgently preparations towards this
end.

On that basis, the EU reiterates its readiness to
support the Palestinian Authority in taking
responsibility for law and order as well as to continue
the Union's existing aid to the Palestinian Authority
and to examine possible future needs that may arise in
the context of a new situation in Gaza. The Union
stresses the need to avoid a political vacuum - and the
dangers that that would involve - in the interim period
between now and the beginning of any withdrawal. It
recalls that there are a number of measures that need to
be adopted in the period immediately ahead in the
political, security and humanitarian spheres in order to
prevent further deterioration and to resume progress.

The EU urges an end to violence and terrorism as
well as the resumption of a ceasefire embracing all
parties and groups. It calls on both sides to resume
negotiations on the peace process without further delay.
The EU recalls that a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace must meet the legitimate aspirations of both the
Israeli and the Palestinian people and must include
Lebanon and Syria. The EU also calls on all States in
the region to make every effort to promote peace and to
combat terrorism.

The EU looks forward to an early meeting of the
Quartet at the principals level. The Quartet should play
an active role in pursuing the goal of a comprehensive
regional peace and should encourage the parties to
move ahead vigorously on the basis of the principles
that I have outlined.

