Mr. Fonseca (Brazil): I am pleased to
congratulate you, Sir, on your presidency of the
Security Council. Mexico has been an invaluable
addition to this important body. Your delegation's
active and innovative presence in the Council is in line
with the best traditions of Mexico's highly regarded
diplomacy and its outstanding contribution to
international peace and security.
This is, indeed, a timely and necessary open
debate. The continuing crisis in the Middle East cannot
be regarded as merely a regional issue. It concerns the
international community as a whole. This is a crucial
moment. This is also the appropriate place for the
United Nations to express its deep regret at the death
toll caused by the conflict, to reaffirm its hope that the
peace process can be revitalized and to articulate
specific proposals to this end.

We welcome the fact that the Security Council is
now receiving periodic briefings on the situation in the

Middle East and that it has agreed to hold regular
consultations on this pressing issue. We hope that
closer monitoring may foster constructive and
imaginative proposals for an adequate settlement of
differences, bringing renewed prospects for peace and
reconciliation for all peoples in the Middle East.

When I last spoke to the Council, in December, I
stressed precisely the point that we hoped that in the
future the Security Council would be able to fully exert
its responsibilities with regard to that question. In
recent years, Member States have had reason enough to
be dismayed by the fact that the Council seemed
unwilling, or at least reluctant, to fully take on its
responsibilities with respect to one of the most pressing
and deadly conflicts facing the world. We fully agree
with Secretary-General Kofi Annan's View that

"it is imperative for the Security Council and the
wider international community to work in a
concerted manner with the parties towards a just,
lasting and comprehensive peaceful settlement of
the conflict". (S/PV.4474, p. 3)

The role of the Council needs to be strengthened in
times of crisis.

We all dream of a day when the spiral of violence
will finally come to an end in the Middle East and
when all peoples in the region will be able to devote
their energy to the full realization of their destiny, with
social justice and opportunities for all.

Yet during past months, a shocked world has been
following the consequences of a dreadful, vicious cycle
of terrorist acts and indiscriminate reprisals. The
number of dead and wounded - most of them
civilians - on both sides is increasing day by day. The
economic prospects are dire; a large part of the
population is deprived of its basic needs. There is loss
of capacity, and investments are being deflected that
could foster the well-being of the people. Total mistrust
is the prevailing sentiment among the parties, and that
prevents them from taking bold steps towards peace.

The United Nations could certainly make a
contribution to change this sad situation. For its part,
the Security Council has full legitimacy - and the
right tools at its disposal - to exercise its role.

We would like to suggest that, to the extent
possible, all periodic briefings by the Secretary-
General and members of the Secretariat on the
evolving situation in the Middle East be made in public

S/PV.4478

 

meetings, without, of course, detriment to in camera
discussions by the Council.

What, in concrete terms, can the Security Council
actually do at this juncture? How might it contribute to
salvaging the peace process and restoring hope for a
long-lasting solution? It can certainly do a lot. First
and foremost, the Council can, in clear terms, convey
to both the Israeli and Palestinian leadership our
collective dismay about the fact that they are failing to
live up to their commitments. The belief in the
possibility of a negotiated solution to the conflict must
be kept alive. The Council must not fail to exert the
right amount of pressure on both sides. We also
encourage the establishment of a monitoring
mechanism to help the parties implement the
recommendations of the Mitchell report, which have
been accepted but not even marginally implemented.

We strongly deplore all acts of violence, and
particularly the terrorist attacks and suicide bombings
that continue to afflict Israeli civilians. In the same
vein, we also strongly deplore the excessive use of
force by Israeli military forces, especially against
civilian targets, including the deliberate destruction of
infrastructure in the occupied Palestinian territories.

We call for the lifting of the closures that are
stifling the Palestinian economy.

There must be no artificial preconditions of any
kind for the parties to take the road back to the
negotiating table. The resumption of the peace process
cannot remain hostage to extremist actions.

We regret the maintenance of the virtual house
arrest imposed on Chairman Yasser Arafat. The
Palestinian Authority plays an essential role. It is an
indispensable party in the quest for peace and, as such,
needs to be fully preserved, in conditions that allow it
to meet its political and security commitments.

We consider that full freedom of movement for
Chairman Arafat would enable both parties to start
implementing, in full and without delay, the Mitchell
Committee recommendations and the Tenet
understandings, so as to secure a durable ceasefire.

Political will must be mustered in order to resume
a meaningful dialogue aimed at reaching a
comprehensive, just and lasting settlement based on
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) and on the understandings reached between the
parties.

Since the Palestinian question was placed on the
United Nations agenda, Brazil has consistently
advocated a peaceful solution to the Middle East
conflict.

As President Fernando Henrique Cardoso stated
last year before the General Assembly,

"Just as it supported the creation of the
State of Israel, Brazil today calls for concrete
measures towards the setting up of a Palestinian
state that is democratic, united and economically
Viable. The right of the Palestinian people to self-
determination and respect for the existence of
Israel as a sovereign, free and secure State are
essential if the Middle East is to rebuild its future
in peace. This is a moral debt owed by the United
Nations. It is a task that must not be postponed."
(A/56/PV.44, p. 6)

We welcome all proposals aimed at fostering the
peace negotiations and at providing an answer to the
call made by Secretary-General Kofi Annan for a new
kind of thinking and imaginative ideas.

In this respect, Crown Prince Abdullah of Saudi
Arabia recently made a specific proposal that resonates
in the spirits of all those who long for peace.

The Security Council must consider how it can
contribute to the full exploration of these ideas.

Brazil remains prepared to take part in this effort,
in any way it can, so as to help achieve the goal of
political freedom, peace, stability and prosperity for all
in the Middle East.

