Mr. Moreno-Ocampo: Mr. President, thank you
for the opportunity to brief the Council on the activities
of my Office.

On 31 March 2005, the Council determined that
the situation in the Sudan continued to constitute a
threat to international peace and security and decided
to refer the situation in Darfur to the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court.
On 5 April 2005, I met with the Secretary-
General in New York to receive a sealed envelope with
the conclusions of the International Commission of
Inquiry on Darfur and a list of 51 names. I read the
document; I sealed it again. As the Prosecutor of an
independent court, I could not and did not use this list
in my subsequent work.

Before opening an investigation, and in
accordance with the principle of complementarity, my
Office reviewed whether there were national
proceedings related to allegations of serious crimes in
Darfur. Having found no such proceedings, I opened a
first investigation in June 2005.

We examined allegations of crimes committed by
all parties. We focused our efforts on the most serious
crimes, which occurred in 2003 and 2004. We
investigated brutal attacks on the villages of Mukjar,
Bindisi, Arawala and Kodoom. We looked impartially
at incriminating and exonerating facts. We identified
direct victims of crimes living in 17 countries and
eyewitnesses who gave strong evidence.

In addition, we collected evidence from a wide
range of sources, including the Government of the
Sudan. We interviewed Sudanese officials in Khartoum
and were provided with the report of the National
Commission of Inquiry as well as a report from the
Ministry of Defence.

After this, my Office continued to assess whether
or not the Sudan investigated the case selected by the
Prosecution. My Office met with all Judges and the
Prosecutors of the Darfur Special Courts and we also
met with the Minister of Justice.

In December 2006, I informed this Council that I
was ready to submit evidence to the Judges by
February 2007. I indicated, however, that my Office
would go to the Sudan to check again information on
national proceedings. The mission to Khartoum took
place from 27 January to 7 February 2007 and found
that no investigations in the Sudan addressed our case.

On 27 February, I presented my evidence to the
Judges. On 27 April, the Pre-Trial Chamber of the
International Criminal Court issued arrest warrants
against Ahmad Harun, former Minister of State for the
Interior of the Sudan, and Ali Kushayb, a
militia/Janjaweed leader integrated with the popular
forces who committed crimes against humanity and
war crimes.
07-6267
The Pre-Trial Chamber found that the case fell
within the jurisdiction of the Court and was admissible,
without prejudice to future challenges under the
Statute. Since then, the Court has received no
communication from the Sudan concerning national
proceedings. There has been no challenge to
admissibility from either the Government or from
Ahmad Harun or Ali Kushayb.

The Court transmitted the request to execute the
warrants to the Government of the Sudan on 16 June
2007. Interpol Red Notices were subsequently
disseminated.

On 17 October, the Registry submitted a request
to the Sudan for an update as to activities undertaken in
the execution of the warrants and as to any difficulty
which may have arisen, with a time limit of
15 November. The Court has received no response
from the Sudan.

Under the terms of Security Council resolution
1593 (2005), "the Government of Sudan and all other
parties to the conflict in Darfur, shall cooperate fully
with and provide any necessary assistance to the Court
and the Prosecutor pursuant to this resolution". The
Sudan, a Member State of the United Nations, has the
legal obligation to cooperate to arrest and surrender
Ahmad Harun and Ali Kushayb and has the ability to
do so.

I report today to the Security Council that the
Government of the Sudan has not complied with its
legal obligation. The Government of the Sudan has not
complied with resolution 1593 (2005). The
Government of the Sudan is not cooperating with my
Office, or with the Court.

Ahmad Harun and Ali Kushayb have not been
arrested and surrendered. While the Sudan continues to
publicly insist that it is willing and able to prosecute
those responsible for serious crimes, they have done
nothing. While the Sudan has known the nature of the
case against Ahmad Harun and Ali Kushayb for ten
months, they have done nothing. They have taken no
steps to prosecute them domestically or to arrest and
transfer them to The Hague.

Ali Kushayb, against whom the Government had
previously indicated that there was an investigation,
was reported on 30 September by the media to have
been released for lack of evidence.
07-6267

Regarding Ahmad Harun, all public information
indicates that he would neither be surrendered to the
International Criminal Court nor subject to national
proceedings. The media reported in August a statement
by the Sudanese Minister of Interior Bashir Taha that
Harun had been interrogated but the evidence against
him did not stand scrutiny. And, he added, whether it
did or not, it was a matter for Sudan to decide and act
upon and that the Prosecutor had no jurisdiction there;
he was an intruder.

Even more serious, there are expressions of
support in Khartoum in Harun's favour. Since the
issuance of the warrants, Ahmad Harun has been
maintained in his current position as Minister of State
for Humanitarian Affairs. He is even acting Minister
since the withdrawal of the Sudan People's Liberation
Movement/Army from the Government. He accompanied
President Bashir to Darfur on 18 June 2007. He, along
with the Minister of Interior and Director General of the
Police, attended the 5 September meeting when
President Bashir appointed Nafie Ali Nafie to the
Darfur portfolio in charge of the talks in Sirte. On this
occasion Ahmad Harun reported on the "improvement"
of the humanitarian situation in Darfur. In September,
he was also appointed to a committee on human rights
violations and breaches of the constitution in the south
and north.

There is more. There is more with potential risks
for the peacekeeping operations. As of 18 November,
the Government's official website announced that
Ahmad Harun has now been appointed to the African
Union/United Nations Hybrid operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) national monitoring mechanism group,
overseeing the deployment of UNAMID.

The Sudan, a United Nations Member State, has
not complied with its obligation under resolution 1593
(2005) to arrest and surrender the indictees. The
Government of the Sudan is repeatedly challenging the
Council's authority to give jurisdiction to the
International Criminal Court. On 1 November in the
General Assembly, the representative of the Sudan,
Ambassador Abdalhaleem Mohamad, stated that, since
the Sudan was not a member of the Rome Statute, the
Court held no jurisdiction there. I will ask the Council
to ensure respect for resolution 1593 (2005).

In June, I informed the Council that my Office
would monitor current crimes. Today, I will provide as
3
much clarity as possible on the next steps. I hope that
such information will be useful to the Council's work.

In our first case, we demonstrated how, in 2003
and 2004, Ahmad Harun, as Minister of State for the
Interior, coordinated a criminal system. He recruited
and used militia/Janjaweed to supplement the Sudanese
Armed Forces and incite them to attack civilians. In
Darfur today, massive crimes continue to be
committed. I am therefore preparing to open two new
investigations.

First, we have consistent indicia showing a
pattern of attacks by Sudanese officials against
civilians, in particular against those 2.5 million people
who have been forcibly displaced into camps.
Secondly, we have reports of an increasing number of
attacks against humanitarian personnel and
peacekeepers, as happened in Haskanita, with rebel
involvement. Let me give the Council further details on
those forthcoming investigations.

First, we will investigate present acts of violence
against civilians, in particular the victims of
displacement. We are witnessing a calculated,
organized campaign by Sudanese officials to attack
individuals and further destroy the entire community.
All information points not to chaotic and isolated acts,
but to a pattern of attacks. We cannot and should not
deny reality. Calling those crimes "chaos" or "sporadic
violence" or "inter-tribal clashes" is a cover-up.

The campaign of terror of 2003-2004 has
achieved the forced displacement of 2.5 million people.
Most of the villages have been burned down, but in
Darfur today, in the few remaining villages, civilians
are still being attacked and forced to flee. Examples
include the joint attack on Muhajiriya by allied forces
of the Government of the Sudan and militia/Janjaweed
on 8 October 2007, just two months ago. Forty-eight
civilians were killed; people praying in a mosque were
rounded up and slaughtered. That was not an inter-
tribal clash. The Sudanese Air Force bombing of Adilla
in August 2007, producing 20,000 new displaced
persons, was not an inter-tribal clash.

In the camps, 2.5 million victims already
displaced are subjected to persecution and abuses -
sexual violence, illegal detentions and unlawful
killings. Far from disarming the militia/Janjaweed, as it
committed to do, the Government of the Sudan has for
the most part integrated them into its security apparatus
and stationed them in the vicinity of camps. Rapes of
women when they leave the camps are systematic. That
is not an inter-tribal clash.

In the camps, 2.5 million victims are deliberately
kept in a state of destitution. Obstacles to the delivery
of aid are part of the pattern of attacks. In the camps,
2.5 million persons are deliberately kept in a state of
insecurity, surrounded by hostile forces and threatened
with forced relocation to hostile territory.

Instead of upholding their promises to facilitate
returns, Sudanese officials are said to facilitate the
settlement of militia/Janjaweed supporters on land
inhabited previously by Fur and Masalit. In addition,
approximately 35,000 Chadians have also been
encouraged to settle in destroyed villages or
surrounding land. Fur, Masalit and Zaghawa are thus
deprived of a safe place to return. Resettlements are
consolidating the displacements. Victims are faced
with two options - remaining under attack in the
camps or going back to hostile territory. Let me repeat
that: Victims are faced with two options - remaining
under attack in the camps or going back to hostile
territory. They are left with no hope for the present and
no prospect for the future. That is how the slow
destruction of entire communities is pursued - in full
sight of the international community.

The Sudan is not fulfilling its duty to protect its
citizens and is allowing members of the Government to
attack them. As Minister of State for Humanitarian
Affairs, Ahmad Harun - a man indicted by the
International Criminal Court - is responsible for
providing relief, for working with international aid
organizations and for coordinating with relevant
security organs the security in the internally displaced
persons camps. Formally, he shares responsibility for
the safety and well-being of the displaced population.
In reality, he joins in constant abuses against them.

The Humanitarian Aid Commission, a component
of the Ministry for Humanitarian Affairs, comprising
mostly security personnel, is allowed to enter and
gather intelligence within the camps. They promote
organized disturbances with the assistance of factions
close to the Government. Then, as international actors
and sheikhs try to find solutions, the camps are raided
by security forces. These are not inter-tribal clashes.

Ahmad Harun himself was present during
specific operations against internally displaced persons
camps in past months. He was in Nyala on 20 August,
07-6267
as arrest operations started in Kalma. That was not an
inter-tribal clash.

All indications show that the so-called eruptions
of violence and in-fighting in the camps reflect a well-
designed strategy. Local civilian leaders are killed or
arrested to undermine any structure within the camps.
Attempts are made by Sudanese officials to dismantle
the big camps, including by trying to forcibly relocate
the displaced. We have witnessed the same modus
operandi in Kalma and Hamadiya in past months. The
objective is to disperse the inhabitants of the bigger
camps into smaller groups, which are easier to control.

The Humanitarian Aid Commission also plays a
pivotal role in hindering humanitarian assistance. Aid
workers must have Commission permission to enter the
Sudan and then Darfur. The Commission manages the
complex system of permits needed to access camps.
When international staff expose the reality, they are
expelled. There is no connection here with inter-tribal
clashes.

Allow me to remind the Council that the
Commission is nothing new in the Sudan. In fact, it is
similar to the Peace and Resettlement Administration
created in South Kordofan in the 1990s. That
Administration had close links to national security, was
dominated by former security staff, oversaw internally
displaced persons camps and collected information to
prepare attacks on villages. Ahmad Harun was
Executive Director of the Administration from 1997
until 2000.

In Darfur in 2003 and 2004, we witnessed the
first phase of the criminal plan coordinated by Ahmad
Harun. Millions of people were forced out of their
villages and into camps. Now, in the second phase -
happening right now in front of our eyes - the victims
are being attacked in the camps.

Ahmad Harun is a key actor, but he is not alone.
Failure to take any steps to investigate or arrest him
and failure to remove him from office are clear
indications of the support he receives from other high
officials.

The failure to protect persons displaced from
constant attacks by militia/Janjaweed and Government
of the Sudan agents and the failure to facilitate the
deployment of peacekeepers who could protect the
victims are clear indications of endorsement,
acquiescence or active participation by other high
officials.

My Office will proceed to investigate who bears
the greatest responsibility for ongoing attacks against
civilians, who is maintaining Harun in a position to
commit crimes and who gives him instructions. That is
my second case.

Allow me now to address our other new
investigation. On 29 October, 10 soldiers of the African
Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS) were killed, eight
were injured and one was unaccounted for after the
attack on the Haskanita base. The incident appears to
have been committed by rebel forces. It represents an
increasing trend in attacks against African Union,
United Nations and other international workers by
various forces, a trend which my Office is monitoring
with concern. Attacks on humanitarian convoys have a
devastating effect.

Such attacks or threats of attack on peacekeepers
and aid personnel will be investigated by my Office.
They can constitute a war crime under the Rome
Statute. They also further undermine efforts to protect
the civilian population.

We note with concern that the Sudan is taking no
measures to protect international forces. There are
allegations that some Sudanese aircraft have been
painted with United Nations or African Union colours
and are used in Darfur. Such acts - among others -
undermine the United Nations and African Union,
create the impression of collusion and can encourage
attacks against them.

I wish to take this opportunity to ask all members
of the Security Council, all States Members of the
United Nations and all relevant organizations to
volunteer specific information and thus assist in
conducting our two new investigations.

Allow me to address further the issue of
cooperation. First, I want to thank all those who have
responded to our requests for information on the
possible movements of our indictees. I am pleased to
report that no State has been reluctant to share
information.

Regarding cooperation with the African Union,
Deputy Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda and I met with
members of the African Group in New York. I thank
South Africa for having hosted such meetings. On
20 June 2007, I updated the President of the African
Union, Ghanaian President Kufuor, on our work in
Darfur. We also met with the representative of Congo
in August in his then-capacity as President of the
Security Council.

Since June, the Deputy Prosecutor and I have
met, respectively, with Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
and Deputy Secretary-General Asha-Rose Migiro. I am
very grateful for the Secretary-General's efforts to
remind President Al-Bashir of his obligation to execute
the arrest warrants.

Since June, I have also briefed the European
Union and ministers of European Union member
States. I have continued constructive exchanges with
the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States and
with its member States on international criminal
justice. I have been invited to visit a number of States
in the region next year. Their support for the
independence and impartiality of my work is
invaluable.

I have informed the Security Council today that
the people of Darfur are being attacked by members of
the Government in their homes and in the camps. This
is the reality. Ahmad Harun, a man charged with 50
counts of crimes against humanity and war crimes
should not be entrusted with his victims' safety. He
must be arrested.

Maintaining Harun in his position is a clear
indication of collusion with other officials. Who is
taking responsibility for supporting him? This is the
new case I will bring to the Judges. Maintaining Harun
in his position is a direct threat to millions of victims
and to the humanitarian workers and peacekeepers
seeking to protect them.

When will there be a better time to arrest Harun?
How many more women and girls have to be raped?
How many persons have to be killed? Must we really
wait, again, for the destruction of entire communities?

I ask the Security Council for consistency. I ask
the Security Council to send a strong and unanimous
message today to the Government of the Sudan,
requesting compliance with resolution 1593 (2005),
requesting the execution of the arrest warrants. This
same consistency is needed throughout the United
Nations. It would be both inaccurate and confusing to
convey in any way to the Government of the Sudan
that the arrest warrants and the obligation to comply
with resolution 1593 (2005) will go away.
The only realistic solution today is to request the
removal and arrest of Harun as a first step to any
solution. That will send a signal to the perpetrators of
crimes in Darfur that the international community is
not only watching, but will also hold them accountable
for their actions. The Council can make a difference; it
can break the criminal system. What is at stake is, quite
simply, the life or death of 2.5 million people.

