Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow
me to first express my delegation's appreciation to
the Polish presidency for convening this open debate.
Indeed, the choice of this crucial topic for our debate is
very appropriate and timely.

First and foremost, I align myselfwith the statement
to be delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

I also thank the Secretary-General and the former
President of the International Court of Justice for
their input.

Today more than ever, multilateralism and
the international legal order are under threat by
unilateralism, disregard for international law and
disrespect for the common interests of the international
community as a whole. The prerequisite for a rules-
based international legal system is full respect for the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
all States and upholding the principles of international
law and customary international law.

Since the establishment of the United Nations,
maintaining international peace and security has been
one of the key concerns of the international community.
With that in mind, the prohibition of the threat or use
of force, as enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations, is an achievement of the United Nations sine
qua non. Unfortunately, certain Member States tend to
use intimidation and the use or threat of force to impose
their will on others. Those practices undoubtedly lead
to disorder, instability and insecurity, as we see in some
regions, especially in the Middle East.

At the same time, some developing countries are
unjustly targeted by arbitrary unilateral economic
sanctions. Such morally wrong and ethically unjustified
unilateral measures not only defy the rule of law at the
international level, they also infringe on the right to
development, which ultimately leads to the violation
of basic human rights. It is a fact that such measures
have almost always been initiated by a single Member
State, the United States, which is apparently addicted
to sanctions and sees them and the use of threats as the
only tools available to it in pursuing its agenda. These
practices obviously contravene international law and
the Charter of the United Nations, especially where they
deprive nations of their lawful and legitimate rights
under treaties as well as the fundamental human rights
of individual citizens in the targeted States. In many
cases, unilateral sanctions are imposed as a result of
the extraterritorial application of domestic legislation
against legal and natural persons in other countries, in
spite of the many General Assembly resolutions against
such unlawful measures.

Unilateral measures, in the form of illegal recourse
to war, occupation, aggression, denial of the sovereignty
of Member States or disregard for the immunity of
States under unsubstantiated legal doctrines, are
obvious manifestations of the rule of power, not the rule
of law. Such practices can undoubtedly be qualified as
internationally wrongful acts that negatively affect
a rules-based international order and endanger the
maintenance of peace and security.

It is ironic, given the holding of this open debate,
that this very month the international community has
witnessed two specific situations where the credibility
of international law and international agreements was
severely damaged. On 8 May 2018, the United States
announced its unilateral and unlawful decision to
withdraw from the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) and reimpose all United States nuclear-related
sanctions. This was a material breach ofthe JCPOA and
of resolution 2231 (2015), of which the JCPOA is an
integral part.

The official announcement came after multiple and
prolonged violations of the J CPOA by the United States,
including bad faith, nominal implementation, undue
delays, new sanctions and designations, anti-JCPOA
statements, refusal to issue the necessary licences,
particularly in the past 16 months, as well as systematic
and concerted efforts to sabotage the deal by actively
dissuading others from doing business with Iran.
Considering the fulfilment by the Islamic Republic of
Iran of its commitments under the J CPOA, as repeatedly
and consistently verified by the International Atomic
Energy Agency, these acts and omissions on the part
of the United States reflect a complete disregard for
international law and the United Nations Charter. They
undermine the principle of the peaceful settlement
of disputes and endanger multilateralism and its
institutions. It is a regression to the failed and disastrous
era of unilateralism and encourages illegality.

On 14 May, Netanyahu and his guests celebrated
the illegal move of the United States embassy to
Jerusalem, violating and mocking international law as
well as the many United Nations resolutions regarding
the situation of Jerusalem and the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people. At the same time, the Israeli
army was creating its latest bloodbath in Gaza, killing
more than 61 people and injuring more than 2,500
unarmed Palestinian protesters in a single day - a
shameful violation of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law. These criminal acts
took place in an atmosphere of total impunity shown to
the Israeli regime by the United States.

Any serious effort to uphold international law must
entail accountability for such wrongful and criminal
acts, especially when they fly in the face of the United
Nations Charter and international law. Violators
should be compelled to bear responsibility for their
wrongful acts.

