Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): I wish at the outset to
thank you, Mr. President, for having convened this
meeting. I am pleased to welcome Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Muburi-Muita
to the Council and to thank him for his very lucid
briefing, and particularly to express my appreciation
for the passion with which he has approached his new
responsibilities.

Nigeria welcomes the growing partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union.
Since the signing of the joint Declaration on the
enhancement of United Nations-African Union (AU)
cooperation - the Ten-Year Capacity-Building
Programme - several milestones have been achieved
in cementing this cooperative relationship. Notable
among these are the operationalization of the AU
Peacekeeping Support Team within the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, training by the Department
of Political Affairs for the Secretariat of the AU Peace
and Security Council, and an information exchange
between the two bodies, facilitated in part by the
Security Council's Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa.

The impact of such policy-level cooperation is
evident in the giant African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). The Tripartite
Mechanism on Darfur has been a useful conduit for
strategic planning and information exchange and in
easing administrative difficulties in the Operation.
In spite of the concerns raised by the AU Peace
and Security Council in a communique dated 8 April

2011 that proposed a start date for a fresh Darfur
political process, there are numerous lessons to be
derived from the UNAMID model. We are pleased to
note that the relationship remains strong, as is evident
from the communique of last month's consultative
meeting between the members of the AU Peace and
Security Council and the United Nations Security
Council. As envisaged by Article 52 of the Charter of
the United Nations, regional bodies such as the AU
have traditionally played a supportive role in relation
to the United Nations in the maintenance of
international peace and security. This approach is a
pragmatic recognition of the asymmetric capabilities of
the two organizations. Whereas the African Union has
the political will, it is insufficiently resourced to
undertake long-term peacekeeping and transition
operations.

On the other hand, the centralization of resources
and expertise within the United Nations system affords
it enhanced peacekeeping and peacebuilding
capabilities. All too frequently, AU member States will
muster sufficient troop numbers to address crisis
situations, only to be undermined by a lack of
equipment and logistical support.

In that regard, we stress that the capacity
development of peacekeeping personnel, though
essential, is not a substitute for adequate equipment,
logistics and training. We are therefore encouraged by
the range of initiatives under consideration,
particularly the prospect of giving the African Union
access to United Nations logistics base capacities and
United Nations strategic deployment stocks. Also
encouraging is the prospect of a surge capacity team of
experts being made available to the African Union at
the initiation of a peace support operation.

In the context of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), different challenges abound. On
31 January 2011, the AU called on the Council to
provide greater support to AMISOM. and to fully
assume its responsibility towards Somalia and its
people, including through increased funding from
United Nations assessed contributions. Such direct
calls for support are not new. While those appeals have
been met in some measure, not all requests have so far
been granted.
The current challenges facing AMISOM. vividly
illustrate the need for more predictable funding for
AU-led operations as well as the need for the United
Nations to assume primary responsibility for AU-led
operations initiated as bridging measures. This should
not be misunderstood as the African Union's
unwillingness to manage its own operations. Rather, it
is an acknowledgment that today's armed conflicts
require complex, nuanced and often high-technology
responses that demand a particular level of
infrastructure that the AU simply cannot afford. The
need for support does not amount to dependency.
Instead, it must be viewed as a vital partnership in the
global quest for maintaining international peace and
security.

Cooperation in the area of deployment, including
the deployment of expert civilian personnel, is central
to this partnership. Our joint vision must be the
enhancement of capacity-building for the African
Union in peacekeeping operations and ensuring cost-
effectiveness. The opening of the United Nations
Office to the African Union (UNOAU) is a step in the
right direction. We hope that it leads to a more
systematic and less reactive approach to joint
peacekeeping between the African Union and the
United Nations.

We are particularly pleased to note, in the report
of the Secretary-General on the budget for UNAOU
contained in document A/64/762, the stated objective
of facilitating an operational African peace and
security architecture with an effective capacity to
address threats to regional peace and security. We
believe that there is real scope for effective cooperation
through the preventive diplomacy pillars of the AU's
Peace and Security Architecture. With the right level of
support at the international level, the AU has a chance
of developing best-practice models for early-warning
mechanisms and for mediation that could be effectively
applied globally.

Partnership is the cornerstone of Africa's effort to
stabilize its vast region and to shoulder its share of the
global responsibility to maintain peace and security.

