Mr. Nufiez Mosquera (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the
way in which you have been steering the work of the
Security Council this month.

I will speak for less than four minutes. I thank the
Chairmen of the Committees for the information
provided, which informs us about the work they are
carrying out. Cuba values and follows up on the work
of those Committees and strictly complies with the
obligations under Security Council resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004). I wish to
reiterate Cuba's strongest rejection of all terrorist acts,
methods and practices in all their forms and
manifestations, by whomever or against whomever and
wherever they are committed. All terrorist acts,
whatever their motivations, must be condemned.

My country has systematically submitted various
comprehensive reports on measures it has taken on this
issue. Border control is a major aspect of Cuba's work
in combating terrorism. Our control is efficient, based
on the experience gained in more than 50 years
fighting terrorism. That has allowed us to thwart many
acts of this nature.

The position of my country on weapons of mass
destruction is also clear. Cuba does not possess, nor
has it the intention of possessing, weapons of that kind.
They have never been part of our national defence
strategy. In addition, my country has ratified or
acceded to 13 international conventions on terrorism.

Cuba attaches great importance to the adoption of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
My country has enacted a wide range of legislative
measures, even long before the adoption of the
Strategy, with the goal of preventing and suppressing
all terrorist acts and activities and those directly or
indirectly associated with them. My country has an
impeccable record in confronting terrorism, to which it
has historically fallen victim. I wish to reiterate Cuba's
unswerving determination to never allow its national
territory to be used to organize, incite, support or carry
out terrorist acts.

Cuba categorically rejects the unilateral
preparation by the Government of the United States of
America of a list of States that supposedly sponsor
terrorism, and the inclusion of Cuba on that list. That is
a spurious and politically motivated exercise, contrary
to international law and the Charter of the United
Nations.

No Government can claim the right to classify the
behaviour of other nations in terms of terrorism. Much
less can that be done by a Government that adopts a
double standard, as it does not prosecute the confessed
perpetrators of horrible terrorist acts against Cuba and
other countries of this hemisphere, as in the cases of
Luis Posada Carriles and Orlando Bosch. It allows
them to remain free and to participate in political
activities. At the same time it arbitrarily and unjustly
keeps in prison five Cuban citizens, who, risking their
lives, were fighting against the activities of terrorist
groups that operate with impunity against Cuba in the
United States territory.

Just a month ago, several terrorists with a long
record of actions against Cuba were honoured at the
Institute for Cuban and Cuban-American Studies of the
University of Miami, in the presence of American
members of Congress. That Institute is heavily
subsidized by the United States Government. Only
eight months ago, Posada Carriles was the guest of
honour of the annual conference of the terrorist
organization, Alpha 66. Recent revelations by another
confessed terrorist, Francisco Chavez Abarca, confirm
details of Posada Carriles' responsibility for acts of
terrorism against Cuba. It is not in Cuba but in the
United States where a terrorist mafia acts with
impunity, having organized, financed and carried out
hundreds of terrorist acts against the Cuban nation.
Cuba has a completely clean record concerning
terrorism. The United States Department of State,
which issued that report, cannot say the same.

On several occasions Cuba has cooperated with
the United States Government and has recently
reiterated its willingness to continue doing so.

We reiterate our willingness to deliver a more
detailed presentation on these questions before the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, or to submit to it any
additional information or clarification considered
necessary.

As it has always done, Cuba will continue to
strictly comply with the stipulations of Council
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004)
and will cooperate with the subsidiary bodies
established pursuant to them.

Before concluding, I wish to reiterate the
willingness of my country to cooperate with any State,
including the United States, in preventing and
confronting international terrorism on the basis of
mutual respect, the sovereign equality of States and the
principles and rules of international law, including the
Charter of the United Nations.

