Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank Mr. Yamamoto, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), for his
work towards implementing the Mission's mandate. We
also thank him for his informative and detailed briefing.

We commend the role of the United Nations in
Afghanistan. The Secretary-General's visit to Kabul
was timely and focused attention on the future of
Afghanistan and of the entire Central Asia region.
The visit serves as a reminder for the international
community of its obligations and responsibilities
towards this critical region and its future.

The security situation across Afghanistan is
deteriorating, especially with the Taliban's announcement
last April of the launch of its seasonal spring offensive
and the increase in terrorist attacks, which have recently
reached unprecedented levels. We recall the tragic
attack that claimed hundreds of victims during the
early days of Ramadan and other despicable terrorist
attacks that occur on an almost-daily basis across the
regions of Afghanistan.

We hope that Afghan militias and armed groups
will follow the example set by the agreement between
the Government and the Hizb-i Islami, which allowed
for the return of Gulbuddin Hekmatyar to the legitimate
and legal political stage after the delisting of his party
from the Security Council sanctions list. It is important
to fight and eliminate terrorist groups wherever they
exist, particularly the Islamic State of Iraq and the
Levant - Khorasan Province, within the framework of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

Egypt has traditional and historical links in
relations with Afghanistan and feels the influence that
the political and security situations in Central Asia
and the Middle East have on each other. We therefore
reiterate our support for the Afghan Government in
its war against terror and its effort to extend State
authority across its territory. We support all regional
and international efforts aimed at economic and
social development in order to bring about the return
and repatriation of internally displaced persons and
refugees and achieve prosperity for all the people
of Afghanistan.

We oppose the lenient approach towards the drug
trafficking phenomenon, which is a major threat,
particularly in the case of opium, to the stability and
security ofAfghanistan and Central Asia. We stress the
importance of regional and international coordination
with the Afghan authorities in the fight against
trafficking in drugs, which must be part of the efforts to
fight terrorism, as drugs are a main source of funding
for terrorist groups and armed militias.

In conclusion, Cairo attaches great importance
to the implementation of Egypt's role as a supporting
State for the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process. We also
affirm the importance of following up on all of the
outcomes of the ministerial conference on Afghanistan
held in Brussels in October. Egypt's partnership
development agency is continuing with its high-quality
training programmes for elements of the Afghan police
and security forces. We have also been sending Arabic
experts to the University of Kabul for a number of
years. We attach great importance to building Afghan
capacity in the areas of the judiciary, culture, health
care and nursing and agriculture and irrigation, as well
as in the banking sector. And we continue to provide
humanitarian assistance to the people of Afghanistan.

