Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Allow me to warmly
welcome you, Mr. President, and your presence in
the Chamber.

Let me also begin by thanking the Secretary-
General and today's briefers for their contributions
to our discussion. I would like to thank the Peruvian
presidency for having organized this briefing, which
addresses one of the most crucial elements of the
Security Council's activity.

Tackling the complex and evolving nature of current
conflicts requires a wide spectrum ofactivities within all
three pillars: inclusive peace and security processes with
the meaningful participation of women and minorities;
sustainable development going hand-in-hand with
resilience-building; and consistent respect for human
rights and the rule of law. The Declaration of Shared
Commitments on Peacekeeping Operations, which
was endorsed by Poland last year, rightly underlines
that sustainable peace implemented by peacebuilding
activities is a fundamental condition for development.
For this purpose, the United Nations should address
conflicts in a comprehensive way by using all available
instruments, including peacekeeping. Peacekeeping
operations have proven to be an effective tool of the
United Nations to assist host countries on the difficult
path from conflict to peace. In this context, building
political dialogue with the host nation at each stage of
the peacebuilding process should consider the balance
of power and be implemented holistically, embracing
all actors on different stages, from local communities
to the high political level, including non-governmental
organizations, regional and subregional organizations
and local communities.

The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and its Sustainable Development Goals containing the
pledge to leave no one behind create the conditions for
inclusive and sustainable development and provide the
best way to prevent crises and conflicts in today's world.
In that regard, cooperation among all stakeholders,
including Governments, civil society, academia and
the business community is of utmost importance,
which means we have to be prepared for new forms
of partnership, converting ideas into action - action
that brings benefits to all actors involved. It is therefore
crucial to align the core business of the private sector
with the strategic goals of the international community.
Development assistance alone is not sustainable in
comprehensively tackling all post-conflict challenges,
especially economic stagnation. Only this kind
of approach will give us a chance of achieving a
peacebuilding process that delivers expected results.

In thinking ofpractical options for resource-pooling
in conflict prevention and sustaining peace, we
might consider leveraging more private resources for
development in the form of blended finance. In that
regard, all stakeholders should continue to invest in
new methods of generating financial resources and
innovative information-gathering, data-analytics and
machine-learning tools, in order to better define where
the risks and threats to peace and security are most
urgent and where the assistance of the international
community is needed most.

In conclusion, the experience of peacekeeping
operations in Cote d'Ivoire and Liberia demonstrate
that political dialogue, security sector reform, national
reconciliation, social cohesion, the promotion of
human rights and the reduction of socioeconomic
inequalities are the only visible means of overcoming
the root causes of crises in the region. It is equally
important that the United Nations remain closely
engaged in supporting countries in transition so that
they can address the challenges in sustaining peace and
achieving sustainable development. It is our obligation
to preserve their gains and achievements and support
dialogue around the challenges that these countries
still face.

