Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Presidents and Prosecutors of
the Tribunals for the information they have provided
on their efforts to implement their completion
strategies. Their briefings are especially important now
as the Security Council Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals is seeking to convert the
Tribunals into a residual mechanism. We acknowledge
that completing the work of those two international
judicial bodies is a rather complex task, both for the
Tribunals themselves and for the Security Council.

Based on the reports before us (see S/2010/588 and S/2010/574), it is clear that most of the path to
completion has been travelled. Many violators of
international law have been found guilty, and the
Tribunals' contribution to the development of national
judiciary systems has been great. The States
established on the territory of the former Yugoslavia
and Rwanda are prepared independently to uphold a
high standard of criminal justice.

Against that backdrop, we are even more
concerned about the continued prolongation of the
Tribunals' existence. The members of the Council have
always been understanding of the practical problems
encountered by the Tribunals and have accorded many
mandate extensions. However, there are reasonable
limits. Six months ago, the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) reported that it was
prepared to complete the first instance cases in 2012,
and the subsequent appellate work in the Karadeic' case
in 2014. We have now heard that this may be 2015. We
have observed such developments in the Council for
many years now.

Our analysis of the information provided by the
Tribunal shows that it is difficult to explain this delay
by objective criteria, such as the emergence of new
evidence, the obstructionist behaviour of the
defendants, or the slowness of witnesses to testify. It is
very difficult for us to understand why defendant

Seselj had to wait more than six years for proceedings
to start in his case. It is difficult to understand why the
purely technical work of establishing a sentence should
take a year. We are not especially swayed by the
argument that it will take a year to hand down
sentences in the Prlic' et al. case because there are six
accused involved.

The judges of the ICTY have sufficient qualified
assistance effectively to discharge their technical work,
and with all due respect to that Tribunal, we note that
even the International Court of Justice - working on
the most problematic cases with huge political
resonance and legal significance - does not encumber
its case work with such lengthy time frames. Another
example was the Nuremberg Tribunal, which took
barely more than a year to find guilty those who may
well have been the most monstrous criminals in the
history of mankind.

On that basis, we are deeply concerned by
accounts that the delays in a number of cases before
the Tribunal are artificial and caused by the slowness
of some judges and other personnel in their work. We
express the hope that these reports are merely rumours;
nevertheless, we would be grateful if the Presidents
were to take a second look at issues of discipline and
performance.

For our part, we believe that the effective
completion of the Tribunals' work would be expedited
by the identification, in the draft resolution currently
under consideration by the Council on the residual
mechanism, of explicit and realistic deadlines for
moving the Tribunals' work to completion. It is our
intention to work constructively with all our Council
colleagues on this issue.

With respect to our View of the parameters of the
residual mechanism, we have consistently advocated
for a mechanism that is compact, effective and guided
by reasonable timelines for beginning and ending its
work. In the case of fugitives from either Tribunal
being apprehended during the final phase of that
Tribunal's operation or after its completion, such
fugitives must be tried by the mechanism. Accordingly,
the mechanism must have all it needs in order to
discharge that function.

The Russian Federation is committed to
dispensing international criminal justice according to
the highest legal standards. There is no doubt that those
indicted by the Tribunals who for various reasons are
still at large must appear before the Courts. The
apprehension of fugitives and the prompt completion
of the Tribunals' mandates can be accomplished
through the conscientious cooperation of regional
States with the Tribunals. We call on those States to
make every necessary effort to promote the highest
level of cooperation with the Tribunals.

