Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would like
to thank Special Representative Farid Zarif for his
briefing. We also warmly welcome Prime Minister
Aleksandar Vucic' and Prime Minister Hashim Thaci to
the Council, and thank them for their statements today.

Since the elections in June, it has been expected
that those first Kosovo-wide general elections would
lead to the country's democratic stability. However,
six months after the elections, we are still witnessing
a continued stand-off among the political actors
and the subsequent delay in the formation of a new
Government. At this critical stage of Kosovo's path
towards the normalization of relations with Belgrade
and European Union (EU) integration, we hope that the
next parliamentary session in the coming week will be
an opportunity to find a way for a new Government to
be established.

While there has been no high-level dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina due to the domestic
political process, we do believe that both sides are
steadily moving forward in their implementation of
the 19 April 2013 agreement. Most importantly, the
talks on a technical level remain ongoing, and progress
on the ground has also been sustained in the areas of
integrated border management, telecommunications
and energy. It is also encouraging that the recent
progress in the implementation of the agreement on
freedom ofmovement, with additional border crossings,
has brought substantial benefits to the people's daily
life.

In order to maintain this positive momentum, it
is vital that the EU-facilitated high-level dialogue
resume without delay. There are remaining key
issues - such as the integration of the judiciary in
northern Kosovo - that need a political dialogue if
they are to be resolved. In this regard, we encourage
Belgrade and Pristina to continue to scale up their
efforts towards the normalization of their relations.

Despite these positive developments in the political
dialogue, we should not lose sight of the difficult road
ahead in dismantling the emotional barriers between
the ethnic communities. In that respect, the work of
the Commission on Missing Persons and joint efforts
to protect cultural and religious heritage are a good
starting point for promoting inter-ethnic tolerance and
enhancing the culture of mutual respect.

Furthermore, more vigorous efforts should be
made to ensure the full safety of ethnic minorities.
In particular, a series of security incidents targeting
ethnic minorities and their property continues to
be of grave concern. With this shared concern, we
encourage the Kosovo authorities to engage more
with minority communities, including Kosovo Serbs,
and to investigate any instances of violence against
them. Close cooperation between the EU Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and the Kosovo police is
also highly important in this regard.

At the same time, we would like to commend the
Kosovo authorities in continuing to address the issue of
extremism and the participation of Kosovars in foreign
conflicts, mainly in Syria and Iraq. We also welcome
the public dissociation of religious leaders in Kosovo
from violent extremism, radicalism and terrorism.

Finally, we once again commend the entire staff
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo, EULEX and other international partners
for their tireless efforts for the peace and stability of
Kosovo and the wider region.

