Mr. Cappagli (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to express our thanks for the Secretary-General' s
report on the progress that has been made by the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH)
since 17 December 1999, as well as for the oral briefing
that has been given by the Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Hedi Annabi.

According to the Secretary-General's report, there is
no doubt that progress has been made with regard to police
restructuring, the revision of the judicial system and the
establishment, in January, of the unified police force in
Breko. In this context, we should note the good work of
that unified police force during the ceremony that took
place on the occasion of the creation of the Brcko District.
The Mission's efforts to modify the ethnic make-up of local
police forces so as to properly reflect the multi-ethnic
nature of the communities that they serve, to improve
cooperation between the police of the two entities, to
depoliticize the local police forces and to promote the
establishment of a judicial police deserve our full support.

It is regrettable, however, that, despite the agreement
in the New York Declaration, Parliament's repeated failure
to pass the State Border Service Law compelled the High
Representative to impose it on 13 January.

We are also concerned about the fact that some
officials persist in perpetuating divisions instead of working
to foster integrated coexistence. In this context, we can only
repudiate the attitude taken by the Croat authorities in
Mostar with regard to Bosniac officials, whom they are
preventing from working in the same building as their
Croat counterparts.

We do not want to miss this opportunity to underscore
the importance of the decision taken recently by the High
Representative for the establishment of the Breko District
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as the entry into force
of the District Statute and the designation of the appropriate
authorities. We hope that the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and of both entities will take all the
necessary measures to enable the District to develop fully.

We agree with the Secretary-General that the
promise of the recently elected Government of Croatia to
respect the sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
cooperate with its population and with the international
community is a positive development.

In conclusion, we reaffirm our support for the
initiative to form a contingent of police officers from both
entities and the three ethnic groups for service in United
Nations peacekeeping operations.

