Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): First let me
welcome the presence earlier of President Abbas here
in the Council, and let me thank Mr. Mladenov for his
detailed briefing and certainly for his efforts for peace.

The facts on the ground speak for themselves and
leave little room for optimism. We face a growing
humanitarian and economic crisis in Gaza, and we see
a lack of possibilities for Palestinian development in the
West Bank.

I will touch on three points in that context: first,
the two-State solution and the need for tangible steps;
secondly, the need for commitment and international
support; and, thirdly, the situation in Gaza.
With regard to my first point, the two-State
solution, it is worth recalling the Oslo accords, signed
by President Abbas, who has always advocated a
peaceful road towards a Palestinian State. The Oslo
accords held the promise of two States within five years
of their signing, in 1993. We are now in the twenty-
fifth year since Oslo, and the obstacles to peace have
only grown.

Oslo was not just a document; it was a vision.
We remain firmly convinced that only the two-State
solution, based on the borders of 1967, will lead to
sustainable peace. We recall that a lasting solution
to the conflict must be achieved on the basis of the
relevant Council resolutions; the Madrid principles,
including land for peace; the road map; the agreements
previously reached by the parties; and the Arab Peace
Initiative, with the State of Israel and an independent,
democratic, contiguous, sovereign and viable State of
Palestine living side by side in peace and security and
mutual recognition.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands believes that clear
parameters define the basis for negotiations, including
on Jerusalem. These parameters are key elements of a
successful outcome.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands calls upon both
sides to translate their stated desire for peace into
tangible steps, steps that build trust and contribute
to the preservation of the possibility of the two-State
solution, in line with resolution 2334 (2016). This
requires a fundamental change in the developments on
the ground, which continue to undermine the prospect
of a two-State solution.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands reiterates its strong
opposition to Israel's settlement policy and the actions
taken in this context, including continuous demolitions;
plans leading to the forced transfer of Bedouin
communities in the West Bank; the announcement
that the Havat Gilad outpost would be legalized into a
settlement; and legislative proposals that entail nothing
less than annexation. Such actions and proposals are
cause for serious concern.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands' position has not
changed: settlements are illegal under international law
and undermine the viability of the two-State solution
and prospects for a lasting peace. At the same time, the
continued violence, including the firing of rockets, as
well as incitement, needs to stop.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands is deeply
concerned by the escalation of violence in and around
Gaza. Rocket attacks by militants from Gaza are
unacceptable and need to stop. The leadership on both
sides must work to prevent escalation.

Secondly, concerning the need for commitment and
international support, the current lack of confidence
between parties but also in tried formats for negotiations
creates a dangerous vacuum. They cause both the Israeli
and Palestinian populations to lose hope.

Worldwide examples of resolved conflicts show
that negotiations do not start with trust, they start with
courage and the political commitment to reach out,
build bridges and create trust, taking people along step
by step.

The international community can certainly help
in providing a political horizon for the two-State
solution, in line with relevant Council resolutions. The
international community can support the parties to
find a path back to the negotiation table. To this end,
cooperation between the Quartet partners as well as
regional players and with both parties is crucial.

We fully support the initiatives for the two-State
solution taken by the High Representative of the
European Union, working together with both parties,
the other members of the Quartet and regional partners.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands will continue to
play a constructive role, building on our good relations
with both sides.

This brings me to my third point: Gaza. As others
have said, the crisis in Gaza is growing rapidly.
Unemployment is rising, and the economy is coming
to virtual standstill. Gaza faces a lack of energy supply
that affects all aspects of life, including the provision
of water and the treatment of sewage. Almost none of
the groundwater is now fit for human consumption,
and raw sewage flows into the sea, polluting the water
needed for desalination. The people of Gaza suffer
from insufficient access to adequate health care. In
the words of the Secretary-General, Gaza will become
unlivable by 2020.

But for many, it is hardly livable this very day.
A growing number of people there are dependent on
humanitarian aid, and the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), as we all know, is the largest provider of
this aid. The critical financial situation of UNRWA is
undermining its ability to provide basic services to the
people of Gaza. We are concerned that this negative
forecast will lead to growing despair in Gaza. It will
add to the unpredictability of the situation and increase
the risk of instability in the other areas of operations
of UNRWA. It is our collective responsibility to ensure
that UNRWA is able to execute its mandate as given by
the General Assembly.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands calls upon all
stakeholders to put the needs of the population at the
forefront in future decisions regarding Gaza.

The positive measures suggested by the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee in Brussels can lead to a significant
improvement in living conditions. This includes
the expansion of possibilities for trade and support
for essential services such as water and energy. We
therefore call upon all parties involved to live up to
the commitments made. We call on the Palestinian
Authority to proceed on the challenging path of
intra-Palestinian reconciliation. We support the efforts
to restore unity between the West Bank and Gaza, and
the return of the Palestinian Authority to Gaza as the
single, legitimate governing authority. The incidents
over the weekend showed again the need for a political
solution for Gaza.

In conclusion, I started by saying there was little
cause for optimism. However, in the Middle East
optimism is not so much a choice as it is a necessity.
This conflict can be solved; the conflict must be solved.
We should all work diligently and in concert to advance
the two-State solution: the parties themselves, the
region and the international community at large.

