Mr. Lavald (Norway): Today's discussion - like
the subsequent discussion in the General Assembly on
6 February - is an important occasion to highlight the
importance of peacebuilding. We must maintain and, if
possible, further increase the momentum behind our
peacebuilding efforts. While our focus at all times must
be on concrete results at the country level, we are all
also conscious of the importance of this endeavour for
the United Nations and the international community as
a whole.

Since entering office, the Government of Burundi
has embarked on a series of planning and consultation
processes in order to prepare development strategies to
move Burundi from an emergency situation to a more
normal pattern of development. Those strategies
include the Government's emergency programme, the

Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper, the United Nations
Common Humanitarian Action Plan and Joint Road
Map and the United Nations Development Assistance
Framework. Finally, I should also mention the
establishment by the Government of Burundi of a joint
Government-United Nations peacebuilding committee.
Thus, much is already being done at the country level.
Burundi has made progress in consolidating peace.
However, the situation is still fragile, and continued
international support is needed.

The Peacebuilding Commission held two
meetings on the situation in Burundi last fall. The
Government of Burundi participated actively at the
ministerial level on both occasions. I should like to
thank the Government of Burundi for the very close
cooperation extended to the Peacebuilding
Commission, including myself, during my visit to
Bujumbura last fall.

The identification of priorities for peacebuilding
and how to address them was the focus of those two
country-specific meetings. At the first country-specific
meeting three main critical peacebuilding challenges
were identified in Burundi, namely: promoting good
governance, strengthening the rule of law and the
security sector and ensuring community recovery.
Based on those critical challenges, a number of
important peacebuilding priorities were identified.
Among other things, those included strengthening
national dialogue, continued efforts to include women
in the consolidation of peace, sustained political
support from countries in the region and strengthening
of the Government's ability to deliver on basic
services, inter alia through budgetary support.

The Peacebuilding Commission's engagement
with Burundi is now entering a new phase. The
Commission will, in the near future, finalize its work
plan and commence work on an integrated approach to
peacebuilding, clearly outlining Burundi's
commitments and the response to be provided by the
international community in critical areas. At the same
time, we should continue to work with the Government
to monitor progress in the critical areas already
identified. In that regard, I would like to welcome the
decision by the second Summit of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region to establish a
regional follow-up mechanism - to include a
Conference secretariat - and to establish its offices in
Bujumbura. I am sure that the Peacebuilding
Commission would like to discuss how we can also
support peacebuilding in that regional perspective.

On 29 January, at the African Union Summit held
in Addis Ababa, the Secretary-General formally
announced a Peacebuilding Fund country envelope of
$35 million for Burundi. I welcome that development.
In the Peacebuilding Commission, we must now decide
how we can build on that and achieve a catalytic effect.
We recognize, of course, that funding through the
Peacebuilding Fund can only provide initial support.
Much more will be needed from other sources.

Donor per capita assistance to Burundi remains
low. The international community must support
national efforts to address the priorities and gaps
identified by the Government. The upcoming donors'
round table to be held at Bujumbura from 15 to
16 March will provide an opportunity to respond to
those challenges. The Peacebuilding Commission
would obviously like to consider that event and discuss
how integrated peacebuilding efforts can complement
the results of the round table.

Let me also offer a very brief national point of
view. We are humbled by the enormous challenges
facing Burundi. The Norwegian Government is
committed to doing what it can in order to achieve
durable peace and economic development. The visit to
Burundi by Norway's Minister for Development
Cooperation last month laid the groundwork for a
bilateral programme in support of development and
peacebuilding. In consequence, Norway will in the
near future establish an embassy in Bujumbura.

To sum up, successful peacebuilding will
necessitate sustained political and material support in
the years to come, from all stakeholders: the United
Nations system, the international financial institutions,
donors, civil society and regional actors. Similarly,
continued national ownership will be key, based on an
inclusive approach within which all relevant segments
of society can contribute.

