Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the Nordic countries - Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Norway and my own country, Sweden.

First, I would like to thank the French presidency
very much for the continued focus of the Security
Council on this important topic, especially today for
highlighting the question of non-State armed groups.
We would also like to acknowledge the crucial role
played by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Leila Zerrougui and her Office, as well as the
work of UNICEF, other United Nations agencies and, of
course, the many non-governmental organizations that
are doing very important work in the field.

This is a timely, highly relevant and very important
debate. As was stated in last year's report of the
Secretary-General (S/2014/339), 51 of 59 parties to
armed conflict that have been found to perpetrate grave
violations against children are non-State armed groups.

The appalling violations by these - such as the mass
abduction of 276 schoolgirls in Chibok by Boko Haram,
of the 153 Kurdish boys from Ain al-Arab in Syria, and
the hundreds of Yezidi children in western Iraq by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, and the slaughter
of schoolchildren in Peshawar, Pakistan - have left no
one untouched. A crime against a child is an affront to
our basic value of human decency. We have failed those
children Flagrant violations like those just mentioned
need to be prevented and combated.

Women, girls and boys are among the most
vulnerable people in conflict-affected settings, and
we therefore call for dedicated attention to sexual and
gender-based violence. Children continue to be subject
to such unspeakable violations, such as rape, sexual
violence, sexual slavery and forced marriages. We
also know that reintegration into society is especially
difficult for child victims. Further attention is needed
to help children, adolescents and their communities in
these areas. We also need to continue to highlight the fact
that the recruitment and use of children as combatants
in armed conflict are war crimes. As recommended
through the Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children
in armed conflict, we also encourage States to refrain
from recruiting children under the age of 18 into their
armed forces in order to set an example.

Children's right to quality education in war and
disaster is a vital part of protecting children during
conflict. Attending school can create a sense of
normality in an otherwise chaotic situation. Attacks on
schools deprive children may amount to war crimes.
We very much welcome efforts to deter the use of
schools by armed forces and non-State armed groups
in contravention of international law. We encourage all
States to engage in the ongoing consultations on a Safe
Schools Declaration.

The fight against impunity and assuring victim's
access to justice remain crucial. Crimes against
children must be investigated and prosecuted to
the full extent of the law. Individual responsibility
must be upheld, and this means that all perpetrators
must be held accountable and punished accordingly,
regardless of their status or capacity. The International
Criminal Court plays an important role in ensuring
accountability, and we welcome the initiative of the
Prosecutor's Office to develop a comprehensive policy
paper on children. We must not forget, however, that
States themselves bear the primary responsibility for
protecting their populations, including children, from
crimes.

It is essential that personnel in peacekeeping
missions have adequate training in the rights of the
child, including through predeployment training in
child protection. We are therefore happy to inform
that Sweden is once again planning to host a United
Nations child protection training-of-trainers course at
the Swedish Armed Forces International Centre this
autumn.

Children are particularly vulnerable in humanitarian
crises. We would welcome a particular focus on
protection in general and child protection in particular
in the run-up to World Humanitarian Summit. We note
the necessity of intensified dialogue through various
channels with non-State actors to prevent violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law.

As has been mentioned, there is an economic and
social dimension to children joining armed groups, as
they may be driven by poverty or social exclusion. The
Nordic countries are very pleased that ending violence
against children is now one of the priorities of the post-
2015 agenda.

Before concluding, the Nordic countries would
like to congratulate the Special Representative on a
successful first year of the "Children, Not Soldiers"
campaign, which aims to end the recruitment and use
of children in conflict by 2016, as endorsed by the
Council, and which we wholeheartedly support. It is a
victory for the campaign that six out of seven countries
concerned have now signed or recommitted to action
plans.

