Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): India
welcomes the initiative taken by the United States to
convene a meeting of the Security Council on nuclear
security. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his briefing.

India fully shares international concerns about the
serious threat posed by nuclear terrorism and
clandestine proliferation to international security. In
recent years, there has been heightened awareness of
the threat of terrorists and traffickers seeking access to
nuclear material and technologies for malicious
purposes. Addressing that threat requires sustained
and effective international cooperation to supplement
responsible national actions.

India's resolution in the General Assembly on
measures to deny terrorists access to weapons of mass
destruction, which has been adopted by consensus
since 2002, and the recently extended work of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) are important in that regard. So
are international legal instruments on national security,
the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear
Material and its 2005 amendment, and the International
Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear
Terrorism. We support the universalization of those
instruments and the central role of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in strengthening the
international global nuclear security architecture.

We welcome the successful outcome of the
Nuclear Security Summit held on Seoul on 26 and
27 March 2012, which sets new benchmarks for
nuclear security and new frameworks for international
cooperation. India's Prime Minister participated in the
Summit. India has contributed to the Nuclear Security
Summit process, including by hosting a Sherpa
meeting in New Delhi this year.

While nuclear security is primarily a national
responsibility, there are benefits to supplementing
responsible national actions through sustained and
effective international cooperation.

We have made progress in the establishment of
the global centre for nuclear energy partnership. The
physical infrastructure for the centre is being set up,
and cooperation agreements have been signed with
several countries and the IAEA. Off-campus courses
are already under way.

India will contribute $1 million to the IAEA's
Nuclear Security Fund for the years 2012 and 2013 and
will participate in the Agency's 2013 International
Coordinating Conference on various nuclear security
activities, including the Global Initiative to Combat
Nuclear Terrorism, of which we are a member.

India intends to host a 1540 workshop this year to
strengthen its implementation. We believe that the best
guarantee of nuclear security is a world free of nuclear
weapons. The Rajiv Gandhi action plan, submitted
nearly 25 years ago, remains the most comprehensive
and elaborate proposal to achieve the objective of
global nuclear disarmament in a time-bound
framework.

Attaining the goal of a nuclear-weapon-free
world will require commitments embedded in an
agreed multilateral framework involving all States
possessing nuclear weapons. This should include
measures to reduce nuclear dangers by reducing the
salience of nuclear weapons in security doctrines and
by increasing universal restraints on the first use of
nuclear weapons. Working towards the common goal of
a world free of nuclear weapons will require a steadfast
commitment to multilateralism, which has proved its
worth in the case of conventions banning two other
categories of weapons of mass destruction.

The United Nations disarmament machinery,
especially the Conference on Disarmament as the
single multilateral disarmament negotiating forum,
should play its role. We support the early
commencement of negotiations in the Conference of
Disarmament in Geneva on a fissile material cut-off
treaty, which has since 1993 been envisaged as a
significant contribution to non-proliferation in all its
aspects.

States should fully and effectively implement the
obligations arising from the agreements and treaties to
which they are parties. The role of the Security Council
should be in accordance with the Charter and
applicable provisions of international agreements that
provide for such a role. India has never been a source
of proliferation of sensitive technologies. We are
determined to further strengthen our export control
systems to keep them on a par with the highest
international standards. We have already adhered to the
guidelines of the Nuclear Suppliers Group and the
Missile Technology Control Regime.

As a country with the ability and willingness to
promote global non-proliferation objectives, we
believe that the next logical step is India's membership
in the four export control regimes. All States have the
right to develop and utilize nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes, in accordance with the international
obligations they have undertaken. Given India's
growing energy demands, we see nuclear energy as an
important component of our energy mix. We are taking
forward our three-stage nuclear programme based on a
closed-fuel cycle, with new safety features and
proliferation-resistant technologies. Our goal is to
generate 62,000 megawatts from nuclear energy by
2032. We are determined that our expanding nuclear
power programme will follow the highest standards of
nuclear safety and security.

We hope that this meeting of the Security Council
will help draw attention to the challenges posed by
nuclear terrorism and reinforce national and
international commitments to strengthen nuclear
security and contribute to the enhancement of the
global nuclear security architecture.

