Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Over the past five years, issues relating to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict have been a
constant focus for the United Nations and for the
Security Council. Despite the existence of a whole
arsenal of international human rights instruments and
international humanitarian law, completely innocent
civilians continue to suffer, including women, children,
the elderly and members of what have come to be
called vulnerable groups, as well as the humanitarian
personnel who are there to help them.

The protection of civilians requires coordinated
international, regional and national efforts. Here, we
must remember that the protection of civilians has
human rights and humanitarian dimensions. Obviously,
the humanitarian component is at present in the
greatest demand, especially as part of a comprehensive
crisis-prevention strategy in the phase of post-conflict
settlement. Humanitarian activities should definitely be
based on the norms of the United Nations Charter and
basic humanitarian principles; to a great degree, their
effectiveness will depend on the way in which the
international community includes them in efforts to
find political settlements.

We thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report on this item (S/2004/431), which
contains a thorough analysis of the situation in a
number of specific countries and of the reasons for
violations of international humanitarian law during
armed conflict. It also offers recommendations on how
to enhance the protection of civilian populations.

We note with satisfaction the progress made
towards enhancing the effectiveness and efficiency of
measures in this sphere, with an eye to the changing
trends and the resulting new conditions with respect to
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. One recent
example of that approach - including in the context of
eliminating impunity - was the establishment of the
International Criminal Court, whose activities are
intended to supplement national legislation.

With good reason, the report notes that the
Security Council is making increasing use of a regional
approach to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. Here, we have questions relating to statistical
and methodological aspects of certain parts of the
report, notably those pertaining to the safety and
security of humanitarian personnel. In our View, it is
wrong to group together situations in countries or
regions when the conflicts in each case are entirely
different in nature. And we see no basis for listing
countries where the situations cannot be defined as
armed conflicts in terms of the Geneva Conventions
and their Additional Protocols. This only creates
confusion and gives rise to a fallacious impression of
the true situation.

Machinery for early warning, for eliminating war
and for preventing conflict is the key element in
ensuring the protection of civilians. It is important that
efforts in that sphere be properly coordinated so that in

the protection of civilians - as in other areas - there
be a strict division of labour consistent with the United
Nations Charter and other international legal
instruments. States Members of the United Nations should
be more efficient in reporting to the Council relevant
information on situations that could pose a threat to
international peace and security, including instances of
deliberate refusal to humanitarian personnel of safe,
unimpeded access to civilians, refusal to provide
civilians with humanitarian assistance and other
flagrant violations of the rights of civilians.

We believe that a useful exchange of views on
improving the civilian-protection activities of the
Security Council and other United Nations bodies will
lend further momentum to progress in this area.

