Mr. Al-Bader (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, I am pleased to see you among us here
today presiding over the Council, and I would like to
congratulate you on behalf of the delegation of Qatar
for the outstanding performance of your delegation,
which is presiding over the Council this month. I wish
you every success in carrying out that task in the best
possible way.

Today's meeting comes at a time when a number
of countries endowed with natural resources are in the
grip of conflicts and are host to United Nations
peacekeeping operations. Sadly, this phenomenon is
not new. It is merely a contemporary version of an old
story that dates back to the second half of the last
century. Back then, the main incentive for embarking
on adventures beyond national borders was the race to
control and exploit the natural resources of developing
countries.

At the outset, I would like to state the following
facts. First, the topic of natural resources does not fall
within the Security Council's competence and mandate,
as set forth and defined by the United Nations Charter.
Rather, this topic lies at the heart of the competence
and mandates of the Economic and Social Council and
the General Assembly. Dealing with this topic in the
Security Council infringes on the prerogatives of both
bodies and undermines the democratic principles of the
United Nations. We do not approve of extending the
authority of the Security Council to cover State
resources by linking natural resources to issues of
international peace and security.

Secondly, the principles of national political and
economic independence depend on a State being able
to exercise its full and undiminished right to self-
determination and full sovereignty over its natural
resources in the interest of the development and well-
being of its people. International law has ensured the
absolute right of every State to dispose of its natural
wealth and resources, in accordance with its national
interests. Accordingly, endowing the Security Council
with authority over those resources contravenes
international law and diminishes the sovereignty of
States over their natural resources by subjecting it to a
global strategy.

Thirdly, on 14 December 1962, the General
Assembly adopted resolution 1803 (XVII). This
resolution was entitled "Permanent sovereignty over
natural resources". It indicated, among other things,
that "The right of peoples and nations to permanent
sovereignty over their natural wealth and resources
must be exercised in the interest of their national
development and of the well-being of the people of the
State concerned".

Fourthly, and in the same vein, General Assembly
resolution 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, entitled
"Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States",
primarily defines in its chapter I the principles
governing economic, as well as political, relations
among States. Article 2(1) of chapter II entitled
"Economic Rights and Duties of States" also says that
"Every State has and shall freely exercise full
permanent sovereignty, including possession, use and
disposal, over all its wealth, natural resources and
economic activities".

It is worth drawing attention to the following:
article 1, paragraphs 1 and 2, of the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
(1966), and of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights (1966); the United Nations Charter;
and the international rules governing the issue of
natural resources in situations of military occupation,
which require the occupying Power not to exploit
natural resources in occupied territories and not to
cause any damage thereto.

Bearing all this in mind, we would like to stress
that the root causes of most conflict situations today
are due, not to natural resources, but rather to various
international and domestic political reasons.

When reviewing the reports of the Secretary-
General on the causes of conflict in Africa, we find that
he attributes the causes of conflict to the different
stages of economic development and different policies
and patterns of internal and international interaction
and regional variables. The reports also touch on the
cumulative outcomes of the colonial era. While those
reports also refer to natural resources, they do not
focus on them as a root cause of conflict.

In the light of that historical background, it would
have been more useful for us to address the

relationship between natural resources and
development. A case in point is Africa, which is a
major producer of basic commodities. Commodity-
based economies are currently booming in Africa, due
to increasing demand from countries that have fast-
growing regions, including India and China. In that
respect, developed countries can play an extremely
constructive role by integrating developing countries
into world trade, facilitating access for their exports to
the world markets and providing preferential treatment
for them, facilitating the transfer of technology, and
increasing official development assistance and debt
relief. They can also support the South-South
cooperation strategy as part of the Tripartite Technical
Cooperation for development. In this way, they would
assist many resource-endowed countries, especially in
Africa, by boosting the growth engines in those
countries, so that they can progress quickly towards
achieving the Millennium Development Goals.

A country's natural resources should not be a
source of affliction for it. It is crucial that we avoid
repeating the history of the painful colonial era. Rather
than approach the issue of natural resources as a source
of conflict, we must include it in the development
agenda of the United Nations.

Thus, it would be more useful for States to
discuss the issue of natural resources in the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council, in the
context of the development agenda, rather than here in
the Security Council. Such an approach would enable
the developing countries to manage their natural
resources without foreign trusteeships or interference,
in a way that serves their national interests, and within
the framework of a just international economic order.

