Mr. Repkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Assistant Secretary-General
Oscar Fernandez-Taranco, Mr. Smai'l Chergui,
African Union Commissioner for Peace and
Security, and Mr. Jiirg Lauber, Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission and
Permanent Representative of Switzerland, for their
comprehensive briefings.

To be frank, we do not quite understand the
motives that led our colleagues on the Security Council
to insist on holding today's meeting. We all know that
it has happily been a long time since the international
community received any alarming news from Burundi.
From diplomats in Bujumbura we know that the situation
there is calm and that the trend is towards normalization.
We want to point to the stable security situation, the
significant reduction in violence, including the attacks
on civilian infrastructure by the radical opposition.
Refugees from neighbouring countries are returning to
Burundi, and the speed of that process depends entirely
on the availability of resources for settling them.

We want to once again remind the Council of a
key event in the inter-Burundian settlement that took
place a year ago. The constitutional referendum was
conducted in a calm environment with the participation
of an overwhelming majority of Burundi's population.
We note that the constitutional reform was supported
by a majority of voters - more than 73 per cent - and
the referendum itself was preceded by a democratic and
transparent information campaign.

We once again call for respect for Burundi's
sovereignty. The Russian Federation is categorically
opposed to any interference in the country's internal
affairs, including in the context of the parliamentary and
presidential elections scheduled for 2020. As we know,
the people of Burundi are already actively preparing
for the elections. More specifically, plans are already in
place to finance the elections from the national budget.
The Independent National Electoral Commission is
functioning, and the Parliament has enacted changes to
the electoral code by an overwhelming majority. It is
also important that there is ongoing dialogue among the
country's political forces, as evidenced by the adoption
of the Kayanza road map by a majority of the political
parties. We urge the authorities and the opposition to
refrain from mutually negative rhetoric and to focus
on preparing for elections. The initial reason for the
dispute among Burundi's political forces is long gone.
President Nkurunziza has made repeated promises that
he will not run in the upcoming elections.

We believe that at the moment Burundi's national
Government is in particular need of support on the
socioeconomic front. In that regard, we welcome
Bujumbura's adoption of a national development
plan for the period from 2018 to 2027. We believe
that further progress in that area could be facilitated
by lifting the economic sanctions on Burundi, in full
concurrence with the decisions of the African Union
Summits held in Nouakchott in July 2018 and Addis
Ababa in February of this year.

In general, we firmly believe that the situation in
Burundi does not pose a threat to international peace and
security. The Security Council's continued attention to
it has long been counterproductive, and our discussions
have done nothing but help the unreconciled opposition
make the country's internal political processes more
difficult. It is essential that we take Burundi off the
Council's already overburdened agenda.

