Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Madam President, for
holding this open debate and for choosing its important
topic to enhance the efforts to combat terrorism and
terrorism financing and support in all its forms. I would
also like to congratulate your friendly country on its
successful presidency of the Security Council this
month and on the adoption of resolution 2462 (2019). I
also thank the briefers for their valuable contributions.

When we talk about combating extremism and
terrorism we always hear that we need to address the
root causes that allow terrorists to spread their extremist
ideology and pursue their destructive acts. Terrorism is
spreading mainly because it continues to receive funds
and support from individuals, entities and countries.
Despite the best efforts ofthe international community to
put in place strategies to track and eradicate the sources
of financing for terrorism - and despite national,
regional and international legislation to hold those who
fund terrorism accountable - supporters of terrorism
continue to find new means of funding terrorist acts and
avoiding censorship. Therefore, financing terrorism
remains one of the obstacles to saving the world from
this scourge. The Islamic Republic of Iran continues to
support and finance terrorism in the region.

The Kingdom of Bahrain has had successful and
long experiences in combating terrorism financing and
putting an end to suspicious financial transactions. We
are willing to exchange that expertise with friendly
countries and continue our cooperation with all States
and international organizations to end that scourge.
We believe it is important to strengthen international
efforts to combat terrorism financing. We must also dry
up the sources of terrorism because halting terrorism
financing is an important aspect in the overall fight
against terrorism. Therefore, we need deterrent
mechanisms to eliminate all sources of funding for
terrorist groups.

Our frameworks at the national level to combat
terrorism funding in Bahrain include several laws,
mainly Law No.4 of2001, on prohibiting and countering
money laundering, and Law No. 25 and Law No. 54. In
addition, Law No. 7 of 2017 deals with ratifying the
Arab Convention on Combating Money Laundering
and Terrorist Financing.

The Kingdom of Bahrain continues to play a role
in countering terrorism. In 2014 and 2015 we hosted
the Manama Meeting on Combating the Financing of
Terrorism, with the participation of representatives
from the United Nations, the International Monetary
Fund, the European Commission and the Financial
Action Task Force (FATF), as well as the Middle
East and North Africa Financial Action Task Force,
whose headquarters is in Bahrain. We are addressing
the challenges related to combating the financing
of terrorist groups and terrorist activities in all their
forms and manifestations. The Manama Meeting issued
recommendations in line with international law and the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
notably with regard to investigating and tracking
terrorism financing by groups and individuals, as well
as fully implementing financial sanctions with the
positive involvement of the private sector in the efforts
pertaining to terrorism financing.

The Kingdom of Bahrain fully participates in the
international framework to combat the financing of
terrorism through many means, including by joining
the international network of regional organizations
similar to the FATF. We also participate effectively in
all the meetings held by the global coalition to defeat
Da'esh and combat terrorism financing in order to dry
up its sources of funding by implementing a joint action
plan among the countries of the coalition.

One of the most prominent activities conducted
by the Kingdom of Bahrain, in cooperation with
the Central Bank, was the eighth Gulf European
workshop on counter-terrorism financing. Another
workshop on charitable contributions and combating
terrorism financing as well as violent extremism was
held in cooperation with the Central Bank, the Gulf
Cooperation Council and the United States of America.
The Kingdom of Bahrain also participated in the tenth
meeting of the Counter ISIS Finance Group, held in
Poland in September 2018. As a member ofthe Terrorist
Financing Targeting Centre, headed by the United
States and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, we discussed
the guidelines on tracking the sources of terrorism
financing and the role of the Centre's Executive
Committee and its decision-making mechanism for
designating individuals and entities funding terrorist
actions. During the general meeting of the FATF and
the meetings of the working group in Paris in June
2018, the mutual evaluation report of Bahrain was
adopted, whose aim is to implement measures to combat
terrorism financing worldwide.

In conclusion, the Kingdom of Bahrain would like
to highlight its adoption of a comprehensive approach
to combating terrorism and terrorism financing. We
will strengthen our national and collective participation
to combat terrorism financing. We stand ready to work
with the international community to dry up the sources
of terrorist funding and combat terrorist ideologies
so that we can all enjoy safety and security through
our partnership in maintaining international peace
and security.

