The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on their behalf:

"The Security Council recalls its press
statement SC/lO607, of 13 April 2012, and
reiterates its strong condemnation of the military
coup by the military leadership and political
elements in Guinea-Bissau, thereby undermining
the conclusion of the legitimate presidential
electoral process.

"The Security Council rejects the
unconstitutional establishment of a Transitional
National Council by the military leadership and
its supporters.

"The Security Council demands the
immediate restoration of the constitutional order
as well as the reinstatement of the legitimate
Government of Guinea-Bissau. The Security
Council further demands the immediate and
unconditional release of the interim President
Raimundo Pereira, Prime Minister Carlos Gomes
Junior and all officials currently detained in order
to enable the completion of the presidential and
legislative elections. In this regard, the Council
welcomes the decision of the African Union
Peace and Security Council to suspend, with
immediate effect, Guinea-Bissau from the African
Union until the effective restoration of
constitutional order.

"The Security Council underlines the need
to ensure the safety and security of those detained
and that those responsible for violent and illegal
acts must be held accountable.

"The Security Council is deeply concerned
by reports of violent repression of peaceful
demonstrations, looting, restriction of freedom of
movement, the arbitrary detention of civilians and
demands their release. The Council calls on the
military leadership to release information on the
number of arrests and the names and whereabouts
of those arrested and further calls upon the
military to protect human rights, including the
rights to freedom of movement, peaceful
assembly and expression.

"The Security Council welcomes and
supports the active engagement and measures
undertaken by the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
and the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries (CPLP), and encourages the
coordination of these efforts for the immediate
restoration of the constitutional order in Guinea-
Bissau.

"The Security Council urges Guinea-
Bissau's partners to further strengthen these
efforts and requests the Secretary-General to
support these endeavours, namely through his
Special Representatives.

"The Council stands ready to consider
possible further measures, including targeted
sanctions against the perpetrators and supporters
of the military coup, should the situation remain
unresolved.

"The Security Council takes note of the
African Union's decision to initiate consultations
with ECOWAS, the CPLP, the United Nations
and other partners on possible additional means
necessary for the stabilization of the country, in
consultation with the legitimate Government of
Guinea-Bissau.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to keep it informed on
developments in Guinea-Bissau and to submit a
report by 30 April 2012, concerning the
re-establishment of the constitutional order in
Guinea-Bissau.

"The Security Council stresses that the
recurrence of illegal interference of the military
in politics contributes to the persistence of
instability and a culture of impunity, and hampers
efforts towards consolidation of the rule of law,
implementation of security sector reform,
promotion of development and entrenchment of a
democratic culture. In this regard, the Council
welcomes the efforts of the Peacebuilding
12-30441
Commission country-specific configuration and
of the Angolan bilateral mission (MISSANG) in
pursuit of peace and stability in the country.

"The members of the Security Council
emphasize the need to uphold and respect the
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of
Guinea-Bissau.
12-30441
"The Security Council will remain actively
seized of the matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/20l2/ 15.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 11.15 a.m.
