Mr. Zhukov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to join in condemning the
criminal terrorist actions carried out today in Abuja,
which we condemn unconditionally and steadfastly. We
express sincere condolences to the Nigerian delegation
and through it to the Government of Nigeria to the
families of the bereaved, and to all staff of the United
Nations Secretariat regarding this crime.

We thank the Indian delegation for convening
today's important and timely meeting on peacekeeping
operations. The Russian Federation attaches great
significance to United Nations peacekeeping and
considers it an important instrument in ensuring
international peace and security - hence our
willingness and desire to actively help in those efforts.
Russian peacekeepers participate in peacekeeping
operations in the Middle East, in various African
regions and in Haiti.

United Nations peacekeeping is needed as never
before. Recently the Council took a decision on
deploying a new peacekeeping operation in the region
of Abyei in the Sudan. There has been an important
reorganization in the presence of the blue helmets in
the young Republic of South Sudan.

Two thirds of the total number of peacekeepers
are uniformed and play a leading role in meeting such
complex challenges as supporting efforts of national
governments to stabilize a situation and strengthen
peace, ensuring the protection of civilians, and
monitoring ceasefire compliance.

United Nations peacekeeping efforts continue to
evolve both conceptually and operationally. That will
help in expeditiously handling emerging problems and
effectively reacting to new political realities. Given the
increased number of complex peacekeeping operations,
in the past few years the Organization has experienced
an ever-growing demand on its resources and
consequently encountered an unprecedented number of
challenges. It is clear that resolving these issues
requires the interest and involvement of Member
States.

The recent situations encountered by the blue
helmets have again confirmed the nature of
fundamental peacekeeping principles. Peacekeepers
must strictly follow their mandates and remain neutral
and must not be drawn into intra-political conflicts or
provide support to any of the parties in the conflict, as
that could jeopardize the reputation of the world
organization.
The problem of ensuring the required level of
military expertise has not yet been resolved in
measures taken within United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Once again we reiterate our proposal to
step up the work of the Military Staff Committee.
The task of improving United Nations
peacekeeping requires more effective use of the
resources of regional organizations. Of course, the
mandates of peacekeeping operations must be clear,
implementable and adequate for the situation. The lack
of financial and material resources dictates the need for
optimal use of existing capabilities. In current
peacekeeping mandates, it is important to clearly
delineate the functions of peacekeeping and support for
post-conflict peacebuilding. United Nations
peacekeepers should be tasked only with initial
peacebuilding duties. Processes supporting
socioeconomic development should be more actively
undertaken by specialized United Nations agencies and
regional organizations.

We share the View that there is a need for ongoing
dialogue between the Council and troop-contributing
countries (TCCs) on all aspects of the work of
peacekeeping operations, including at the planning and
mandate-development stages. Interaction with TCCs
will allow the Council to develop clearer and more
realistic peacekeeping goals, with strict monitoring of
their implementation, and to curb attempts to broaden
their interpretation.

We hope that today's meeting will confirm our
common interest in further improving the effectiveness
of United Nations peacekeeping operations, which
must be undertaken in compliance with the Charter of
the United Nations, the norms of international law, and
unfailing regard for the primary responsibility of the
Security Council for the maintenance of international
peace and security. This is the political guarantee of the
successful conduct of operations.

We would like to thank India for having prepared
the draft presidential statement, which we fully
support.

