Ms. Rice (United States of America): The United
States welcomes the Council's decision to impose new
sanctions on Eritrea. Today we have sent a clear
message to the Government of Eritrea that it must
cease all illegal actions threatening international peace
and stability in the Horn of Africa.

In adopting this resolution, we should recall the
events that led us to this decision. Exactly two years
ago this month, the Council adopted resolution 1907
(2009) in response to a disturbing pattern of behaviour.
Eritrea was not engaging constructively in resolving its
border dispute with Djibouti and most alarmingly, it
was providing political, financial and logistical support
to armed groups seeking to undermine peace in
Somalia. The Council imposed targeted sanctions on
Eritrea to demonstrate that Eritrea's actions were
unacceptable and would have negative consequences.

That was two years ago. What has happened
since? As we have heard again this morning, we have
continued to receive evidence of Eritrean support for
extremist groups in the region. Eritrea still has not
resolved its border dispute with Djibouti. The United
Nations Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea has
documented Eritrea's support for terrorism, including
an appalling planned attack on the January 2011
African Union summit in Addis Ababa. According to
the Monitoring Group, Eritrea is financing all of those
activities through illicit means, including threats and
the extortion of a diaspora tax from people of Eritrean
descent living overseas.

In direct response, the Council has today imposed
tougher sanctions. Our goal is to show Eritrea that it
will pay an ever higher price for its actions. Building
on resolution 1907 (2009), the resolution just adopted
imposes new obligations on Eritrea, including the
obligation to cease illicit practices aimed at extorting
funds from its diaspora.

We particularly welcome the Council's
expression of concern over the potential use of mining
revenues to fund violations of Security Council
resolutions. The United States will work with the
Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea and the
Sanctions Committee regarding Somalia and Eritrea to
develop voluntary guidelines for companies from the
United States and other Member States. Such
guidelines could provide useful advice, best practices
and information to help companies protect themselves
from inadvertently contributing to Eritrea's violations.
We intend to draw on that work in advising our own
companies.

In addition to the obligations set forth in this and
in previous United Nations resolutions, today's
resolution 2023 (2011) provides further opportunities
for Eritrea to show its good faith, including by
releasing information on the status of Djiboutian
combatants missing in action since June 2008. Eritrea
must cease all direct and indirect efforts to destabilize
States, particularly through support for armed
opposition and terrorist groups, and it should cooperate
fully with the Monitoring Group on Somalia and
Eritrea.

We hope that this tightening of sanctions will
finally convince the Government of Eritrea to reorder
its priorities. The United States believes that the
international community's concerns can and should be
resolved through political engagement and dialogue.
But Eritrea must clearly and affirmatively prove, not
through its words but through its actions, that it is
ready to re-emerge as a law-abiding State.

Until that time, the Council and United Nations
Member States are committed to enforcing robustly the
sanctions we have applied. We hope that Eritrea will
not squander this second chance to change course.

