Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Alain Le
Roy for his briefing on the situation in Afghanistan.
China expresses its readiness to fully support the work
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and of the newly appointed
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, who has already taken up his
duties in Afghanistan.

Last year, Afghanistan successfully held
presidential elections, representing a major step
forward towards governance by the Afghan people of
their country. Thanks to the joint efforts of the Afghan
Government and the international community, positive
results were achieved at the international conferences
on Afghanistan in Istanbul and London earlier this
year. Now that Afghanistan has entered a critical
transition phase, the international community should
remain focused on that country, increase support and
assistance, and lay the groundwork for full transition to
governance by the Afghan people through the
enhancement of Afghanistan's sovereignty, autonomy
and capacity for development.

The turbulent security situation is a prominent
challenge to Afghanistan's reconstruction. Integrated
approaches should be adopted to improve the security
situation there. While working to strengthen the
capacity of the Afghan army and police, the
international community must also further advance the
process of national reconciliation led by the Afghan
Government so as to consolidate and expand the
political basis for achieving peace and stability. The
transfer of security responsibilities to the Afghan
Government should be carried out in a progressive,
prudent and well-planned way under the precondition
of ensuring the security and stability of the country.

The key to the long-term security and stability of
Afghanistan lies in the development of its economy
and the improvement of people's lives. The further

implementation of the Afghan National Development
Strategy has led to a recovery of its agriculture, an
increase in foreign investment, the rapid growth of its
economy and the steady rise of Government revenue.
The international community should further increase
support for the implementation of the National
Development Strategy so that more Afghans can
benefit from the development dividend. Donors and
relevant international agencies should respect the
autonomy of Afghanistan in economic reconstruction
and encourage the enthusiasm and initiative of the
Afghan Government and people.

We support the country by providing more
assistance to the Afghan Government in order to
enhance its capacity for self-development. We support
the United Nations continued leading and coordinating
role in the reconstruction of Afghanistan. We highly
appreciate the outstanding performance of UNAMA in
fulfilling its mission under extremely difficult
conditions, and support the extension of its mandate for
another year.

The parliamentary elections in Afghanistan are
scheduled to take place in September, and we hope that
they will be held successfully. We support UNAMA's
provision of necessary electoral assistance in
accordance with its mandate.

As a friendly neighbour of Afghanistan, China
has actively supported, participated in and promoted
the peaceful reconstruction of Afghanistan. China has
already invited President Karzai to visit China from
21 to 25 March 2010. I believe that this visit will
achieve positive results.

In the future, China will continue to support
Afghanistan within the limits of its capabilities. We
believe that, with the energetic support of the
international community and through their own efforts,
the Afghan Government and people will eventually
reach the goal of peace and stability, independence and
self-reliance, development and progress, and friendship
and good relations with its neighbours.

