Mr. Zappala (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered shortly by the observer of the
European Union.

We thank today's briefers, and we congratulate
Poland on holding this open debate, which revolves
around the crucial issue of emphasizing the role that
law must play in international relations, particularly
when peace and security are at stake.

International law must be the common language
of our relationships. If we fail to uphold it, the
consequences, especially in the light of modern
weapons and present challenges, can be very serious
and potentially devastating for the future of humankind.

Sovereignty is at the heart of international law. And
yet sovereignty does not and cannot imply that anyone
can be above the law. Today we must strive to uphold
and promote a responsible concept of sovereignty,
one aimed at the well-being of people in a holistic
perspective, at sovereignty as accountability to present
and future generations and at protecting people 4 all
people - without discrimination, in full equality.

States have broad discretion in choosing
mechanisms to settle disputes and tackle challenges
to peace and security. However, it is imperative that
disputes be addressed and resolved peacefully. There
are too many that remain unresolved and situations
in which States do not engage in meaningful talks.
States should show good faith and goodwill to address
issues and settle their differences, including through
non-judicial means, provided that those are inspired by
adherence to fundamental legal principles.

As a follow-up to the 2012 high-level meeting of
the General Assembly on the rule of law at the national
and international levels, Italy accepted the jurisdiction
of the International Court of Justice, in accordance
with Article 36, paragraph 2, of the Statute of the
International Court of Justice. We encourage all States
to consider doing the same, so as to place international
law even more solidly at the centre of international
relations. That is an objective that we must pursue
together, each individual Member State, the Council and
the other organs of the Organization - in other words,

the international community as a whole. We all have
a duty to respect and promote respect for recognized
international public goods. International law is our
compass in identifying and preserving those common
goods and in further promoting the most fundamental
legal principles.

Italy, including during its chairship of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe this year, promotes respect for human rights,
fundamental freedoms and the rule of law, which are
aspects indissolubly tied to our security. In that regard,
we will continue to promote the universality and
indivisibility of all fundamental rights, in addition to
combating all forms of discrimination and intolerance.

This year we celebrate the seventieth anniversary
of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of
the Crime of Genocide and the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, as well as the seventieth anniversary
of the International Law Commission, which, on an
exceptional basis, is currently meeting in New York to
mark the occasion. It is also the twentieth anniversary
of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
(ICC).

Accountability for serious international crimes,
particularly those that threaten fundamental and
universally recognized norms, is one of those areas
where the international community should be more
united. In situations where peace and security are at
stake, if the Council fails to uphold international law,
there are strong risks that more chaos and disorder
will ensue. When the Council does not act - for
example, because of divergences among its permanent
members - there are situations where other organs
ultimately have to step in. That is what happened with
the establishment of the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, which
we support.

The Security Council could strongly contribute
to strengthening our collective engagement to ensure
respect for international law, as it did when it established
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda,
as well as their successor institution, the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. Today the
Council could promote accountability, for example,
by referring to the ICC situations in which war crimes
and crimes against humanity are perpetrated and by
supporting the Court, by limiting the veto power in
cases of mass atrocities or by establishing appropriate
subsidiary organs or procedures to provide for a prompt
and effective follow-up on reports of serious violations
of fundamental rules of international law.

Upholding international law has a unique
preventive power. We must work together to reinforce
that power by holding accountable those who violate
the international norms regulating our relations.

