Mr. Krivas (Lithuania): I would like to start by
thanking the Australian presidency of the Security
Council for organizing this highly pertinent debate.

A few days ago, the Islamic State of Iraq and
the Levant carried out yet another beheading of
a humanitarian worker, Abdul-Rahman, or Peter,
Kassig, which was a disgusting, barbaric act and has
been condemned by the Council. Terrorism brings
devastation and suffering to the countries and people
affected by it by killing, raping, enslaving, displacing,
and denying the most basic of rights to those who are
in the terrorists' way. The threat of terrorism knows no
boundaries as it spreads and mutates, affecting entire
regions.

The fact that terrorism and violent extremism
have been high on the Security Council's agenda and
that we meet here today in this high-level open debate
demonstrates the importance and urgency that this
body attaches to such threats. We appreciate the intent
of the Australian presidency to seize the momentum
and take stock of the progress made in implementing
recent decisions of the Council, while also discussing
a practical way forward. Presidential statement
S/PRST/2014/23, adopted today, is another important
step in that regard.

The constantly evolving nature and intensity of
the threat of terrorism and violent extremism have put
existing counter-terrorismmeasures to anunprecedented
test. Frameworks to tackle the threat existed long before
resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014) were adopted,
yet, as we heard from the briefers today, the actual
response still lags behind. Significant implementation
gaps persist, because ofa lack of capacity, resources or
political will, and efforts to bridge those gaps need to
be stepped up. At the same time, concrete means and
measures need to be updated and adapted in order to at
least match the level of innovation and dynamics on the
part of the terrorists themselves.

Addressing the radicalization process that leads
individuals to accept terrorist violence as an action of
choice is key to preventing new terrorists from emerging
and to dissuading and rehabilitating former terrorists.
We have already had several occasions to hear States
sharing their national experiences, which increasingly
encompass education, greater public engagement
and community outreach, in order to push back the
terrorist narratives and provide positive alternatives to
their schemes. Communities, traditional and religious
leaders, women, and surviving victims of terrorism,
education, community policing and mobilization can
contribute significantly to such efforts.
On the other hand, the use of social media and
modern communication technologies merits special
attention, as it poses significant new challenges when
used by terrorists. It also provides significant new
opportunities for spreading positive messaging to
counter the terrorist narrative. The United Nations itself
needs to step up its efforts to address violent extremism
and raise its visibility in that area, including through
strategic communications.

Mobility and flexibility, as highlighted by the
phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters, exacerbate
the threat of terrorism by providing it with a potentially
global reach. Identifying and interdicting individuals as
they travel to engage in fighting is often the last chance
to prevent them from turning into actual terrorists,
as well as a first step towards effective mitigation of
potential threats upon their return. Countries need to
step up their efforts to improve information-sharing
and their analytical capability at border crossings.
Wider and better use of INTERPOL databases must
be encouraged. Moreover, the capacities of States,
especially those neighbouring conflict zones, to control
their land borders need to be further strengthened.

It is also essential to step up efforts aimed at
disrupting terrorist financing. Terrorist organizations
increasingly rely on looting, illicit trade in antiquities
and protected species, poaching, kidnapping for ransom,
human trafficking and drug trafficking. Many of those
activities have links with international organized crime
networks. The ability of States to detect and prevent
terrorism financing in all its varieties is a crucial
component of counter-terrorism efforts. It is especially
relevant with regard to the non-profit sector, alternative
remittance systems, cross-border movements of cash
and the ability to freeze funds and assets linked to
terrorism.

The foregoing arejust a few ofthe many interrelated
areas where progress could contribute to the suppression
of terrorism, both tangibly and durably. In that regard,
preventive measures are a long-term investment, as
reducing the vulnerability of States and strengthening
the resilience of societies to terrorist threats often
prove to be more effective, also in the areas of conflict
prevention and conflict resolution.

The United Nations system as a Whole plays a
central role in leading international efforts aimed at
suppressing terrorism and ensuring the coherence of
responses. We recognize linkages with the recently
revised United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and the benefits of closer and more coherent
coordination among the various United Nations bodies
tasked with its implementation. Moreover, we see great
potential in the cooperation with and among various
international, regional and subregional organizations,
such as the European Union, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, NATO and the
Global Counterterrorism Forum.

However, the essential element of all those
efforts remains the long-term commitment of States.
While various multilateral bodies are in a position
to monitor States' implementation of relevant
international obligations and help them identify and
overcome existing gaps, effective measures to counter
terrorism must correspond to national circumstances,
be nationally led, but also remain open to genuine
international cooperation.

