Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I thank you, Madam President, for holding this
important meeting. We would like to thank the Chairs
of the subsidiary bodies for their briefings.

Six months have passed since the most recent
briefing by the three Chairs of the subsidiary bodies
(see S/PV.7071). In the course of that time, my country,
the Syrian Arab Republic, and dozens of other Member
States such as Iraq, Lebanon, Egypt, Libya, Yemen, the
Russian Federation, China, Kenya, Nigeria, Pakistan
and others have experienced brutal terrorist attacks.
The attacks have been of various types and committed
by various groups, yet they are united in their abhorrent
and criminal terrorist approach and blind radicalism.

Just a few days ago, Jabhat al-Nusra, a terrorist
organization that has been designated as such by
the Security Council counter-terrorism committees,
detonated two car bombs in the Old City ofHoms to deter
the efforts of the Government at national reconciliation.
Dozens of innocent civilians died. Regrettably, the
reports of senior officials of the Secretariat, some
reports of the Secretary-General and statements made
by certain colleagues in the Council describe Jabhat
al-Nusra as an armed opposition group in Syria. Some
still use that expression in this very Council.

Those terrorist acts have demonstrated their
perpetrators' ability to launch further terrorist attacks
despite the efforts deployed at the national, regional
and international levels to combat terrorism. Terrorist
organizations utilize the circumstances in some Member
States to find new bases for themselves, benefiting from
the failure of the Governments of some Member States
to meet their obligations and from the support provided
to them by those Governments and our Organization,
which are of the view that the ends justifies the means
and that terrorism may be an effective means to serve
their foreign policies and interventionist interests that
they seek to achieve at the expense ofinnocent lives.

We express our condolences and sympathy to the
victims of terrorism, and we are of the view that the
lives taken and the bloodshed resulting from such
terrorist acts must compel us to act seriously and
abide by international calls to combat terrorism. The
United Nations represents the main international forum
for coordinating and fostering international efforts
designed to eradicate the threat terrorism poses to
international peace and security, the safety and stability
of States and the prosperity of peoples. Success in that
endeavour necessitates, first and foremost, eschewing
anything that would undermine the role and credibility
of the United Nations, such as politicizing the efforts
to combat terrorism, seeking to excuse the perpetrators
of terrorist acts, or classifying terrorism as "halal
terrorism", or lawful terrorism, and "haram terrorism",
or unlawful terrorism. Terrorism is terrorism, regardless
of where it happens and who perpetrates it.

The abduction by Boko Haram of innocent Nigerian
girls is a contemptible and condemnable action. The
abductions carried out by terrorist groups acting in
Syria have harmed hundreds of women and children
and are condemnable and shameful acts.

Only two days ago, in Idlib City, near the Turkish/
Syrian border, four suicide bombers from Jabhat
al-Nusra detonated themselves in vehicles carrying
several tons of explosives. That piece of news may
not sound surprising, but we should note that the first
suicide bomber was from the United States, the second
from the Maldives, the third from Turkestan and the
fourth from Syria.

The sister of Mohamed Merah, the terrorist killed in

Toulouse, left France for Syria without the knowledge of
the French authorities, who had had under supervision,
or so they claim. That terrorist is now in Syria and is
fighting alongside the terrorists - and some call them
"foreign fighters". Even some of my colleagues might
be ashamed of using terrorists, but they call them
foreign fighters. As long as the subject is terrorism in
Syria, these are not terrorists; they are called foreign
fighters. If, however, they are somewhere else, they are
called terrorists.

The terrorist acts committed by terrorists, radicals
and foreign mercenaries crossing our borders to wage
war on our country's territory are targeting Syria's
ancient civilization, State institutions, infrastructure
and services. They are targeting Syrians and their
schools, universities, hospitals, mosques, churches and
places of work. They have also attacked diplomatic
missions, foreign journalists and peacekeeping
personnel in the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force and humanitarian assistance convoys.
Yesterday, we witnessed an attack by terrorist groups
on a fact-finding team from the Organization for the
Prevention of Chemical Weapons on its way to verify
allegations of the use of chlorine gas in the village of
Kfar Zeita, north of Hama. This was done with the aim
of undermining faith in Syria's cooperation in the area
of eliminating chemical weapons and preventing the
team from doing its job. A doctor was also prevented
from going to the village to verify the use of toxic gas.

The terrorist groups' ongoing activities, including
the cutting off of drinking water and sewage services
for 3 million citizens in Aleppo, targeting schools
and universities with rockets and bombing an election
meeting are a direct result of the support they receive
from Governments of United Nations Member States
that turn a blind eye to their crimes, give them all sorts
of support and describe them as a moderate opposition.

We listened attentively to the briefings by the
Chairmen of the Security Council subsidiary bodies,
and we would like to emphasize the priority of the
following issues.

First, all Member States should be obliged to cease
giving any form or support or financing to terrorism,
in accordance with resolution 1373 (2001). They must
prevent their citizens, institutions and any businesses
operating in their territory from supporting such
terrorism. In that connection, I would like to refer to a
report issued by the Brookings Doha Center, headed by
the former Prime Minister of Qatar, which states that in
the autumn of 2011 some philanthropic societies were
subject to United States sanctions, and that influential
business leaders in the Gulf States have actively
worked to form and finance terrorist operations in

Syria. Residents in Kuwait, Saudi Arabia and Qatar
sent millions of dollars to finance terrorist acts that
resulted in the deaths of hundreds of Syrian civilians.

Secondly, radicalism and bigotry should be
combated regardless of their justifications. The
incitment to violence and terrorism in my country
encouraged by some States must end, in accordance
with resolution 1624 (2005). They must refrain from
disseminating hate speech, attempting to sow the
seeds of sedition and ethnic, factional and religious
proclivities.

Thirdly, radical and terrorist groups should be
prevented from acquiring the capacity to exploit the
media and modern technology, particularly the Internet,
in order to coordinate and implement terrorist acts,
glorify terrorism, spread terrorist propaganda, deceive
young people and seduce them into joining their ranks.

Fourthly, the efforts of terrorist groups to acquire
weapons of mass destruction and their means of
manufacture and delivery should be thwarted, in
accordance with resolution 1540 (2004). We should
be informed of the steps taken by the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) to
address the information it has received from the Syrian
Government on the acquisition by armed terrorist
groups of chemical weapons and the involvement of
some other States in the region in this matter.

Fifthly, terrorist organizations that are affiliated
with Al-Qaida should be placed on the lists of the
Committee pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) and 1989
(2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals
and entities, and should have sanctions imposed on
them similar to those already imposed on Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities. Borders should be
controlled and the flow of terrorists into Syria to fight
alongside terrorist organizations curbed. It is no secret
that foreign terrorists have been imported by certain
specific, well-known Governments of more than 80
States to run amok there. The total number of foreign
terrorists brought into Syria is larger than those who
have entered Iraq and Afghanistan. This phenomenon
is significant in that it has led to some States admitting
belatedly how enormous and grave the situation is
and the importance of finding the means to fight it
successfully.

Our delegation calls for more transparency in
the work of the counter-terrorism committees. Some
records circulated in closed meetings, in which Member
States have revealed major issues, indicate the degree
to which Syria's neighbouring States abide by the
provisions ofresolution 2118 (2013), as well as violations
ofresolution 1550 (2004), with these networks crossing
borders. The actions taken by the committees to deal
with such matters are not clear. We have received
no reply to the dozens of letters sent to the various
committees dedicated to countering the terrorism that
is battering my country on the involvement of specific
Governments in that terrorism.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to reiterate
that the States supporting the terrorism of which Syria
is the primary victim include Israel, which does not
need an academy of terrorism. It brought radicalism
and terrorism to the region along with Zionism and the
crimes perpetrated by its Zionist bands against all of
us. Those States also include Saudi Arabia and Qatar.
They are accomplices in the taking of Syrian lives.
My delegation appeals to the Council to shoulder its
responsibilities, to condemn those and other States, to
hold them and others that support terrorism accountable,
to force them to refrain from their subversive practices
and respect their obligations under international law and
the Charter of the United Nations. Foreign occupation
is the most dangerous form of aggression and terrorism,
and that is what Israel represents in the international
Organization.

