The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of the Russian Federation.

The issue of post-conflict peacebuilding has
never been more topical in the context of United
Nations activities, in particular those of the Security
Council. Experience shows that achieving lasting peace
and the effective resolution of armed conflicts is
possible only on the basis of a comprehensive
approach. This approach must include preventive and
peacekeeping efforts, along with peacebuilding
measures for post-conflict reconstruction, and ensure
continuity and consistency during the transition from
one phase to the next. Such an approach will allow us
to create firm guarantees of regional stability and the
non-renewal of conflict.

An important tangible result of the decisions
taken at the 2005 summit was the joint establishment
by the General Assembly and the Security Council of
the Peacebuilding Commission. This body, as this
morning's discussion has shown has considerable
practical potential and could become one of the
important mechanisms of international support for the
reconstruction of States that have experienced armed
conflicts.

In general, the Commission's work on Burundi
and Sierra Leone in its first six months of existence is
to be commended. We note the efforts of the Chairman
of the Organizational Committee of the Commission -
the Permanent Representative of Angola, Mr. Gaspar
Martins, and his two country coordinators, the
Permanent Representatives of Norway, Mr. Levald, and
of the Netherlands, Mr. Majoor. We must also note the
considerable work done by the Peacebuilding Support
Office, headed by the Assistant Secretary-General,
Ms. McAskie.

However, there were not just successes during
this period. We suggest that the well-known difficulties
are largely due to the complexity of this initial stage in
setting up a commission. In its activities, particular
attention should be given in the future to ensuring
close coordination with the recipient countries. In this
context, we welcome the participation in today's
meeting of representatives of Burundi and Sierra Leone
and the confirmation of their readiness to cooperate
with the Peacebuilding Commission.

It is important that members of the Commission
conduct an impartial and collective analysis of
priorities for peacebuilding in countries on their
agenda, and that they develop agreed recommendations
that provide assistance required both by recipient
States and by the Security Council. If proper account is
taken of recommendations developed together with
Governments of recipient countries by the
Commission, the General Assembly, the Security
Council, United Nations agencies, the donor
community, the international financial institutions and
other interested parties, this will improve the
coordination of international post-conflict support and
reduce the risk ofa relapse into a crisis.

Particular attention must be given to enhancing
cooperation between the Commission and the Security
Council, particularly at this stage when Burundi and
Sierra Leone are on the agenda of both bodies. It is
important to establish a timely exchange of information
and show a clear division of labour. Of course, this
must be done while at the same time developing links
between the Peacebuilding Commission, the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council.

There is a clear need for more systematic work by
the Commission and more careful preparation of its
country-specific meetings in order to increase their
effectiveness. It is important to have a sensible mix of
closed meetings and open, informal consultations
within the Commission and the work of the expert
groups on specific questions of Burundi and Sierra
Leone.

The most important component of the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission is its work on the ground
with national Governments and involving the United

Nations country teams and the donor community. Here,
additional attention must be given to harmonizing the
activities of the Peacebuilding Support Office and the
Commission with existing coordinating mechanisms,
first and foremost within the United Nations system
itself. What is needed is cooperation between the
Peacebuilding Commission and United Nations
agencies in the field that does not infringe upon
existing United Nations operational activities but rather
enhances them, including by taking account of the
existence of specific cooperation programmes with
recipient countries that have been endorsed by the
executive boards of those United Nations agencies.

The General Assembly, in our View, is precisely
that forum where Member States can find an answer to
this question. We welcome the initiative of the Non-
Aligned Movement to hold a plenary meeting of the
Assembly to discuss the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission. We suggest that the interest shown in the
Commission by the two main United Nations bodies is
a guarantee of the close and constructive cooperation
between the General Assembly and the Security
Council to achieve our common goal - that is, to
increase the effectiveness of international efforts in the
area of peacebuilding.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Germany.

