Mr. Hidayat (Indonesia): At the outset, let me
take this opportunity to thank you, Sir, all members of
the Council and those delegates who expressed their
sympathy and condolences to the Government of
Indonesia for the tragic event that took place in Bali
last weekend. My Government is equally shocked and
strongly condemns that heinous and barbarous act. A
serious investigation is under way. Indonesia is
working hard, with the help of several countries, to
find the perpetrators and to bring them to justice.

Mr. President, the delegation of Indonesia is
pleased to see you chairing the Security Council for the
month of October. We are appreciative that under your
presidency, the current emergency debate on the
situation in Iraq has been convened upon the initiative
ofthe Non-Aligned Movement.

In the context of increasing transparency in the
Council, we welcome the participation today of non-
members, as this debate on Iraq is important not only
for its subject matter but also for its timing. Holding
the meeting at a time when the Council is considering a
possible new resolution enables non-members of the
Council to give their input in the policy-making of this
body. In this way, we hope that the collective wisdom
and the support ofthe entire membership can be tapped
for any decision by the Council on this very important
subject. This point is important because it is at the
heart of our best hopes concerning the authority of the
Council.

The Council should remain engaged in any
solution on Iraq. On this question, Indonesia is of the
view that diplomatic efforts must be exhausted before
taking any other measures. At the moment, the door
has been opened to diplomatic activity, and the
Security Council should take full advantage ofit.

In this connection, we call on the Security
Council to continue to seek a peaceful resolution.
Indonesia does not believe that anyone prefers conflict
to peace. Towards the achievement of a peaceful
resolution, therefore, we urge the Council to deploy its
considerable influence to persuade all parties that the
road to peace - not the route to war - is in the best
interest of all. War must be employed only as the very
last resort, not as the next item on the agenda. War may
tempt, but that does not mean that it will resolve a
situation.

As a member of the international community
committed to the peaceful resolution of disputes,
Indonesia has consistently appealed to the Iraqi
leadership to comply with the relevant United Nations
resolutions, including those relating to the destruction
and renunciation of weapons of mass destruction. In
that regard, the Government of Indonesia has
welcomed Iraq's decision to allow the return of United
Nations inspectors to their country without conditions.
Since Iraq has indicated its readiness to implement
previous Security Council resolutions, agreements,
commitments and arrangements, my delegation
believes that this critical situation can be resolved
peacefully.

It is apparent that Iraq has suffered long enough.
All this has been at the expense of the development of
the country, its economy, its people and its institutions.
It would therefore be unfortunate for Iraq to have to
face another war, which would be a further setback to
its economy and its people and create a humanitarian
crisis even deeper than what Iraq has seen so far. This
does not have to be, and the Council has it in its power
to prevent it from happening. In our view, now that
Iraq has agreed to allow United Nations inspectors
back into the country, the door has been re-opened to
peace.

There is no doubt about it: Iraq must not only
allow in the United Nations Monitoring, Verification
and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC), but also see
that the return of the inspectors is a new window by
means of which it can protect its people. To that end, it
must fully comply with all the relevant resolutions of
the Security Council and work at finding a
comprehensive solution that would lead to the lifting of
United Nations sanctions.

Indonesia feels that despite what seems to be the
prevailing sabre-rattling at the moment, there is a good
chance to avoid military action and to win back both
regional and global peace in this situation. We call on
the Council to seize this opportunity to demonstrate
that when necessary, it will go the extra mile to ensure
that peace prevails and not have to explain war
afterwards. This issue touches upon the mandate of the
Council, and it is in the interest the multilateralism of
United Nations that the Council lives up to the best
expectations ofthe membership.

Finally, Indonesia calls attention to the point that
the situation in Iraq should not be viewed in isolation.
In our view, it is crucial that the international
community see the larger picture of the Middle East,
with particular reference to the situation in Palestine,
as well see the situation in the context of the challenge
of terrorism. It is our considered opinion that there is a
sense in which these issues, and therefore the response
to them, must be seen as related.

