Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I should first like
to thank President Mkapa for his comprehensive
briefing and also Under-Secretary-General Le Roy. We
are pleased by the presence of State Minister Siddiq
and Mr. Amum, Secretary-General of the Sudan
People's Liberation Movement (SPLM), and thank
them for their presentations.

Last week, Austrian Foreign Minister
Spindelegger visited the Sudan and had talks with
senior representatives of the National Congress Party
(NCP) and the Sudan People's Liberation Movement
(SPLM) and with President Mbeki. Minister
Spindelegger came back with the understanding that
both sides are committed to holding the referendum on
time, but that the overall process of Comprehensive
Peace Agreement (CPA) implementation and the
political situation in the North and the South remain
fragile.

Austria therefore considers it important for the
international community to send positive messages: to
Khartoum that there is a chance to enter into a new
phase of relations with the international community,
once the CPA has been implemented; and to the South
that the international community is ready to assist with
capacity-building, and humanitarian and development
cooperation, provided of course that the SPLM-
leadership does not take any action that could lead to a
military escalation. At the same time, more
specifically, Austria is convinced that there will be a
strong need for the United Nations and other
international actors, such as the European Union, to be
actively engaged in peacebuilding in the south in the
post-referendum period, and also in the north if so
desired.

We welcome the substantive progress in the
preparations for the referendum, in particular the
completion of the voter registration and its peaceful
and orderly conduct. In that regard, we highly
appreciate and fully support the work of the high-level
monitoring Panel. The European Union has deployed
an election observation mission, which also observed
the registration process.

With regard to post-referendum arrangements, we
are particularly concerned about the inability to resolve
the problem of citizenship, as that could produce a
dangerous hotspot. Austria has offered technical
expertise in the area of citizenship. Upon the invitation
of the parties, we discussed that offer with
interlocutors in the north and the south in October, as
well as during the recent visit by our Foreign Minister.
Nevertheless, further progress is needed, in particular
in the preparations for the referendum in Abyei.
Preparations also have to take place for the popular
consultations in the Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan
states. Strengthening the rule of law, ending impunity
and ensuring human rights for all will be important in
that process in order to guarantee lasting peace and
stability. The full inclusion of women in those
processes is also of very great importance.

On Monday, 13 December, the Foreign Affairs
Council of the European Union expressed its readiness
to step up engagement with the Government of the
Sudan and to establish a long-term dialogue. The
European Union and its member States, including
Austria of course, attach importance to finding a
lasting solution to the Sudan's debt burden. At the
Foreign Affairs Council, the European Union
committed to examine closely possible support for an
international debt relief effort.

In view of the tense security situation in the south
caused by rebel movements, military activity and an
influx of people moving from north to south, we call
on the leadership of the SPLM. and the NCP to avert
conflict, ensure regional stability and protect civilians.
Contingency planning by the United Nations Mission
in the Sudan (UNMIS) is important. The freedom of
movement is crucial for UNMIS to fulfil its tasks.

Austria strongly supports the facilitation of the
African Union High-Level Panel, under the leadership
of President Thabo Mbeki, as well as the work of Joint
African Union-United Nations Chief Mediator for
Darfur Djibrill Bassole. We urge all parties to work on
ceasing hostilities and on making progress in the Doha
negotiations.

We particularly condemn the abduction of
peacekeepers and humanitarian workers and the
violence against civilians in and around camps for
internally displaced persons (IDPs). In that regard, we
welcome the release of three Latvian nationals working
for the World Food Programme. We demand the
immediate release of a Hungarian peacekeeper in the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). We urge all parties to allow free
access to everyone in need of humanitarian assistance.

UNAMID has an important role to play in
protecting civilians. It needs the full support of the
Government of the Sudan and all other parties
involved. The safe and voluntary return of a high
number of IDPs in Darfur must be ensured. We
strongly support all efforts to strengthen mechanisms
to combat impunity and promote justice, accountability
and reconciliation.

