Mr. Hill (Australia): Thank you, Mr. President,
for giving us the opportunity to contribute to this very
important debate. Australia is gravely concerned about
the escalation in violence in the Middle East, which
has already resulted in a large number of casualties.
Australia extends its condolences to the Governments
of Lebanon and of Israel, and to the families of all of
those affected. Australia recognizes Israel's right to act
in self-defence. We call on both sides to exercise
restraint, to avoid civilian deaths, to avoid damage to
civilian infrastructure and to refrain from acts which
escalate an already dangerous situation.

We need to bear in mind responsibility for the
current crisis. It began with the attacks on Israel by
Hamas and Hizbollah, including the capture of Israeli
soldiers and the launching of rockets and mortar bombs
into Israel. Australia condemns those actions and calls
for the unconditional release of the hostages taken by
Hamas and Hizbollah. We also call for an immediate
end to the rocket attacks on Israel. Those must be the
first steps towards the resolution of the current conflict.

The Australian Government is extremely
concerned with the deteriorating humanitarian
situation. The Australian Government has already
provided some $A 2 million through the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) for humanitarian
assistance to Lebanon.

The Government is also working to ensure the
safe evacuation of Australians from Lebanon. We have
about 25,000 people in Lebanon. We are extremely
worried about the situation of Australians in southern
Lebanon in particular. We call on all parties to
facilitate the safe evacuation of foreign nationals.

Our priority must be to create conditions for a
comprehensive and lasting ceasefire. This can be
achieved only through the full implementation of
United Nations Security Council resolutions 425
(1978), 426 (1978), 1559 (2004) and 1680 (2006), in
particular those elements that address the disbanding
and disarmament of all Lebanese and non-Lebanese
militias and the extension of the control of the
Government of Lebanon over all Lebanese territory.
This means the disarming of Hizbollah and control by
the Government of Lebanon of the area between Beirut
and the Israeli border.

A long-term solution to the Middle East conflict
must involve acceptance of Israel's right to exist in
peace and the need for the emergence of a Palestinian
State. Those countries in the region with influence over
Hizbollah - Syria and Iran - should exercise that
influence to prevent continuation of acts of violence.
By arming and supporting those extremist groups, they
are threatening the wider security of the Middle East.

Australia also expresses support for ongoing
diplomatic initiatives, in particular the mission team
dispatched to the region by the Secretary-General. We
also note once again that the G-8 would welcome an
examination by the Security Council of the possibility
of an international security/monitoring presence. In
Australia's view, any multilateral force must have a
robust mandate to enable it to guarantee both Lebanese
sovereignty and Israel's security. That means the force
would have to assist the Lebanese Government to
exercise its sovereignty and prevent Hizbollah from
repeating its actions that have precipitated the current
arms.

