Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Staffan dc Mistura for
his important briefing. The State of Kuwait expresses
its appreciation and gratitude for all his efforts over the
past four years in carrying out his difficult task. We are
certain that he will make further efforts until his last
day in office.

We have just listened to the outcomes ofthe Special
Envoy's visit to Damascus, which we had hoped would
lead to positive results and would advance the Syrian
political process nine months after the declaration
made in Sochi regarding the constitutional committee.

Unfortunately, the outcomes of the visit did not meet
our aspirations and expectations.

According to resolution 2254 (2015), the formation
of the constitutional committee is an important step in
the political process and a basis for further steps in the
future, including the drafting of the constitution and
the holding of free and credible elections in Syria under
the supervision of the United Nations and with the
participation of all Syrians.

The Sochi declaration is clear in terms ofidentifying
the role of the Special Envoy and the Geneva process
in the final formation of the constitutional committee
so as to contribute to the political settlement under the
auspices of the United Nations and in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015).

There is still nearly one month to go until Mr. De
Mistura leaves office. We encourage him to continue
his efforts to form the constitutional committee and
to ensure that its work can begin as soon as possible.
We once again express our support to him. We believe
that he has the necessary mandate to establish the
constitutional committee, and we agree with him on
the need to create a balanced and credible committee.

In conclusion, we stress the need to respect and
to implement Security Council resolutions. They
should not be a dead letter, especially resolution 2254
(2015), which was unanimously adopted by the Council
nearly three years ago. In the coming days we have an
opportunity that we must all seize, particularly after
the stability seen in Idlib following the Russian-Turkish
agreement. That provides an important opportunity to
revitalize the political process led by the United Nations
following some eight years of war, destruction, killing
and displacement in Syria. We hope that diplomatic, not
military, solutions will prevail.

