Mr. Valero Bricefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to
congratulate you, Sir, for the work that you
undertaking as President of the Security Council. We
wish you success in your efforts.

We come here to reiterate our fervent desire for
the prompt establishment of the Palestinian State and for
peace in the Middle East. We associate ourselves with
the statement made today on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement and the efforts of the League of Arab States
in support of the Palestinian people's self-determination.

The Government of Israel has violated the United
Nations Charter on many occasions. The Permanent
Observer of Palestine has sent 374 letters to the
Secretary-General and the Security Council that relate
the excesses committed against the Palestinian people
by the occupying Power, Israel. Numerous reports by
United Nations rapporteurs also confirm the outrages
committed by the State of Israel. Thus there exists a
comprehensive criminal record of its assaults that has
moved and outraged the conscience of the world.
Venezuela demands that the Security Council take
charge in this matter and proceed without delay to
apply the measures outlined in the United Nations
Charter in order that the State of Israel complies with
international law.

Illegal settlements and the practice of occupation,
condemned by the Governments and peoples of the
world, are part of the State of Israel's policy of
aggression, which is aimed at perpetuating its
occupation and depriving the Palestinian people of
their inalienable right to self-determination and
sovereignty. The occupying Power is carrying out an
ethnic war and a racist and xenophobic policy aimed at
the de-Arabization of Palestine.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, in
accordance with the views expressed by the Arab
League, believes that the revival of Israeli colonization
through the building of settlements on Palestinian land
is a sabotage of the negotiation process being
conducted by the Palestinian National Authority and
the Israeli Government. The continued construction of
these settlements, which has been condemned around
the world, affects the borders of a Palestinian State.

The Israeli Government has again shown that it
does not have the political will to move forward with
direct negotiations with the Palestinian National
Authority. The United Nations should demand that the
State of Israel refrain from further violating the norms
of international law and from disrupting the
negotiations currently being conducted.

Before the eyes of the world, the Government of
Israel has amassed a voluminous record of violations
of international law. Why does the Security Council
permit the impunity of this occupying Power? We
therefore request that the Security Council exercise the
powers invested in it by the Charter of the United
Nations to maintain and preserve international peace
and security.

The Charter states in its preamble that it is
necessary to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war, to reaffirm the equal rights of men and
women and of nations large and small and to respect
obligations arising from treaties and other sources of
international law. The Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela considers that the Security Council, by
allowing the impunity of the State of Israel, has not
complied with its obligations under the Charter. This
body, unfortunately, is a prisoner of the right of the
veto. That is why Venezuela has stressed the need to
rebuild the United Nations. Among other things, that
means eliminating the right of the veto in the Security
Council and granting binding force to the decisions of
the General Assembly, including those having to do
with international peace and security.

In conclusion, I note that the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela has been admitted as a full member of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People. From that platform, or any
other, we will support the struggles of this people,
which seek to achieve their historical claims.

