Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let me thank
the briefers for their valuable inputs in today's discussion.
I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate our
full support for the efforts of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths; the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Mark Lowcock;
and retired Major General Patrick Cammaert. We
express our appreciation for the work of United Nations
personnel in Yemen.

The year 2018 ended with the prospect of
relaunching a formal political process thanks to the
agreement reached by the parties in Stockholm and the
adoption of resolution 2451 (2018), which establishes a
mechanism to oversee its implementation. We welcome
the swift instalment of the Redeployment Coordination
Committee, the assumption of the role of its Chairman
by Major General Cammaert, and the progress made by
the parties in relation to establishing the organizational
structure of the Committee. We are also encouraged
by the decision of President Hadi to instruct that
the salaries for all civil servants in Al-Hudaydah
governorate be paid.

The compliance of the parties with the provisions
of the Stockholm Agreement is now crucial and will
determine the future of the peace process in Yemen.
The ceasefire in Al-Hudaydah governorate must be
upheld. We are concerned about reports of breaches of
ceasefire on both sides, and we urge the parties to show
restraint. We also encourage them to show goodwill,
to continue to advance confidence-building measures,
especially those directly related to the humanitarian
situation, and to carry on their engagement with the
Special Envoy. We look forward to the next round of
consultations. In that vein, we would like to underscore
the need to include all relevant stakeholders and
underrepresented groups, including women and youth,
in the political process.

We also call upon the parties to continue to
cooperate closely with the Redeployment Coordination
Committee and to extend all support for United Nations
personnel in Yemen, including through bureaucratic
assistance in advancing the additional deployment of
United Nations staff and equipment. The safety and
security of United Nations personnel must be ensured
at all times.

Despite the progress made on the political
track, much remains to be done with relation to the
humanitarian situation in Yemen. Urgent actions are still
required in order to improve the living conditions of the
Yemeni population, ensure their protection and avert
the prospect of famine. We therefore urge the parties
to do their utmost to advance confidence-building
measures so that the humanitarian operations can be
carried out unimpeded and without delay. To that end,
the Al-Hudaydah-Sana'a highway must be urgently
reopened in order to allow the functioning of the
humanitarian corridor. We underscore the urgent need
to lift all bureaucratic restrictions on humanitarian
access into and across Yemen.

We are pleased that the Security Council is united,
and we hope that it will stay united in order to help our
Yemeni friends to implement the agreement. We are also
very supportive of the efforts of the Permanent Mission
of the United Kingdom to prepare a technical resolution.

