Mr. Keating (New Zealand): I congratulate you,
Madam President, on assuming the presidency of the
Council for this month of February. In fact, I believe that
special congratulations are in order, because, if I recall
rightly, this is the third time I have seen you as President
of the Council. And of course it is a very rare distinction
for any Permanent Representative to serve as President of
the Council on three occasions. So we are particularly
privileged to have your experienced leadership.

I also want to convey special thanks to His Excellency
the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom. I
think that the United Kingdom delegation presided over the
Council during a very productive and important month of
January. We are all very grateful for their efforts.

New Zealand very much welcomes the opportunity
to participate in this orientation debate in connection with
the report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. 111). As
members of the Council will recall, New Zealand was the
first country to support France's proposal for public
orientation meetings of this sort in the Security Council.

We believe that it is very important that the non-
members of the Council have the opportunity to express
their views in a way that can be fed into the Council's
informal deliberations. All too often in the past, the only
chance for public debate has been after the Council has
come to its decision. So we very much commend you,
Madam President, for your initiative in calling this
meeting. Orientation meetings are a useful complement to
meetings like the one which you convened yesterday
between Council members, troop contributors and the
Secretariat. We hope that from both meetings Council
members will be able to draw useful suggestions as they
consider the extension of the mandate of UNAVEM. III.

For, as the Secretary-General's report makes clear,
the extension of the mandate is by no means an easy
decision. His report is, in many places, very disappointing
reading. As he says,

"progress in the peace process in Angola has been
very slow." (S/1996/75, para. 2)

The setback to the process at the end of 1995 was a
serious one. An offensive by government troops around
Soyo saw UNITA respond by suspending the quartering
of its troops, withdrawing its assistance to UNAVEM. III
in building quartering areas and imposing restrictions on
the movement of the Mission. As you told the troop
contributors yesterday, Madam President, even worse,
most relief operations in UNITA-held territory ceased in
December.

Since then, there has been some positive progress
registered, but it is of a limited nature. As you reported
to us this afternoon, Madam President, UNITA troops
entering quartering areas are still behind schedule. We are
still far short of the 16,500 whom Mr. Savimbi promised
you would be quartered by Thursday. We are equally
worried by reports that many entering the quartering areas
are under age and carrying only old weapons or none at
all.

Against this background, the international
community has the right to be very concerned about the

 

peace process. The Secretary-General correctly observes
that we will want to respond positively to all constructive
initiatives by the parties. But there seem at present to be all
too few of these constructive initiatives.
We believe, therefore, that it is all the more important
that the Security Council continue its policy of vigilance
and active involvement to put pressure on both parties to
cease this cat-and-mouse game. A pro-active Security
Council, using the various tools at its disposal under
Chapter VI of the Charter, is the best response to the
current situation. Visits, such as your own, Madam
President; missions by the Council itself; statements by the
presidency; bilateral representations; United Nations special
envoys; debates such as this; and the constant use of the
media - both the international media and within Angola
itself - to remind the parties of their obligations: these are
the things which we believe can play an important, positive
role. We want to commend very highly the members of the
Council for their willingness to be pro-active in support of
the peace process over the past 12 months.

You yourself, Madam President, described yesterday
to the troop contributors the horrible sight of mine-crippled
children. On the other hand, you also told us about how
eagerly local villagers moved to turn areas that had been
cleared of mines into productive fields. We see this as one,
small, positive note. We are pleased at the report which the
Secretary-General has been able to make of progress in the
area of mine clearance. New Zealand has made a serious
commitment to mine clearance in Angola, seeing it as a
crucial element of longer-term stability.

But mine clearance in Angola has not been without its
problems. It has taken a considerable effort to turn the
programme around so that an efficient and coordinated
approach can be taken in support of the peace-keeping
operation and humanitarian requirements. New Zealand is
pleased that its military personnel have been able to play a
practical role in achieving this turnaround. The carry-over
of unexpended funds should put the programme on a sound
financial footing, but the key to the future will be the
integration of the programme into the work of UNAVEM
111. As the report notes, it will need to operate under the
control of the UNAVEM. III Force Commander until 1997.
We believe that the structure is now in place to build a
national capacity that will enable the Angolan people to
reduce and maybe one day remove the threat posed by
land-mines in their country.

We are also somewhat encouraged by the positive
references in the Secretary-General' s report to human rights
activities being conducted under United Nations auspices
in Angola. But there is a need for much greater assistance
and much more action in this regard. There will not be
national reconciliation unless all the people of Angola
have a reasonable prospect that their human rights will be
respected if they lay down their arms. We are therefore
strongly of the View that human rights capabilities in the
context of peace-keeping operations need to be better
integrated, better funded and better recognized within the
United Nations system.

In conclusion, I should like to say a few words about
the draft resolution which I know the Council members
will begin to consider shortly.

First, we believe that it would be a mistake to try to
put pressure on the parties by establishing an artificially
short time-period for the mandate. This has been tried in
the past in different situations, and it has been clearly
demonstrated in the past that this tactic does not work. In
the end, it only backfires against the Organization itself.
It ruins planning and undermines proper financial
management of the operation. So, if we are to go forward,
let us go forward for a full six-month mandate period. In
our View, the best way to signal a determination to keep
up the pressure is by insisting on regular review periods
within the mandate.

Secondly, could we request that the draft resolution
take a firm and even-handed approach to both of the
parties in Angola, holding them both responsible for
honouring the promises made to the people of Angola that
there would be peace? Can we also request that the draft
resolution take a firm approach on the question of mine
clearance? This is an area in which, as I have said, New
Zealand is making a major contribution and in which we
would like the Council to send a clear message to the
parties to meet their obligations in this regard - but also
a message to UNAVEM. III and the Secretariat about the
need to maintain an integrated approach to the
management of the demining programme. We believe that
we need an action-oriented approach if the problem of
mines is ever to be resolved.

Finally, can the Council please find an acceptable
way in its draft resolution to reinforce the importance of
the human rights component in the United Nations
presence in Angola?

