Mr. Guehenno: First, I should like to respond to
the three questions from the Ambassador of Jamaica.
On DNA testing, indeed, the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) would
very much like to draw on the expertise of a number of
specialized non-governmental organizations that have
performed similar work in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I
think that we will be in touch with those organizations,
and we will, of course, need funding to support their
work. But that is a source that should be tapped for this
particular very sensitive and important issue.

With regard to the participation of Kosovo Serbs
in Municipal Assemblies, progress has indeed been
made, especially after the change of leadership in
Belgrade. Recently, Kosovo Serb representatives have
walked into Municipal Assemblies, including some
difficult municipalities around Pristina. So there is a
precedent that that can be done without the generation
of violence. We hope that this will pave the way for
more comprehensive participation in other
municipalities, especially in a key municipality such as
Pristina.

I can assure the Council that in those
municipalities where Serbs are still, unfortunately,
outside the ruling structures, UNMIK makes a point of
making sure that municipal resources are, indeed, being
allocated to the Serb community.

Jamaica's third question related to the regulation
of weapons. What I can say on that is that UNMIK did
enact a very comprehensive regulation one month ago
that outlaws the possession of illegal weapons and
imposes very serious sanctions. IfI am not mistaken,
there can be a 10-year jail sentence in some instances.
At the moment, we are still in the grace period, and a
very important information campaign is going on, with
close cooperation between the Kosovo Force (KFOR)
and UNMIK, going door-to-door and making sure that
people throughout Kosovo are fully informed about
this new regulation. This information campaign will be
followed by a one-month amnesty for those who
surrender - a one-month grace period, so to speak -
during which the Kosovars can hand in their weapons.
My understanding is that that period will last until the
end of May. We expect that a number of weapons will
be surrendered. Indeed, there are still quite a lot of
weapons in Kosovo, and there will probably still be
weapons after that. But we will be in a better position
to control the illegal possession of weapons, and I
think this is an important step forward.

The Permanent Representative of Singapore
asked whether elections could have a destabilizing
effect since, indeed, the issue of independence will be
there - at least, it will be promoted by some parties.
We know that last year every political party that
registered for the municipal election had independence
at the core of its electoral platform. Obviously, this will
not be different for the Kosovo-wide elections. Kosovo
politicians are still in competition to see how
nationalistic they can be. On the Albanian side, the
issue of independence is one of the few issues on
which they agree.

At the same time, I am told - it is the experience
of the municipalities where we have begun to have a
functioning administration - that the more they can
focus on the practical management of Kosovo, the
more that will defuse the tension. They may want to
make their political point, and I am under no illusion
that that political point will be made. But they then
have to focus on the practical issues of substantive
autonomy and deal with a lot of practical issues. I said
that the infrastructure was in much better shape, but a
lot of very practical issues have to be dealt with if
Kosovo is to be effectively managed. Focusing on that
should hopefully defuse tensions.

Colombia raised three questions. On the question
of refugees and internally displaced persons, I gave the
most recent figures that I have. What I can say is that
the return of the internally displaced Serbs to Kosovo
is indeed a very important political issue. It is one of
the key priorities of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. It will take place in a gradual way -
it would endanger the safety of Serbs to try to do it
suddenly in a massive way. Unfortunately, I do not
think that the resources and the political context are
there yet for a massive return. However, UNMIK is
committed to organizing that progressive return and to
working in a practical way with all involved partners to
start that process so that the signal is sent that indeed
the Serbs have their full place in Kosovo.

The second question was that of the negotiations
taking place in southern Serbia. Those negotiations got
off to a slow start due to continuing breaches of the
ceasefire and the composition of the Albanian
negotiation team. We are advocating the beginning of
the implementation of a package of confidence-
building measures. In this regard we very much
appreciate the behaviour of the Yugoslav army force,
which has been redeployed into part of the ground
safety zone. I would reiterate here that the composition
of the forces that are being redeployed should not
include troops that have been associated with events in
Kosovo. I think that this would send a signal that could
increase tensions. I think that we have to work on that
very sensitive and delicate issue, where perceptions
play a very important role, in a progressive and gradual
manner in order to avoid undue tensions.

The third question raised by the delegation of
Colombia was on illicit activities across the border. As
I said, I visited the area. This is mountainous and
wooded terrain. I would not want to convey to the
Council the View that 100 per cent control of that
border can be achieved. It would probably require a
huge force to do that. However, I was very much
encouraged by the commitment of KFOR and UNMIK
to have effective coordinated efforts put in place in
order to have as much effective control as possible.
This indeed has resulted in the apprehension of several
persons, especially ethnic Albanians from the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.

Several weapon seizures have successfully taken
place, as was recalled by Ambassador Lavrov. KFOR
and UNMIK are presently studying the possibility of
strengthening the legal framework within which they
can act in that respect so that those who are
apprehended illegally crossing the border would
receive the appropriate sanction. On all those issues we
maintain very close contact with former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia authorities. Any effective
control of the border needs very good interaction, I
think, between UNMIK, KFOR and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.

The Ambassador of Norway raised the question
on whether the Albanian Kosovar leaders' commitment
to security is sufficient. I impressed upon those leaders,
when I visited Kosovo last week, that indeed there had
been a lot of international sympathy for Kosovo and
that the effort of the international community in
Kosovo, as has been recalled by several delegations, is
a massive effort. That sympathy would vanish if the
commitment of all leaders, Kosovar and Serb, to a
multi-ethnic Kosovo were in doubt.

I think that it is important for all leaders to send
the right signals in that respect in the functioning, for
instance, of municipalities. Tom Koenigs, who is
sitting behind me, head of Pillar II and carrying out a
very difficult job in Kosovo, could reinforce that point.
In our dealings with the municipalities, we continually
impress upon them the need to show tolerance when
they exert power. I myself made the point that
democracy is not the dictatorship of the majority; it is
as much the respect of the minority. The mission will
continue to impress that point upon all the leaders of
Kosovo. I understand that it will take time before that
is fully accepted by all the communities of Kosovo.

The Ambassador of Norway also asked about the
regional dimension of the situation. I personally
believe that the process of stabilization of the Balkans
has to combine the bottom-up and the top-down
approaches. There has to be a clear message. I think
that at the moment the message from the international
community is very clear and evident: endless
fragmentation and redrawing of borders is leading
nowhere and is certainly not a factor for stability.

It is certainly very important that all the
communities of Kosovo - and I think the same would
apply in a different situation such as Bosnia-
understand that tinkering with fundamental principles
will not lead to stability and peace. At the same time, if
we want stabilization - and that is what is so difficult
in the work of UNMIK - there also has to be a
bottom-up approach, where the local communities-
and in the case of Kosovo we know how many different
communities there are - begin to take responsibility
and integrate into their own minds those principles,
which cannot just be asserted by the top leaders. In that
respect - and I think that this connects with what I
was saying on focusing on the management of their
daily lives a I am concerned when I visit a city like
Mitrovica to see that the political agenda of all
communities takes over the needs of attending to the
practical management issues of a city. I think that the
effort of our mission has to be in that direction. This
will take time, but if we have a steady hand, I am
confident that we will eventually be successful.

