Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank the United States of America for having drafted resolution 2547 (2020).One year ago in this very Chamber (see S/PV.8641), we discussed the multiple crises besetting Haiti at that time and the possible implications of establishing a special political mission in a country dealing with deep-rooted political, economic and social conflicts and a climate of violence whose victims, unfortunately, are primarily civilians. Today, one year on after the establishment of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH), we are Seeing a persistent, complex crisis that continues to be multidimensional and has been deeply exacerbated by a huge spike in violence and the impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic, a crisis that has further worsened the already precarious situation and is now including human rights violations, rampant impunity and a severe food crisis that has affected almost half of Haiti's population. In the past week, aware of the difficult situation, we participated in the negotiation process of the new mandate for BINUH. It had been our hope that we would have a more extensive, cross-cutting and inclusive conversation in order to come up with a more robust multidimensional mandate, including at least the strengthening of human rights safeguards and accountability in Haiti - a mandate that also would be geared towards combating impunity, providing reparations for victims and curbing the persistent violence perpetrated by the gangs that control the streets and have been assaulting, abducting and displacing people and assassinating eminent, high-profile persons. Unfortunately, the talks did not lead to the changes that we had wanted and that could have helped Haiti in the consolidation of its long-awaited political stability. With the adoption of resolution 2547 (2020), we believe that the Council is missing a tremendous opportunity to bring more international community support to the people of Haiti, who are the poorest in the Western Hemisphere. That would have enabled us to lock in the gains made by earlier peace missions in Haiti and averted any worsening of the crisis, which could extend to other countries in the region. However, BINUH will continue to operate under the same mandate as last year, even though indicators are pointing to the fact that progress has been minimal. We are aware of the fact that BINUH has striven to fulfil its mandate despite the limitations on it. It has sought to create a conducive environment so that Haitian society could overcome the paralysis in the process of holding of legislative elections and the lack of consensus on a common political agenda that would enable it to break the impasse and define a new electoral cycle. However, the fragile institutional capacity in the area of security and prevailing conditions mean that greater support is needed from the international community in order to enable the country to activate development and renew hope. It is for that reason that during the negotiations, the Dominican Republic took an active part in coming up with clear-cut proposals on the changes that it thought could strengthen the mandate of BINUH, with a view to devising a stronger mandate with greater capacity that would reflect the solidarity of the international community and be focused on the most pressing challenges facing Haiti. We regret that we were unable to reach a consensus in that respect. The experience in the country and the complexity of the current situation prompt us to conclude that this mandate will continue to fall short of its objectives, especially if Haitian society does not pool its efforts to ensure that this or any other mandate is successful. Nevertheless, given the critical situation in Haiti, we voted in favour of resolution 2547 (2020), because our understanding is that, at the risk of seeming conformist, it is better to have this mission than none at all. It is our hope that at least the limited powers entrusted to the mission will mean that it will have enough resources and personnel. We reiterate in closing that the Dominican Republic will continue with an open policy and its long-term collaboration with the people and the Government of Haiti, which reflects our deep solidarity with that country.
