Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-Genera Jeffrey Feltman for briefing
us on the findings of the Secretary-General's report
(S/2017/467) on the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL). We are pleased that the Secretary-General has
resumed the practice of providing a comprehensive
review of this terrorist organization's presence
throughout the world, which is important for a better
understanding of an evolving threat posed by ISIL and
its affiliates.
I join others in noting encouraging signs that
resolute international efforts have become detrimental
for ISIL. It is continually losing ground in Iraq and
Syria due to heightened military pressure. I want to
commend the Iraqi security forces and the international
counter-ISIL coalition for their efforts to bring the
liberation of Mosul to a successful conclusion. The
crackdown on the terrorist stronghold in Raqqa, Syria,
is the next decisive step towards ensuring the waning of
ISIL's influence.

Ongoing problems in generating revenue have
forced ISIL to cut support to its affiliates, thereby
downscaling their abilities to expand their presence
and to carry out massive attacks. Their attempts to
move funds abroad open up opportunities for the
international community to further deplete its financial
resources by intercepting couriers and money transfers.
A decrease in the numbers of foreign terrorist fighters
travelling to Iraq and Syria and a diminished capability
by ISIL to control its fighters have become tendencies
that limit its manpower. Many States have started to
review their national counter-terrorism legislation,
including their respective strategies, the mobilization
of resources and the establishment of specialized
counter-terrorism units.

I would now also like to address a number of points
of particular concern for us.

On the evolution of the threat, recent terrorist attacks
across the world reveal a new trend, that is, to inspire
rather than send fighters to carry out impromptu attacks
in their own countries on behalf of ISIL. Such attacks
are extremely hard to prevent. It is known that ISIL has
established online groups to recruit and indoctrinate,
as well as to disseminate operational strategies through
private channels. How can we counter such threats?

First, we can eliminate drivers fuelling

radicalization and by promoting social cohesion, which
will allows States to greatly complicate terrorist tasks.
Secondly, the development of counter-narratives will
curb terrorist recruiters' efficiency in attracting new
followers. Thirdly, fostering close contacts with local
communities will go a long way in helping to identify
radicalized elements early and to take necessary actions
in order to disrupt terrorist plots.

With regard to terrorist financing, the Secretary-
General's report indicates that there has been a
significant decrease in ISIL's revenues from the illicit
trade in hydrocarbons, largely due to military operations
targeting related infrastructure. Yet the smuggling of
natural resources continues and we lack information
on the overall effectiveness of neighbouring countries'
efforts to arrest vendors and identify buyers who
contribute to financing terrorist activities. We would
appreciate it if the Secretary-General could expand on
that issue in his next reports.

As to returning foreign terrorist fighters, returnees
undoubtedly pose a real threat, as they possess lethal
skills and can put them to use with dire consequences.
Therefore, there is a growing need to ensure a wider
criminalization of foreign terrorist fighters and conduct
an exchange of evidence of their crimes. Otherwise,
they could be released and be free to travel. Another
worrying fact is that some States deport foreign terrorist
fighters to their countries of origin without informing
the latter.

Rapid information-sharing, especially of the
biometric data of foreign terrorist fighters, as well
as the effective use of respective Interpol databases,
should become a priority if we are to stem the flows
of such fighters. Their abuse of asylum systems also
constitutes a major problem at a time when the huge
waves of migrants arrive from conflict zones in order
to find shelter. It is time to take a more thorough look at
that very serious and, at the same time, human rights-
sensitive issue.

Recently, ISIL has suffered numerous setbacks
and defeats on the battlefield. However, we are still
far from completely eradicating ISIL. The terrorist
organization has demonstrated its ability to regenerate
and change shape, moving underground and resorting
to asymmetric attacks when it is weakened. Therefore,
the international community has to draw lessons from
this and develop a viable "day after" strategy that will
address and resolve the root causes that instigated
ISIL's creation in order to prevent its resurrection.

