Ms. Banks (New Zealand): New Zealand
commends the United Kingdom for initiating this
debate and for its useful concept paper entitled "Post-
Conflict Stabilization: Peace After War".

We see post-conflict peacebuilding as a critical
area of focus for the international community. It is an
immediate practical issue, and there are valuable
lessons to be learned from our recent experience, as
Mr. Brahimi reminded us this morning.

New Zealand is looking to improve its capacity
for post-conflict stabilization while simultaneously
"learning by doing" in several missions that run in
parallel: State-building in the Solomon Islands in an
Australian-led regional operation, in Timor-Leste in a
United Nations mission alongside a regional operation,
and through our participation in the International
Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan.

We are keenly aware of the need for the
international community to improve its approach to
peacebuilding in general and to post-conflict
stabilization in particular. A military intervention may
be necessary in the first instance to stabilize a
situation. But, as many have noted here, for the
resolution of conflict to be sustainable, we need more
wide-ranging interventions to deal with the causes of
State failure and initiatives to build both capacity and
social services. Those interventions must be coherent,
coordinated, and have local ownership. Increasingly,
we must be prepared to commit a wider range of
Government agencies to complex, multifaceted
peacebuilding interventions ranging from the justice
system to border control.

United Nations integrated missions have made
considerable progress in addressing these challenges.
10
But we do share the concern of the United Kingdom
and others that, overall, our international efforts remain
too fragmented, too ad hoc and often too fleeting.

Therefore, New Zealand supports the idea of a
gap analysis. The United Kingdom has identified at
least three critical gaps in post-conflict stabilization
process: leadership on the ground, rapidly deployable
and skilled civilian capacity, and more rapid and
flexible funding.

There are no easy answers to the associated
questions in the United Kingdom paper but there are
some important points. First, it notes that the United
Nations can make a significant contribution to the
developing body of international theory and practical
learning on post-conflict peacebuilding. In the United
Nations context, the Peacebuilding Commission and
Peacebuilding Fund are, of course, central to this
discussion.

Coherence with non-United Nations actors is
vital. There is a need for coordination of and a clear
division of labour among the numerous multilateral
agencies involved in peacebuilding. Even in classic
United Nations-led interventions, the United Kingdom
identifies a broad range of non-United Nations and
often non-State actors.

Finally, within the broader context of building
deployable civilian capacity, we agree with the
identification of police advisers as a critical dimension
of the international effort. Developing the capacity for
credible, effective policing is essential to underpinning
post-conflict transition. A range of recent examples
demonstrate the challenges of building police capacity,
particularly relative to building military capacity.

Allow me to conclude by stressing New
Zealand's continuing commitment to contributing to
United Nations led, mandated and authorized peace
operations. They are tangible expressions of our
collective responsibility to serve fragile post-conflict
States, which most need the assistance of the
international community.

