Albania commends the efforts of many Member States and partners to put in place solid normative frameworks and commitments on the women and peace and security agenda, as demonstrated by the increase in the number of national action plans for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). However, we strongly believe that effective implementation is not possible without the allocation of proper resources. It is important to celebrate progress, but equally important to recognize the challenges we face. We need to pay special attention to the engagement of communities at the grassroots level and demonstrate progress in people's lives. We need to give civil society, including women's organizations and human rights defenders, a voice that is heard in the Security Council. Their experience and know- how are crucial to better understand what should be improved. To that end, we need to engage more women mediators and ensure the meaningful participation of women in both conflict prevention and in peacebuilding. Albania is proud to report some significant achievements on the meaningful participation of women in important decision-making processes. Our first 1325 national action plan, 2018-2020, sets out a robust and detailed plan with clear implementation, financing, monitoring and evaluation strategies, and reporting pathways. Albania is among only seven countries of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) region that have a costed and budgeted national action plan. We have also made sure to include civil society in the main pillars of the national action plan. It mainly focuses on the increased participation of women in the armed forces in peacekeeping missions outside of the country; the appointment of female officers to leading positions in the police and armed forces and the strengthening of management capacities of women in the police and armed forces; the establishment of a reporting system for the implementation of the national action plan; awareness- raising activities with women members of Parliament and local Government representatives on Security Council resolutions on women and peace and security; and the delivery of trainings on gender equality in military operations, the handling of post-conflict situations, and the prevention of and response to violence against women and girls. Albania is committed to increasing women's meaningful participation in crisis prevention and peace processes, as well as to improved protection against sexual and all other forms of violence. To that end, Albania has increased the meaningful participation of women in the security sector, while mainstreaming the gender perspective in policies and structural plans of the Ministry of Defence and the armed forces. We included the women and peace and security agenda as one of the priorities of our 2020 OSCE chairmanship, injecting new momentum into the OSCE's work on women and peace and security. If elected to the Security Council next year, Albania will champion the women and peace and security agenda across the full breadth of its work. We strongly believe that women are agents of positive change and that they must actively participate in all peace and security efforts. In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that the chances for building and sustaining peace are much higher once women are fully engaged. We cannot afford to lose 50 per cent of our human energy, talent and ideas. The meaningful participation of women will boost our common efforts for a more inclusive, transparent and effective approach towards peace and security.
