Mr. Mkapa: I wish to begin by congratulating you,
Sir, on assuming the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of March. I am indebted to the Council
for giving me this opportunity to update it on my work
as Facilitator of the inter-Burundian dialogue.

Let me start by saying that, after the Heads of
State of the East African Community appointed me
Facilitator in order to contribute to the efforts of the
mediator, President Museveni, to reach a peaceful
solution to the crisis in Burundi, I have seen myself
as someone who helps the parties to this crisis to get
together and reach common ground peacefully. I was
told that there should be no conditionalities with regard
to who I meet, and that the objective was to reach a
sustainable and peaceful solution. It was quite clear in
my mind that the task of facilitation was not the task
of conferencing. I have therefore not been leading a
constitutional conference on Burundi. Instead, I have
been trying to facilitate a process in which the political
parties are brought together with a view to ensuring
that they can resume the spirit and the dictates of
the Arusha Agreement - to which all of them are
signatory - and the Constitution - which they all
adopted together - so that we can avoid any further
failures in the future.

I have encountered the following problems. On
the one hand, the Government and the parties that are
perceived as being supportive of the Government agree
that the Arusha Agreement and the Constitution must
serve as the basis for any solution. However, they say
that much of that has already been achieved because the
Constitution is being implemented fully and the spirit of
the Agreement is being pursued. On the other hand, it is
the View of the political opposition - both the internal
and the external groups - that the Government has
usurped the political space in which to undertake the
political work in and governance of the country. That
is the situation.

The other point that has emerged from the
consultations is that each side claims to be the custodian
of the Arusha Agreement and the Constitution. The
tendency is to see the members of the other side as the
criminals, and therefore as the ones that should receive
the wrath of the State or the power of the international
community. We see, therefore, that this is a situation in
which the two parties are almost irreconcilable.

I tried to talk to each of the major political parties
over four different sessions. I did not call a meeting. We
did not meet in the same place. We did not meet in the
same room, let alone sit at the same table. However, I
met with the political parties. I met with representatives
of civil society organizations, youth and women's
organizations. I met with religious leaders, separately,
and listened to them. Believe me when I say that I was
lectured beyond imagination. One would have thought
I was the culprit in the matter. However, I listened to
them because I wanted to know what difficulties stood
in the way of reaching an agreement.

After the first meeting, I asked them to reflect

further. I met with them a second time in Arusha. There
were some who did not want to come to Arusha in the
first instance because they thought that would prejudice
the impending discussions or that we were suggesting
the Arusha Agreement had been abandoned. But there
are those who say that we must meet in Arusha to
reaffirm the spirit of the Agreement. As such, I called
them. Some of them came, others did not.

The third time I met them in Bujumbura, the capital.
Again, I spoke to all of them separately, and listened to
them in order to see whether they had reflected further
on the situation they had outlined to me. Finally,
having listened to all these groups, I decided to go to
the political parties that I thought would be decisive in
the implementation of any agreement reached - that is,
the major political parties, both internal and external.
Also, I took in political leaders or political actors of
consequence and influence. That group included
three former Presidents, former Assembly and Senate
Presidents, former party leaders and so on. I called them
to Arusha for the last time, which was last month, in the
hope that I could get them to talk to each other at least.
To facilitate that, I outlined the four principal areas
that, in my view, constitute major areas of discussion.
First was the political situation in the country: what
are the political obstacles that are pulling them apart?
Secondly, what were the constitutional obstacles
that were pulling them apart? Thirdly, what were the
economic and humanitarian positions that were keeping
them apart? And, finally, I asked, what are the security
issues? The security issues are particularly relevant to
the external opposition, who felt that they could not go
back for fear of their lives or for fear that they would
not be able to operate politically in safety.

This time I asked them to give me their maximum
demands and their minimum requirements, in writing.
That is what I did this past month. They have done
so. But before that, I had asked the Government of
Burundi, through the Chairman of the East African
Community (EAC) Summit, the President of Tanzania,
my own President; through the mediator; and through
the President of Kenya, President Uhuru Kenyatta, to
talk to the Government of Burundi, in order to suspend
the arrest warrants against some of these political actors
of substance and influence, so that they could come to
Arusha and be part of the consultations.

Unfortunately, the Government did not take this
request very well at all. The Government delegation
did not show up and Arusha, and they told me why:
because, they said, they do not want to meet these people
who are under arrest warrants, and although I had said
that it would not include anyone who could be directly
associated with the attempted coup of 2015, they said,
no, this is enough to keep us away from Arusha, so they
did not come.

But what gave me solace was that the ruling party
came to Arusha this time. I gave them the documents,
and they gave their responses in writing. In substance,
the parties are still very far apart. They both affirm
the Arusha Agreement and the Constitution arising
therefrom, but each one claims to be the exclusive
implementer of the Arusha agreement, that the
others have abandoned it and they are the ones who
are legitimate. Clearly, they are so far apart that it is
difficult to bring them together.

What I decided, therefore, was that, while I was
looking at the recommendations and the written
responses to the questions I had raised, I would ask the
Heads of State for an emergency summit meeting to give
impetus to the two sides, so that they could now really
think seriously about getting together and discussing
these issues. I reported back to the Chairman of the
East African Community Summit and to the Mediator,
and I told them that now, in order to get anything done,
they really had to get together and push both sides to
seriously get down to the basic issues and to reach out
to each other and see if they can find common ground.

I have done so, but they said, well, the next summit
is only three weeks away, so we cannot have an
immediate special summit. I am hoping, therefore, that
at the next summit, which will be in three weeks' time,
I will be able to raise these issues and argue the case
for direct political intervention with both sides to make
them be agreeable to getting round that same table.
This is what I hope to do.

Meanwhile, my team and I are analysing, with the
help of the United Nations and the African Union - that
is a technical team - those responses and try to distil
or synthesize a common position that could break this
impasse. I still believe that it can be done; I still believe
that the neighbours can have influence; I still believe
that we really have no option except to continue being
engaged, because Burundi is our neighbour, and one
cannot choose one's neighbouring country. It is there,
and therefore we have to be part of the efforts to find a
solution to the crisis. That is where we are.

I wish to take this opportunity to thank Ambassador
Fall and Ambassador Benomar and the African Union
and the United Nations for their support. I wish also to
thank the European Union, because it has been very
instrumental not only in helping us to continue talking,
but also in financing this process. I hope that it will
continue to support us in that effort.
I thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity. I
am prepared to listen to and answer any questions that
may be posed to me.

