Mr. Fedotov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The Russian Federation was a co-sponsor
of the draft resolution just adopted by the Security
Council. This resolution we have adopted, along with the
further extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG), contains
weighty political provisions. We consider it important that
the Council is confirming its commitment to upholding
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of
Georgia and the right of all refugees and displaced
persons to return home, and that it is calling on the
parties to refrain from any actions which might hinder or
complicate the peace process.

 

The Russian Federation is concerned at the clearly
inadequate progress in the negotiation process. We consider
that the sides must materially intensify the quest for ways
to achieve a peaceful solution to the conflict.

In this connection, we View as timely the Council's
call upon the sides to reach substantive progress in the
negotiations under the auspices of the United Nations and
with the assistance of the Russian Federation as facilitator
and with participation of representatives of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), and also
the Council's request to the Secretary-General to continue
his efforts to contribute to the negotiation process.

We hope that the next stage in the Georgian-Abkhaz
negotiations will take place in the next few weeks. The
Russian Federation for its part is actively working to that
end. In this context, we attach the greatest importance to
the coordination of our efforts and close collaboration with
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General in Georgia,
Ambassador Edouard Brunner.

The Russian Federation is seriously concerned at the
extremely slow pace of the return of refugees; the Abkhaz
side is to blame for this. We hope that the Security
Council's call upon both sides to comply with their
commitments with regard to the return of refugees, and
upon the Abkhaz side to accelerate the process
significantly, will be effective.

The Russian representative on the Quadripartite
Commission on refugees, along with the representative of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, is working actively to ensure that the sides fully
implement all the provisions of the Quadripartite Agreement
of 4 April 1994 on the voluntary return of refugees and
displaced persons.

We also note the request made by the Council in the
resolution to the Secretary-General to examine, in
cooperation with the relevant representatives of the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) peace-keeping
forces the possibility of adopting additional steps to
contribute to conditions conducive to the safe return of
refugees.

The Russian delegation is grateful to the Council for
commending the contribution of the CIS peace-keeping
forces to the maintenance of the cease-fire and the
stabilization of the situation in the conflict zone.

We also note the satisfaction expressed by the
Council with the close cooperation between the CIS
peace-keeping forces and the United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG), and we confirm our
readiness to continue to cooperate closely with UNOMIG.
We hope that further development of this cooperation will
be facilitated by the exchange of letters on the question
that has taken place between the Secretary-General and
the Chairman of the Council of the Heads of Government
of the CIS.

The Russian delegation attaches importance to the
Council's decision to undertake, on the basis of a report
from the Secretary-General to be submitted by 4 May
1995, a thorough review of the situation in Abkhazia,
Republic of Georgia. We expect that in the course of that
review substantive consideration will be given to the
gradual transformation of the peace-keeping operation
now being carried out in the conflict zone into a United
Nations operation based, initially, on the already deployed
CIS and UNOMIG forces in that area.

In conclusion, I would like to draw attention to the
new call in the resolution we have just adopted upon
Member States to contribute to the voluntary fund
established by the Secretary-General pursuant to
resolution 937 (1994). Probably few occasions can be
found when during a period of nearly half a year not one
contribution has been made to a voluntary fund. We
believe that an inflow of resources into this fund would
contribute to a more effective solution of many problems
and, first and foremost, to the creation of conditions for
the return of the refugees.

