Mr. Ceriani (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank you, Madam President, and your team
for holding this timely and important debate, as well as for
the issuance ofthe substantive concept paper (S/2014/725, annex). As a member of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group, Uruguay aligns itself with
the statement made by the Permanent Representative
of Switzerland. We are grateful for the reports given
this morning by the Ombudsperson of the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities, Ms. Kimberly Prost, and the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda.

In accordance with Article 24 of the Charter of the
United Nations, Member States of the Organization
have conferred on the Security Council the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security, recognizing that the Council acts on behalf of
all Members in that task. In the following Article of the
Charter, the Member States agree to accept and carry
out the Council's decisions. In that sense, its decisions
will be imposed on the international community both
by that Article and Chapter VII. But that prerogative,
granted to the members of the Council by each State that
adheres to the Charter, brings with it the commitment
and responsibility to act on behalf of everyone and in
accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter. At the same time, Article 24 establishes the
Council's duty to inform the General Assembly of its
actions through the submission of annual reports.

With regard to the report, we would like to mention
that it is usually purely factual and does not have
relevant information about the analysis of the situations

addressed and the vetoes of draft resolutions that were
presented in the Council. The membership has the right
to know why certain situations move forward and the
Member States who used the veto should explain why.

Although all Member States, by adopting the
Charter, have decided to accept that the veto is part of the
system, despite our positions of principle on the matter,
in order to achieve the transparency, accountability
and commitment of permanent members with regard to
the international community, those vetoes should not
only be well founded, but also explained. International
peace and security - one of the three pillars of the
Organization - should not be subject to only five
member States, particularly in cases of genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity. That is why we
welcome the French proposal to restrict the use of the
veto in such cases, and we advocate its quick adoption
and implementation, without ever losing sight of our
greatest hope, which is the elimination of the veto as
an institution.

When it comes to the other elements that are part
of the Council's working methods, we want to indicate
that there have been ups and downs in their use, with
no consistency in the Council's action in that regard.
We refer, inter alia, to the horizon-scanning briefings,
provided by the Secretariat - either by the Department
of Political Affairs or another agency - in the exercise
of preventive diplomacy, which is extremely useful in
order to be better informed of the situations that may
endanger international peace and stability. We hope to
see that mechanism in place again, considering the value
that it has as an early warning and conflict prevention
tool. In the same vein, we highlight the adoption this
year of resolution 2171 (2014), by which the Council
undertakes to use all the tools of the United Nations
system to prevent conflicts.

We also wish to emphasize the wrap-up sessions,
held at the end of each monthly presidency, in various
formats, which provide valuable information about the
Council's actions to the rest of the membership, making
its work more transparent. Fortunately, 10 out of the
12 countries that held the presidency since last year's
debate have made use of that working method. We hope
that all countries that assume the presidency of the
Council in the future will act accordingly.

Our delegation supports the holding of open

debates, such as today's. We note with satisfaction that
they happen on a monthly basis and are usually held
more than once a month, allowing non-member States
of the Council to participate and offer their viewpoints
on issues of interest to the international community.
We suggest that the holding of Arria Formula meetings
and interactive informal dialogues continue. They both
give more openness to the Council and make it possible
to hold Council meetings with great informative and
interactive value, but according to their participants
require a different format.

The sanctions system, created by resolution 1267
(1999) of October 1999 and subsequent resolutions, has
been the target of varied criticism. Among the criticism
is that there are no guarantees for the people included
on the list of individuals, who, due to their connection
to Al-Qaida, are prevented from moving freely and
their assets are frozen through a nonjudicial process,
which casts doubt on the legitimacy of the sanctions
imposed by the Council. There have been improvements
when it comes to due process. The developments have
been positive because there have been substantive
improvements from the original system to that of
today. Clearly, there must be a strengthening of due
process and the study of the possibility of extending
the Ombudsperson to all sanctions committees. Our
country calls for a transparent, consistent and fair
system, in accordance with legal due process.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to refer to
the cases referred by the Security Council to the
International Criminal Court. Since considerable
time has passed since the first referral, no follow-up
mechanism has been established in either case - the
situation in Darfur or the situation in Libya - nor have
measures been taken in cases of failure to cooperate
with the Court concerning the arrest warrants issued
by it. It is time for the Council to be consistent with
those referrals, and it should act under Chapter VII, so
that they are not simply virtual referrals, and thereby
making it possible for the International Criminal Court
to carry out its work.

