We welcome the High Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. Filippo Grandi, and thank him for his briefing. Assistance to refugees, asylum seekers and stateless persons today is an essential component of the intensive efforts aimed at maintaining international peace, security and stability. We deeply appreciate the effective work of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in major humanitarian crisis situations that lead to mass flows of refugees. We support UNHCR's commitment to expanding its efforts on the basis of the Global Compact on Refugees. The work of UNHCR has never been easy, but 2020 has brought an unprecedented level of difficulty. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has left no safe place on the planet, and refugees and internally displaced persons (IDPs) are now the most at risk. In that regard, we welcome UNHCR's focus on close cooperation with States, with a view to including refugees in national programmes to combat COVID-19 and conducting information campaigns among the population. Its efforts to alleviate the effects of infection by increasing the supply of humanitarian goods, water and sanitation in camps, hospitals and other institutions deserve wide support. We share concerns regarding the current situation in a number of Middle East and African countries. Refugee camps and reception centres suffer an acute shortage of personal protective equipment and medicine. The health-care system in most host countries is weak and overloaded. In many instances, those countries' capacity to respond to the pandemic is impeded by illegal unilateral sanctions. The provision of humanitarian assistance to refugees, IDPs and their host countries should not be subject to politicization. The High Commissioner stated that very clearly. We call yet again for an immediate and complete lifting of unilateral sanctions and other restrictive measures that undermine the capacities of States to effectively combat the COVID-19 pandemic. Despite barefaced efforts to block the return of refugees to the Syrian Arab Republic, we see positive momentum. The initiative to facilitate Syrian refugees' voluntary return home, launched by Russia in 2018, shows significant progress. The number of Syrians refugees and IDPs returning to their homes continues to grow, and today exceeds 2 million. UNHCR plays a major role in that regard, and we hope that the Office will continue to assist Syrians refugees and IDPs. Russia supports the Syrian Government in its efforts to restore basic infrastructure, such as water and electricity supplies, schools, hospitals and housing. Today a special focus of our actions is the implementation of a set of measures to fight COVID-19. Overall, the country is becoming increasingly safe for people. Unfortunately, there is an unresolved humanitarian situation in Rukban camp, where thousands of people are forcibly being held in unacceptable conditions. The lack of qualified medical care and personal protective equipment in wholly unsanitary conditions could lead to a sharp outbreak of COVID-19. From time to time in the Council, we hear stories about the mass exodus of people from the tyranny of Government. For example, some colleagues love dearly to refer to the economic migration from Venezuela in the refugee context. Now we have the reverse flow - thousands who left the country are now rapidly coming back. The main reason for that is xenophobia in host countries, triggered by the pandemic. As it turns out, now they are indeed refugees in a real sense. Moreover, around 90 per cent of all COVID-19 cases in Venezuela are found among the returnees, who evidently were denied health care and exposed to the virus in host countries. In conclusion, I would like to once again underscore that Russia will continue to strengthen the international refugee protection regime and comprehensively support UNHCR's activities, which are vital for the millions who have been forced to leave their homes.
