Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
wish first of all to thank the Acting Executive
Chairman of the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
and the representative of the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to the
United Nations for their briefings this morning. I take
note of the statements made by the representatives of
the United States and the United Kingdom and of the
letter dated 24 April 2007 from the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Iraq addressed to the Security
Council (S/2007/236, annex).

For several months many in the Security Council
have spoken in favour of the principle of closing the
Iraq disarmament file, on which for some 16 years the
international community has focused in response to the
exceptional defiance of the former regime of Saddam
Hussein. It did so while seeking to ensure that the
various dimensions of that sensitive file were duly
addressed.
The first is the political dimension. The context
has changed. Iraq has regained its sovereignty, and a
democratically elected Government legitimately wishes
to take control of its future and, in particular, to
shoulder its non-proliferation responsibilities.

The second is the security dimension. All of us,
including the Iraqis, know how important it is to ensure
that Iraq not become once again a threat to the region
or to itself and that any remaining proliferation risks -
in particular in the light of recent history and the
unstable security situation - be properly addressed.

The final dimension relates to the United Nations,
and in particular to the Security Council, which was
deeply involved in this matter and which can take the
important decision to close the file only with full
understanding of it and possessing sufficient
information to take such a decision.

Thus, France has taken note with interest of this
morning's briefings to the Council by the
representatives of the IAEA and of UNMOVIC. It is
crucial that in shaping its assessment it takes account
of the briefings of those two bodies, which possess
unparalleled expertise in this area. In that regard, my
delegation wishes to pay special tribute to the unique
multidisciplinary activities carried out by UNMOVIC
and the IAEA - both in the field, until 2003, in the
case of UNMOVIC, and outside Iraq, where
remarkable work in compiling and analysing data was
carried out, including by representatives of the
coalition.

France takes note today of the United Kingdom
and United States assessment that all measures have
been taken since March 2003 to guarantee Iraq's
respect for its obligations in the field of disarmament,
in accordance with Security Council resolutions. My
country also takes note of the letter dated 24 April
2007 from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq
addressed to the Security Council (S/2007/236, annex),
setting out the request of the Government of Iraq that
the mandates of UNMOVIC and the IAEA be
terminated within Iraq, along with the conviction of the
Iraqi authorities that weapons of mass destruction that
could justify the continuation of those mandates are no
longer present in Iraq. My country also notes with
interest the Iraqi Government's commitment to full
accession to the international non-proliferation regime.

In that light, France wishes to outline a number of
ideas: an affirmation that the prohibited programmes
begun by the Saddam Hussein regime have been
eliminated thanks to the effectiveness of United
Nations inspections; a reminder that, while not every
issue has been resolved, a low level of uncertainty
remains; acknowledgement that the sovereign
Government of Iraq is now in charge and that, in spite
of the level of uncertainty, it is no longer justified to
continue the exceptional monitoring regime carried out
by UNMOVIC and the IAEA; and the need to

strengthen regional security and ensure compliance
with international non-proliferation obligations.

On that basis, France is prepared to respond
favourably to the request of the Iraqi Government and
to vote in favour of draft resolution S/2007/390,
submitted by the United Kingdom and the United
States. We hope that Iraq will fully shoulder its
responsibilities and its international obligations by
committing itself to adhering to the principal
international instruments in the field of disarmament
and non-proliferation and by adopting apt and effective
national legislation and provisions.

We also express the desire that these
commitments be implemented as soon as possible and
that, one year from now, Iraq will thus be able to report
to the Security Council on the progress that has been
made, as provided in the draft resolution.

