Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): Let me express my
delegation's appreciation to you, Madame President,
for having organized this public debate.
We recently discussed the problem of the illicit
trafficking in drugs in Afghanistan, which continues to
pose a threat to the immediate and long-term stability
of the country and the region. Today, my delegation
would like to share with the members of the Security
Council our views on the recent developments in
Afghanistan and on the latest report of the Monitoring
Group established pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1363 (2001).

However, I would first like to thank Ambassador
Mufioz of Chile, the Chairman of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), for his
very informative and lucid briefing.

Encouraging progress has been made in recent
months. Most notably, President Karzai of Afghanistan
has taken resolute steps towards establishing and
affirming the Government's authority in the country's
provinces. I want to take this opportunity to express
our full support for the endeavours of the Afghan
Transitional Administration in that field. I would also
like to inform the Security Council that a Government
delegation from Ukraine visited Kabul on 4 July to
discuss with President Karzai and other high officials
the problems of security and reconstruction.

Despite the efforts made to stabilize the security
environment in Afghanistan, the current situation
remains a serious impediment to progress that poses a
major risk to the constitutional process, which is
developing positively. Ukraine is deeply concerned
about the outbreak of hostilities in some provinces and
the recent attacks against the International Security
Assistance Force. Ukraine strongly condemns all acts
of violence and intimidation.

We consider the latest report of the Monitoring
Group, which is chaired by Mr. Michael Chandler, as
the most comprehensive and substantive study of the
issue of sanctions against Al Qaeda and the Taliban. I
would like to reiterate the full readiness of my
Government to extend to the members of the
Monitoring Group all possible support and assistance
in their complicated task.

We share most of the Views and assessments of
the report, in particular the major one: that Al Qaeda
and its associated groups continue to pose a significant
threat to international peace and security. Substantial
funds are still available for the recruitment and training
of new terrorists from the illicit drug trade,
uncontrolled charities and donors. We are therefore
convinced that the main efforts in the struggle against
the Al Qaeda and Taliban networks should be
concentrated in the financial sphere. That requires
increased political and economic pressure, international
cooperation and coordination and the provision of
substantial additional technical assistance and financial
aid to States.

Ukraine undertook a set of administrative and
legislative measures authorizing appropriate actions
against persons or entities designated by the Committee
of the Security Council established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999). My country signed and ratified
the International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism and all other anti-terrorist
treaties of a universal character. Ukraine shares the
View expressed by many States that there are some
difficulties in tracking down bank accounts and other
financial and economic assets of designated individuals
and entities because of a lack of sufficient and accurate
information. In that regard, it is important that greater
efforts be made to share information and to identify
contributors to the Al Qaeda and Taliban networks.

We should recognize the reduced effectiveness
and limited nature of the existing list of known Al
Qaeda operatives and others associated with Al Qaeda
and the Taliban. It is essential, in our view, that the
travel ban - considered by the Monitoring Group to
be a political statement - become an effective
instrument. In our opinion, the list should be updated
with better identification, and the information it
contains should be corroborated.

The increased activity of the remnants of the
Taliban regime in Afghanistan shows that the attackers
have unhampered access to small arms and light
weapons and to explosives and that they enjoy
significant freedom of movement. Those trends are
worrisome indeed. We support the relevant
recommendations of the Monitoring Group on how to
tackle that problem.

As far as Ukraine is concerned, we have
established comprehensive national export control
procedures that require end-user certificates for all
weaponry, explosives and military equipment exported
from Ukraine. In addition, my country continues to
work closely with the World Customs Organization to
improve the security of container shipments.

In conclusion, I should like to stress the need to
further strengthen the role of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) as a powerful instrument in developing
international cooperation to combat threats originating
from Al Qaeda and the Taliban.
