Mr. Williamson (United States of America):
Mr. President, I want to thank you for thank you for
convening this Security Council wrap-up meeting on
post-conflict situations, which is a good way to
continue and elaborate on the discussion we have had
in the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
several weeks ago. I thank the Secretary-General for
his interesting remarks.

The Brahimi reforms are still not fully
implemented. If this discussion can help to push some
of those proposals forward, then this will have been a
very useful Security Council session. The Brahimi
reforms are a good place to start the discussion because
they drew on the long and varied experience of the
United Nations in various peacekeeping efforts over
the years. For obvious reasons, that exercise has been
careful not to infringe on the role of the Security
Council in making political decisions.

In the nearly 58 years since the United Nations
Charter was signed, there have been, by our count, 202
armed conflicts involving 114 nations. More than 27
million people have been killed in those conflicts. The
United Nations has played a post-conflict role in only a
small number of those conflicts and has met with
varying degrees of success. One need examine only a
few of those conflicts to understand that the United
Nations role varies significantly from one post-conflict
environment to the next.

Mr. President, in your useful non-paper circulated
last Thursday, you suggested that we look at the United
Nations role in Afghanistan, Kosovo, Timor-Leste and
Sierra Leone. Before considering the United Nations
role subsequent to those conflicts, I would like to make
a point about the conflicts themselves. My delegation
agrees with Secretary-General Annan that every
conflict is unique.

I would add, as a corollary to that axiom, that the
role of the United Nations and other international and
regional organizations also varies from case to case. If
we compare the baseline conditions in Afghanistan -
a nation of 25 million people with a wide range of
ethnic and linguistic backgrounds - with those in
Timor-Leste - a nation of less than 1 million people
without significant tribal or ethnic divisions - we
quickly understand why the conflict in Afghanistan
was very different from that in Timor-Leste and why
the post-conflict structures that the United Nations
established were also distinct.

These differences point to the need for the United
Nations to tailor its involvement on a case-by-case
basis. Former Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjold
once said that in conflict situations the United Nations
must go to a tailor for the tailor-made suit needed for
the occasion. This flexibility has been institutionalized
in the Brahimi reform process. It is not a weakness, but
rather a strength of the dynamic nature of the United
Nations itself, which encompasses and is affected by
the national interests of United Nations Members.

By virtue of having been involved in more than
60 conflicts, the United Nations can rely on an ever-
growing number of post-conflict experiences, as well
as lessons learned. This cumulative experience
provides a toolbox, as it were, of solutions that can be
brought to bear in the face of specific problems.

Part of our flexibility is understanding what the
United Nations can and cannot do. We neither
strengthen the United Nations or the Security Council
nor help bring peace to a conflict by over-promising,
raising unrealistic expectations or over-extending the
capacity of the United Nations to deliver on the
ground.

My delegation takes away several lessons from
the United Nations role in Sierra Leone and other post-
conflict situations in Africa. One lesson, for example,
is the need to find a mechanism for donor group
coordination and follow-up and for the reintegration
element of any disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programme undertaken as part of
a post-conflict peace process. Secondly, there is a need
for the effective coordination of humanitarian
assistance among peacekeeping operations,
international aid agencies and humanitarian groups as a
situation moves from peacekeeping to post-conflict
reconstruction and renewal. The United Nations is
uniquely qualified to provide such coordination in a
post-conflict environment, taking policy guidance from
the Security Council or the lead security force on the
ground - in the case of Sierra Leone, the British
military, which provided umbrella security in the
immediate post-conflict environment.

Sierra Leone also offers insight with regard to the
role of the United Nations in coordinating key
humanitarian issues in a post-conflict environment.
How the United Nations and the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) responded to the
humanitarian needs of refugees and internally
displaced persons in Sierra Leone offers valuable
lessons. In the case of UNAMSIL, its assistance was
focused, responsive and limited to its mandate. That is
the way it should be. The primary task of a
peacekeeping mission is to support a political process,
even in the post-conflict period. The Council acted to
authorize UNAMSIL to participate in the international
humanitarian response in Sierra Leone only after a
clear explanation of the role UNAMSIL would play
and after it became clear that UNAMSIL had unique
capabilities that could not be duplicated by any other
organization.

Another lesson from the humanitarian side of the
ledger is that of the importance of disseminating
explicit guidelines on the role of the various United
Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations.
It is also important to have clear mechanisms in place
to address concerns about overlapping mandates
between the activities of non-governmental
organizations and United Nations agencies. We saw the
benefit of such guidelines in the agreement between the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and UNAMSIL on the use of peacekeeping
operation resources to move refugees.

In the area of transitional justice, which is critical
to post-conflict societies' movement to peaceful,
sustainable societies, Sierra Leone is providing a very
important example. The Truth and Reconciliation
Commission is carrying out interviews, allowing the
truth to be told. The Special Court has now handed
down its first indictments against those who allegedly
committed the worst crimes against humanity. If those
two institutions of transitional justice are successful,
there will be important lessons for the Security Council
in moving forward in the critical area of transitional
justice.

With regard to Timor-Leste, a nation small in
territory and modest in population, Australia was the
indispensable lead nation in moving the country from
conflict to peace and independence. The United
Nations played the central role in organizing elections,
and the donor community, working with the United
Nations, was generous. In order to build a sustainable
society in Timor-Leste it was necessary to build the
institutions of civil society, from constructing
Government buildings to constructing schools, from
training teachers to building a properly trained police
force with adequate numbers. The central role of the
United Nations has been extremely important in all
phases of this post-conflict situation. The success of
the people Timor-Leste, aided by the United Nations
and the donor community, is significant and very
promising.

In Kosovo, after the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization employed armed force to end the
genocide of Albanian Kosovars, the United Nations
played a major role in the post-conflict society, with
invaluable assistance from the European Union and the
larger donor community. The Security Council met on
Kosovo just a few days ago. The United Nations has
helped that post-conflict situation. The goal of a stable,
multi-ethnic Kosovo is a worthy and important one. As
laid out in the Secretary-General's most recent report
on Kosovo, and as discussed around this table, major
challenges in Kosovo remain. Devolution, tempered by
the realities on the ground, must continue. The
development of the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government must progress. The human rights of all
ethnic groups, including their freedom of movement,
must be achieved. In Kosovo the work is not done. But
the United States is confident that the United Nations
mission in Kosovo will be successful. The Security
Council's continued attention and involvement in post-
conflict Kosovo, however, will be required.

In Afghanistan, the coalition forces ended the
reign of the Taliban. Afghanistan had become not a
State that sponsored terrorists, but a Government that
was held up by terrorists. Those days are over. The
United Nations has been the key coordinator as
different nations have taken the lead in important areas
to reconstruct post-conflict Afghanistan - Italy in the
judicial area, the United Kingdom in illicit drug
eradication, Germany in police training, Japan in DDR,
and the United States in training the Afghan National
Army, with the support and help of the French. This is
a very different model from Kosovo and, thanks to the
leadership of Secretary-General Kofi Annan and the
great talent and skill of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Ambassador Brahimi, the post-
conflict reconstruction of Afghanistan is on a clear path
to success - politically, in terms of reconstruction and
in other areas.

Given that some of my colleagues have raised the
topic of Iraq, I would like to reiterate some of the key
principles of United States policy on that issue.
Saddam Hussain's weapons of mass destruction no
longer threaten international peace and security. The
coalition has liberated the Iraqi people from the brutal
tyranny of Saddam Hussain's regime. The days of
thousands of unaccounted-for disappearances in Iraq
are over. The days of torture are behind the Iraqi
people. The days of using chemical weapons against
Iraqi Kurds and of genocide against Iraqi Shiites in the
south are over. The days of human rights travesty and
abuse are over.

The coalition has liberated the Iraqi people from a
brutal tyranny. The coalition is working on the ground
to ensure that the Iraqi people receive supplies of the
essentials of daily life, including food, water and
medical supplies, until Iraq's return to being a self-
sustaining member of the global community.

The United Nations can play a vital role in post-
conflict Iraq. Fortunately, predictions of a humanitarian
catastrophe, even predictions of a humanitarian crisis,
have proved inaccurate. The coalition also is working
with the people of Iraq to facilitate their recovery. We
are committed to the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Iraq, as well as to an Iraq free of weapons
of mass destruction, living in peace with its
neighbours.

The coalition will not remain in Iraq longer than
required. An Iraqi Government chosen by the Iraqi
people and serving the Iraqi people is the goal of the
United States and of its partners in the coalition.

I would like to conclude my remarks with one
other point that I often see omitted in public debate: the
will of the governed. We must not lose sight of the fact
that the wants and needs of the people in a post-conflict
environment are best defined by those people. As the
international community reaches out to help a
population in need, one of its first tasks must be to seek
to provide that population with a voice, a voice with
which to articulate their own desires regarding what
comes next. Helping the people find their voice is
especially important in cases where a new government
model is being instituted, as is the case in all of the
models that have been cited today in your non-paper,
Mr. President, and in the discussion which we have
had.

