Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, for
his briefing on the situation in Somalia. While we
understand his hopes for positive developments in that
situation, the overall picture is extremely alarming. We
listened closely to the statements made by African
Union Commissioner Lamamra and Mr. Mohamed
Abdullahi Omaar, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Somalia.

We are gravely concerned at the ongoing
instability in Somalia, including widespread attacks,
killings and other acts of violence, as well as illegal
acts committed against United Nations facilities in the
country. The continuing attacks against the positions of
Government forces and the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) are intended to undermine the
efforts of the Transitional Federal Government to
effectively govern the country. Under these
circumstances, there is a need to mobilize the efforts of
Somalis themselves as well as those of the
international community to strengthen the central
Government's capacities, particularly in the area of
security.

Unfortunately, as the security situation remains
totally unacceptable and unsatisfactory, it is now
difficult to talk realistically about the possibility of
expanding the United Nations presence on the ground
in Somalia. We must all strive towards that goal, but
the key factor is to ensure appropriate security
conditions.

There is no alternative to sustainable peace and
national reconciliation in Somalia on the basis of the
Djibouti peace process. We continue to support the
efforts of President Ahmed and the Government to that
end. We believe that providing broad support for the
Somali Government by assisting the countries of the
African Union will lay the foundation necessary for the
long-term recovery and rehabilitation in Somalia. We
call on all countries in the region to provide all forms
of assistance to Somalia and not to allow foreign
mercenaries, combatants or weapons to be brought into
the country, in violation of the sanctions regime
established by the Security Council.
We commend the role played by the African
Union Mission in bringing about stability, strengthening
the security sector and helping to promote the political
process. The Mission's activities are extremely
important, and we believe that it must have adequate
staffing, equipment and other types of support.

We agree with the concerns expressed by the
Secretary-General regarding the deterioration in the
humanitarian and human rights situation, in particular
with regard to the most vulnerable groups in the
population. Assistance to Somalia must be
comprehensive and must encompass socio-economic
development. Here, the most important tasks are
ensuring sustainable economic recovery and resolving
the problem of unemployment. However, I must
reiterate once again that none of these tasks can be
carried out satisfactorily without a reliable stabilization
of the security situation, which is key to resolving all
the political, socio-economic and humanitarian
problems in Somalia.

We cannot but agree with the assessments made
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/373) and
by Mr. Ould Abdallah with regard to the ongoing
destabilizing factor of piracy off the coast of Somalia.
We note the robust efforts to ensure security off the
coast and to provide assistance to the coastguard.
Another important task is creating the legal
infrastructure necessary for the prosecution of persons
involved in piracy. Here, assistance by legal
institutions in neighbouring countries could play a very
important role. Because the current conditions in
Somalia make it impossible to eradicate this
phenomenon, international cooperation must be
intensified to combat piracy and eradicate its
infrastructure and its sources of financial support.

Russia will continue to take an active part in
international anti-piracy cooperation and in the overall
effort to assist in the long-term stabilization of
Somalia.

