Mr. Erwa (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I should like at
the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
take this opportunity to commend your initiative to convene
this meeting, which allows Members of the United Nations
that are not members of the Security Council to express
their views on an issue of great importance to the future of
the Organization. We also thank you for the initiative of
making the activities of the Security Council available on
an Internet website within the context of your efforts to
promote transparency and clarity in the Council's work.

In the same vein, I convey my thanks to the delegation
of the Russian Federation for the outstanding manner in
which it conducted the presidency of the Council last month.

The United Nations Charter sets down the principles
that determine the role of the Security Council in the
prevention of conflicts within the context of its work in the
maintenance of international peace and security. This is
carried out through the application of effective collective
measures to remove the causes that threaten international
peace and security, as reflected in Article 1 and Article 33,
paragraph 2, of the Charter. The latter authorizes the
Security Council, when it deems necessary, to call upon the
parties to settle their dispute by peaceful means. Articles 39
to 51 also give the Council the authority to take
enforcement measures under Chapter VII with respect to
threats to international peace and security.

In his report on the work of the Organization, the
Secretary-General points out that preventing disputes is one
of the most important commitments of the United Nations,
but that little interest is accorded to preventive measures.
Instead, huge resources are spent on efforts to resolve
disputes. In his report on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in
Africa, the Secretary-General also stresses the positive
aspects of conflict prevention, such as social and economic
justice and the requirements of economic and social
development in the context of the establishment of peace
and stability.

In "An Agenda for Peace", the former Secretary-
General highlights the roles of the Security Council and the
General Assembly in conflict prevention and of the United
Nations in this regard within the framework of the
commitment to international law and collective security
measures and in accordance with the United Nations
Charter. Here, we would stress the importance of the role
of the Secretary-General in preventive diplomacy, in
accordance with Article 99 of the Charter, in bringing to
the attention of the Security Council any matter which in
his opinion may threaten the maintenance of international
peace and security, so that it may take the measures
necessary to prevent the outbreak of conflict.

In this regard, the Sudanese delegation welcomes the
presidential statement, to be issued following this
discussion, on the Secretary-General's consultations with
the Council on the analysis of all threats to international
peace and security along with recommendations,
throughout the world. We would point to the important
role assumed by regional organizations in the prevention
of conflicts, since greater cooperation is required between
the United Nations and these organizations in the
promotion of joint action, cooperation and coordination to
prevent conflict.

Sudan believes that there is a very close relationship
between the prevention of conflict and the actions of the
international community to take further steps to eliminate
the causes of conflict by helping the developing countries
to end poverty and to foster economic development and
national reconciliation and stability. Each of these
elements is closely linked to the prevention of conflicts
that arise from economic and social causes. In this
context, we must strengthen cooperation between the
Security Council and all the bodies of the United Nations
system, in particular the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council.

The primary role of the Security Council, according
to the Charter, is first to focus on urging the parties to a
conflict to settle it through peaceful means. This must be
undertaken in full respect for the principles of the
Charter, in particular those of the sovereign equality and
independence of States and non-intervention in the
internal affairs of States or in any other purely national
concerns. We believe that the Council will be unable to
assume its full role in the maintenance of international
peace and security, particularly in the prevention of
conflicts, until it is transformed into a more democratic
body with a fair geographical representation of today's
international community, instead of that of 1945.

In many issues that it has considered, especially
those linked to aggression, the Security Council has
exercised a policy of double standards. At times, it has
used the language of condemnation and denunciation,

 

while at others it has tried to enforce the provisions of
Chapter VII of the Charter. We find, however, that the
Council sometimes ignores similar cases that strongly
threaten international peace and security.

Before the Council is the issue of the bombing of the
Al-Shifa pharmaceutical plant in Khartoum, which is an act
of aggression undertaken by the United States. This issue
has remained on the Council's agenda for over a year,
while the very simple request of Sudan for the dispatch of
a fact-finding mission - nothing more - has gone
ignored. It is clear to me that the presidential statement to
be issued will concentrate on the issue of fact-finding. The
American aggression against the Sudanese pharmaceutical
plant was a blatant violation of the principles of the
Charter. The United States has failed to provide any
convincing proof to persuade American public
opinion - let alone that of the international community
represented in the Security Council - that the aggression
was justified.

Sudan shares the international community's interest in
quelling the escalation, exacerbation and expansion of
conflicts and civil wars in many areas of the world and in
stemming the human tragedies and economic disasters they
entail. Sudan emphasizes the importance of taking
collective measures and redoubling efforts to suppress the
causes of conflicts before they erupt. We believe, however,
that these measures and means must be taken with the
agreement and full understanding of the States involved and
within the framework of the United Nations Charter.

The absolute call to intervene in the internal affairs of
States outside such framework and in the absence of a just,
democratic and transparent world order is in fact a call of
the Council to an era of chaos and the hegemony of the
mighty over the weak and the law of the jungle. We would
like to recall here what His Excellency President Abdul
Aziz Bouteflika, the current President of the OAU, said
when he expressed the fears of small and vulnerable
countries regarding humanitarian intervention. When
addressing the General Assembly at the fifty-fourth session,
he said:

"we remain extremely sensitive to any undermining of
our sovereignty not only because sovereignty is our
final defence against the rules of an unjust world, but
because we have no active part in the decision-making
process in the Security Council nor in monitoring the
implementation of decisions." (4th meeting, p. 14)
Despite the fact that modern history is full of
examples of such unjust laws and resolutions, the
American aggression against the Al-Shifa pharmaceutical
plant, which we have referred to above, is a clear
indication of the injustice wrought towards the Sudan by
the Council by not even sending a fact-finding mission to
Sudan.

Sudan - which calls on the Security Council to
reject such double standards in the humanitarian domain
and which attaches equal importance to any acts of
violence perpetrated against all civilians all over the
world, instead of following a selective approach - has
great hopes that the Council will take up its functions in
the maintenance of international peace and security within
commitments to the principles of political independence
and territorial sovereignty of all States in accordance with
the United Nations Charter.

It is really ironic that when the Security Council
meets to study and consider ways to promote its role in
the prevention and containment of conflicts, the United
States, which is a permanent member of the Council and
a supposed safeguard of international peace and security,
is trying today to fuel the fires of war in southern Sudan.
The American Administration today has announced that
it intends to provide direct humanitarian assistance to
insurgents in southern Sudan. This is a blatant violation
of Operation Lifeline Sudan, which is undertaken by the
United Nations in the Sudan in the framework of
transparency and in full cooperation with the Government
of Sudan. This was expressed in all General Assembly
resolutions in this area, which have commended the
cooperation of the Government of Sudan.

The most recent of these resolutions was 53/10,
which stipulates in paragraph 1:

(spoke in English)

"Acknowledges with appreciation the
cooperation by the Government of the Sudan with
the United Nations, including agreements and
arrangements achieved to facilitate relief operations
with a view to improving United Nations assistance
to affected areas, and encourages the continuation of
that cooperation".

(spoke in Arabic)

We pose a very legitimate question: why does the
United States fuel, through feverish attempts, the fires of

 

conflict in southern Sudan at a time when regional efforts
are made, with the support of the African continent and the
international community, headed by the European Union,
including the Council, in order to bring about a peaceful
settlement in the framework of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), to which the Sudan is
also fully committed.

This is in addition to the Sudan's commitment to other
initiatives aimed at promoting the IGAD initiative,
prominent among which are the Egyptian-Libyan initiative
and a series of acts undertaken by the Government of
Sudan on all levels to promote national reconciliation. The
most recent of these took place last week, with the signing
of the Djibouti Agreement, an agreement with one of the
major opposition parties achieved through a valuable
initiative by His Excellency Ismail Omar Guelleh, the
President of Djibouti. The agreement has had a positive
impact within and outside the Sudan and on many countries
interested in Sudanese matters.

We had expected a super-Power such as the United
States, with great responsibility in the maintenance of
international peace, to support such efforts to bring about
peace in the Sudan through positive participation, by
including divergent view- points and seeking peaceful
negotiations with other regional parties to bolster a peaceful
settlement. However, it is now clear that the United States,
through this latest step, is trying to destabilize the Sudan,
destroy its unity and divide it into smaller States by
attempting to destabilize the entire African continent
through the very limited views of some of the African
policy makers in the American Administration.
As the Sudan presents these facts before this historic
meeting of the Security Council on the Council's role in the
prevention of conflict, it is warning against this latest
American step, which is considered a flagrant violation of
the United Nations Charter and international law and
contradicts the principles of international neutrality in
transferring and transporting humanitarian assistance. The
Sudan hopes the Security Council will assume its duties in
order to bring about stability and peace in the region and
the maintenance of international peace and security in
accordance with the United Nations Charter.

We would also like to stress that the Sudan will
defend its sovereignty and territorial integrity and will not
allow any party, whichever it may be, to violate its
territorial integrity and sovereignty.

