The President (spoke in Arabic): Under rule 37 of
the Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia,
Rwanda and Serbia to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome the presence
in the Security Council today of Mr. Aleksandar Vueie,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Defence
of the Republic of Serbia .

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional
rules of procedure, I invite the following briefers to
participate in this meeting: Judge Theodor Meron,
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia and President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals; Judge
Vagn Joensen, President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda; Mr. Serge Brammertz, Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia; and Mr. Hassan Bubacar J allow, Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and
Prosecutor of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
documents S/2012/592 and S/2012/594, which contain,
respectively, the report of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the report
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.
I also wish to draw Council members' attention to
documents S/2012/836 and S/2012/847, which contain,
respectively, a letter dated 14 November 2012 from the
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda and a letter dated 16 November 2012 from the
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia, addressed to the President of
the Security Council. In addition, I wish to draw the
attention of Council members to document S/2012/849,
which contains a letter dated 16 November 2012 from
the President of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals, addressed to the President of
the Security Council.

I now give the floor to Judge Meron.

