Mr. Pascoe: I am grateful for the opportunity to
brief once again on the situation in the Middle East.
Let me turn first to the political process between the
Israelis and the Palestinians. Bilateral contacts between
Israel and the Palestinians continued, with meetings
held between Israeli negotiators and Foreign Minister
Tzipi Livni and the lead Palestinian negotiator, Ahmad
Qurei, on 23 September; between President Abbas and
President Peres on 26 September in New York; and
between advisers.

In Israel, the process of political transition is
ongoing. On 21 September, President Peres
commissioned newly elected Kadima Party leader
Livni to form a new Government. As of this report,
coalition negotiations are continuing, with the deadline
extended by President Peres to 3 November.

On 26 September, the Secretary-General
convened a meeting of the Quartet principals at United
Nations Headquarters. The Quartet called upon the
parties to make every effort to conclude an agreement
before the end of 2008 and underlined its commitment
to the irreversibility of the process leading to the
creation of a Palestinian State living in peace and
security alongside Israel.
The Quartet principals welcomed the parties'
suggestion to brief the Quartet on the negotiations and
expressed interest in coordinating such a meeting at
mutually acceptable time, hopefully in the coming
weeks. The Quartet also agreed that spring 2009 could
be an appropriate time for an international meeting in
Moscow.

The Quartet commended Egypt for its efforts to
help reunite the West Bank and Gaza within the
framework of the legitimate Palestinian Authority.
Quartet members and Arab League representatives held
a constructive discussion, over an iftar hosted by the
Secretary-General on 26 September, on how to work
together in the crucial period ahead in support of the
Israeli-Palestinian process, Palestinian reunification
and regional peace. The meeting also reaffirmed the
central importance of the Arab Peace Initiative.

In that context, the Secretariat continues to work
closely with Arab countries. Last week, Special
Coordinator Robert Serry visited Amman for an
audience with King Abdullah II of Jordan and meetings
with other senior officials.

On 22 September, the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
comprising the parties and key donors, as well as
Quartet Representative Blair, met on the margins of the
General Assembly. The Committee commended the
efforts of the Government of Prime Minister Fayyad to
implement its reform and development agenda and
encouraged the continuation of ongoing security and
institution-building efforts.

It urged further steps, including the easing of
movement and access restrictions. Donors have
contributed over $1.3 billion in budgetary aid during
2008 towards Palestinian Authority recurring costs and
development initiatives.

The security efforts of the Palestinian Authority,
in accordance with the Road Map, focus on deepening
progress in the Jenin governorate, which Special
Coordinator Serry visited today. Efforts are being
extended to Hebron, where Palestinian security forces
recently discovered a tunnel allegedly used by
militants. We also note positively that considerable
progress has been made by the Palestinian Authority in
defining a strategy for the development of the judicial
sector and that the number of judges and prosecutors
has doubled during the past year.
08-5642]
Despite those efforts, the situation on the ground
is not improving in the way that is required. Israeli-
Palestinian violence this past month claimed the lives
of seven Palestinians, two of them children, while
injuring 116 Palestinians and 34 Israelis. Among the
incidents were the killings of a 61-year-old Palestinian
woman and a 15-year-old child when the Israel
Defense Forces (IDF) fired at stone-throwers in the
West Bank. There were clashes in Ni'lin village on the
first day of the annual olive harvest and an incident in
Ni'lin on 23 September in which Israeli border police
reportedly fired tear gas at a civilian delegation
including a European Commission official and local
Palestinian officials and members of non-governmental
organizations. There were also physical assaults by
settlers against Palestinian farmers and the burning
down of an olive grove on 15 October. This year's
olive harvest is in its early days, and concerns exist for
the safety of Palestinian farmers as they harvest crops
in the vicinity of settlements and outposts, as well as
about their ability to gain access to land isolated
between the Barrier and the Green Line.

Israeli Defence Minister Barak has denounced
those attacking olive pickers and has stated that the
IDF is making a major effort to protect farmers, but he
has said that it is impossible to guard all locations. We
reiterate the call of the Quartet for the enforcement of
the rule of law, given continued settler violence against
Palestinian civilians.

On 23 September, 19 Israelis, among them eight
IDF soldiers, were injured when a Palestinian man
from East Jerusalem drove a car into a group of
pedestrians. The driver was shot dead by an IDF officer
at the scene. Tensions were heightened by communal
clashes in the city of Acre in Israel on and in the days
following the Jewish holiday of Yom Kippur.

While the Government of Israel has taken some
positive steps aimed at easing certain internal
movement for Palestinians in the West Bank, there are,
according to the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, currently 630 obstacles to
Palestinian movement throughout the West Bank.
Barrier construction has also continued in occupied
Palestinian territory, contrary to the International Court
of Justice advisory opinion.

The United Nations continues to engage Israeli
authorities on access restrictions imposed on United
Nations staff in both Gaza and the West Bank and the
08-56421

facilitation of the import of materials still required for
the resumption of stalled United Nations projects in
Gaza. The Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator is
seeking solutions to the operational problems of the
United Nations in a manner consistent with Israel's
security concerns and is looking to work even more
closely with the Israeli Government and, in particular,
with those who are able to provide solutions.

There has been no progress in the reporting
period on Israel's key Road Map and Annapolis
commitments, that is, a genuine settlement freeze,
removal of outposts and opening of Palestinian
institutions in East Jerusalem. Settlement construction
continues across the West Bank, including in East
Jerusalem. The United Nations position on their
illegality is well known. The Quartet's clear statement
expressed concern about increasing settlement activity
and called on Israel to meet its obligations. These must
be heeded.

We continue to follow closely all developments
pertaining to the Old City of Jerusalem. The month of
Ramadan passed with smoother coordination than in
previous years, but a majority of Palestinian Muslims
were not able to pray at Al-Aqsa mosque due to permit
and access restrictions. Under increased Israeli security
presence in the Old City, a synagogue was opened by
settlers in the Muslim quarter on 12 October. The
Secretary-General continues to call for an end to
unilateral action in Jerusalem and reminds all parties
that the status of the city remains an issue for
permanent status negotiations.

The calm brokered by Egypt is by and large
holding between Gaza and southern Israel, although
incidents have taken place, including the firing of a
rocket into the Negev yesterday and the subsequent
closure of border crossings between Israel and the
Gaza Strip. The Erez crossing was reopened, but
commercial crossings remain closed today.

Unfortunately, there has been no improvement in
the movement of goods and people in and out of Gaza.
During the period, supplies of petrol, diesel, cooking
gas and industrial gas fell short of weekly needs. The
number of the truckloads of imported goods allowed
into Gaza decreased compared with the previous
period. Construction projects valued at $240 million,
including $149 million-worth of United Nations
construction projects, remain on hold owing to the
absence of construction materials.
3

The number of people who entered Israel for
medical treatment during the first four weeks of
September decreased by 38 per cent compared with the
first four weeks of August. Some 150 students were
denied permission to leave Gaza to reach their places
of study abroad. On 8 October, the IDF, citing security
concerns, denied entry into Gaza to eight Israeli
medical volunteers who had been issued permits.

Fourteen Palestinians were reportedly killed as a
result of collapses, closures or accidents in tunnels
along the Gaza-Egypt border during the reporting
period. Media reports suggest that several thousand
Palestinians gain income from the tunnel industry,
which is reportedly regulated by Hamas. The current
situation underscores the importance of a sustained and
orderly reopening of crossings into Gaza under the
Palestinian Authority, in accordance with the 2005
Agreement on Access and Movement, as called for by
the Quartet.

The continued split between the West Bank and
Gaza is having increasingly adverse effects. Two
Palestinians, including one child, were killed in Gaza
in internal violence. The teachers' strike reported last
month continued, affecting around 250,000 pupils.
Thousands of new substitute teachers are being brought
into the schools by Hamas, and frictions were evident
on 21 October when a student was declared clinically
dead after having fallen three stories following an
altercation involving a Hamas-appointed teacher. The
health workers' strike continued, causing concerns over
the quality and timely provision of services and delays
in elective surgeries and referrals. The percentage of
essential drug items jumped from zero to 22 per cent,
double that of the essential drug items out of stock in
August, when responsibility for delivering medical
supplies to Gaza was transferred from the World Health
Organization to the Palestinian Authority Ministry of
Health.

The Egyptian-mediated process aimed at the
reunification of Gaza and the West Bank within the
framework of the legitimate Palestinian Authority is
ongoing. Earlier this month, Egyptian mediators
completed a round of meetings with Palestinian
factions, which have now received a draft proposal for
consideration. President Abbas has also continued
regional consultations, including a recent visit to
Damascus. We look forward to all regional States
lending their support to Egypt's efforts under the
auspices of the League of Arab States, which will meet
at the foreign minister level in Cairo next month.

We continue to call for the International
Committee of the Red Cross to be granted access to
Israeli Corporal Gilad Shalit, now in his twenty-sixth
month of captivity, and for his release. We reaffirm our
support for efforts to secure his release, as well as that
of a number of Palestinian prisoners.

No further indirect Israeli-Syrian negotiations
under Turkish auspices took place during the reporting
period. The Quartet expressed its desire to see those
talks intensify with the goal of achieving peace in
accordance with the Madrid terms of reference, and we
hope they will resume soon. The situation in the
occupied Syrian Golan remained quiet during the
reporting period, although Israeli settlement activity is
ongoing.

A car bomb exploded in Damascus on
29 September, reportedly killing 17 civilians and
injuring more than a dozen others.

On 16 October, Lebanon and Syria signed an
agreement providing for the establishment of
diplomatic ties between the two countries. That is a
landmark event that should bring benefits to both
countries and to the region. The Secretary-General
reported on that development in more detail in his
recent report to the Council on the implementation of
resolution 1559 (2004) (S/2008/264).

In an important milestone in the implementation
of the Doha Agreement, the Lebanese Parliament
adopted a new electoral law on 29 September. The law
reflects the electoral districting agreed upon at Doha
and incorporates some of the reforms that had been
proposed by the Boutros commission.

A year after the end of the fighting in the
Palestinian refugee camp of Nahr el-Bared, the first
phase of rubble removal began on 17 October and is
expected to last for approximately eight months. That
is a welcome development for the more than 27,000
people who were displaced as a result of the fighting.
Funding is urgently required to meet reconstruction
costs and the humanitarian needs of the displaced.

Security incidents continued to occur in the
northern city of Tripoli during the reporting period. On
29 September, a bomb that targeted the Lebanese
Armed Forces in the city killed six people, including
four soldiers. Alleged members of a terrorist cell that

08-5642]
the Lebanese authorities believe is affiliated with Fatah
al-Islam were subsequently arrested on 12 October by
Lebanese security forces. The terrorist cell is believed
to have been behind two other deadly attacks against
the Lebanese Armed Forces earlier this year.

The situation in the area of operations of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon remained
tense but generally quiet during the past month. Israeli
air violations continued at an average of 10 per day
during the month.

The United Nations Special Coordinator for
Lebanon, Michael Williams, began work as of
1 October. Mr. Williams is responsible for coordinating
the work of the United Nations in Lebanon and for
representing the Secretary-General on all political
aspects of the Organization's work in the country. He is
also responsible for following up on the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006).

Notwithstanding the transition currently under
way in Israel, we hope that Israeli-Palestinian
negotiations will not only continue but intensify
between now and the end of the year, within the
Annapolis framework. We look forward to the parties
08-5642]

briefing the Quartet in the near future. Conditions on
the ground in the West Bank must significantly
improve through parallel actions and the meeting of
Road Map commitments, especially on settlements.
Conditions in Gaza must be eased, the calm extended
and unity pursued under Egyptian auspices. We
encourage the continuation and intensification of the
indirect Israeli-Syrian talks. Further work is also
essential to build on recent positive developments in
Lebanon.

The Secretary-General will continue to work
intensively for the implementation of all relevant
Security Council resolutions and for the achievement
of a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the
Middle East.

