Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to welcome you here to the Security
Council, Mr. President, and to thank you and your
delegation for having given us this opportunity to
discuss this very important topic, namely, peace and
security challenges facing small island developing
States (SIDS). I should like also to thank the Secretary-
General and the Prime Ministers of Samoa and Jamaica,
as well as the Minister of Finance of Seychelles, for
their presentations.

SIDS face several challenges, such as climate
change, natural disasters, transnational organized
crime and the illicit exploitation of natural resources.
All ofthese challenges are threats to peace and security
for humankind as a whole. These States have several
unique features, including their small size, their
isolation or remoteness, and the smallness of their
resource base, all of which means that we all need to be
more watchful and responsive to their needs.

On the issue of climate change, I think that it is
important to talk about the protection of SIDS against the
adverse impacts of that phenomenon. That will require
the implementation of an international network that is
more robust and has a higher profile so as to mobilize
international support to tackle this phenomenon. It
is also important that we make available all of the
necessary resources and financing so as to help these
countries to be in a position to better tackle and meet
these challenges, which constitute a real survival issue
for their populations.

There are many consequences for the rights and
the sovereignty and independence of those countries,
because entire territories could disappear, along with
entire nations. The Security Council must play a key and
leading role in meeting these challenges and responding
optimally to them. An example of this would be the
lack of resources available to those countries, which
might lead to conflicts and tension. It is important that
we be vigilant in meeting these challenges and find
solutions through dialogue and mediation, so as to avert
inter-community conflict.

We would like also to thank the French Government,
which will shortly host the Conference of the Parties
of the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change, in December this year. We call on all
countries that will participate in the meeting to reach an
agreement to counter that phenomenon when we meet
in December, so as to reach an agreement that fully
meets and responds to the needs of SIDS in particular.

Illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons
also constitutes one of the major threats with which we
are faced and a serious form of criminality, organized
crime in particular. This is a threat to the security
and to the economies of those countries, because the
criminal activities supported by such weapons have
been ramped up. Such criminality can threaten both
foreign and local investment. SIDS are a hub for
organized criminal gangs in many cases because of
their many unique features, including their geographic
remoteness and the difficulty of their authorities
effectively tackling trafficking owing to a lack of
resources. The international community, therefore,
commensurate with the requests of those countries,
must make available the requisite aid in order to make
sure that they can tackle phenomena such as these. The
Governments of those islands also need to shoulder
their responsibility to implement and roll out strategies
to address trafficking.

Turning to regional issues and initiatives, the
Governments of neighbouring island countries must
continue to coordinate with their neighbours in
order particularly to address the issue of illegal arms
trafficking, which often involves small arms, and
they must cooperate in a similar way with their larger
neighbours. The threats to international peace and
security for SIDS are often responded to in Security
Council resolutions. We have moved from a general
economic embargo to a targeted sanctions regime that
focuses on terrorism, cross-border attacks and crimes.
There are currently 15 sanctions regimes in place in
the United Nations, and fulfilling the mandates of the
sanctions Committees is a major challenge to small
island developing States. They have problems when
it comes to fully implementing sanctions regimes, in
particular because these countries are more exposed
to the activities of terrorist groups and organizations
and those who work to proliferate weapons of mass
destruction. Those sanctions regimes are often
very complex, particularly with regard to assessing
dual-purpose items, traffickers, travel bans, the
freezing of companies' assets and the illicit use and
transportation of natural resources.

There is therefore an unprecedented need
for enhanced capacity to fight such phenomena.
Accordingly, in the framework of the 2014 high-level
review of the United Nations sanctions regime, Jordan
reaffirmed the importance of focusing on capacity-
building and to aid those countries who have gaps in
the implementation of the sanctions regime. That can
be achieved through the establishment of a mechanism
allowing such countries to fulfil their legal international
commitments under the sanctions regime, thereby
enabling us all to remain confident that those sanctions
regimes are fully implemented.

In conclusion, we call upon the international
community to take the necessary steps to tackle those
peace and security challenges - in particular in
SIDS - and to work collectively to achieve the stated
objectives.

