The President: May I at the outset warmly
welcome the Secretary-General among us for our
deliberations today.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998),
1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)

Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) (S/2001/926)

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Albania, Belgium and Yugoslavia in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. S'ahovie
(Yugoslavia), took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Nesho (Albania) and Mr. de Ruyt (Belgium)
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Hans Haekkerup, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Haekkerup to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on the agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
document S/200l/926 and addendum 1.

As there is no list of speakers for this meeting, I
would invite Council members who wish to take the
floor to so indicate to the Secretariat as from now.

The Security Council will now hear a briefing by
Mr. Hans Haekkerup, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo. I give him
the floor.


