Mr. Rodriguez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation appreciates and acknowledges the statement
made this morning by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
as well as the information and briefing provided by the
Executive Director of the United Nations
Environmental Programme, Mr. Achim Steiner. My
delegation also takes due note of the clear and precise
portrayal of the problem of climate change made by the
President of Nauru, Mr. Marcus Stephen. Peru
associates itself with the statements made by the
Permanent Representatives of Argentina and of Egypt
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, respectively.

That climate change is a real problem for all
countries of the world without exception is no secret to
anyone. We all are suffering it to various degrees, so
the international community, in terms of our respective
capacities and levels of responsibility, must understand
the historic and overriding need to take decisive action
to assuage the scourge.

This is the right time to reaffirm that there are
duly established multilateral channels to address the
issue through the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change, which is the
appropriate context within which States should seek
the necessary consensus, and the relevant United

 
Nations entities, in particular the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council, the Commission on
Sustainable Development and the United Nations
Environment Programme. Those bodies should
exclusively address the issue of sustainable
development in general.

I would like to underscore some of the havoc that
climate change has been wreaking in my country. The
population of Peru lives in very diverse ecosystems. In
our case, the greater intensity and frequency of climate
disorders, such as the El Nifio phenomenon, result in
severe floods on the coast and droughts in the Andes,
causing serious social and economic damage. At the
same time, our glaciers, which account for more than
half the tropical glaciers in the world, are affected by
rapid melting, which increases the scarcity of water for
human consumption, agriculture and power generation.
The Peruvian Amazon forest, the second largest in
Latin America, which is a priceless biodiversity
reserve, is equally affected. In other words, the threat
of climate change is by no means alien to us.

The problem of climate change is of global
proportions. Therefore, we will be able to tackle it only
with the multilateral and concerted action of the entire
international community through the structure provided
by the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change, its additional instruments and their
core principles, in particular that of common but
differentiated responsibilities.

In that context, we reaffirm our conviction that
specific measures to contain greenhouse gas emissions
must urgently be adopted. Here, it is a priority to
strengthen the multilateral regime and full respect for
commitments undertaken. For that, we must take into
account that our peoples demand levels of well-being
and development that we will have to attain under
conditions of climate uncertainty and the changed
availability of our natural resources. That will force us
to make drastic changes in their management, and will
mean designing new and less carbon-intensive
manufacturing and technology.

For all those reasons, we reiterate our demand for
support, not only in recognition of the efforts that
developing countries have already made, but also as an
ethical imperative of global solidarity. That
requirement includes the pressing need to establish the
financing and cooperation mechanisms provided for in
the Convention. Such support, together with backing

 
for capacity-building and dynamically and flexibly
linked technologies, is a trilogy that will require the
creation and definition by all parties requiring it of a
process that must be aligned with national
circumstances and needs, without restrictive
conditionalities.

Peru acknowledges that small island States have
been affected by both the global economic and
financial crisis and the consequences of the food and
energy crises, as well as by climate change and natural
disasters, such as the earthquake that struck Haiti in
January 2010. We should also take into account the
threat to many island States of sea-level rise, whose
two main causes have been identified as temperature
rise and polar ice melt.

From our position as a developing country, we
show solidarity for the efforts of those States, and
advocate the due implementation of the cooperation
commitments of the international community to
financing, technical cooperation and capacity-building.
The recent food and financial crises revealed that the
structure and operation of the food market were too
weak to cope with the effects of successive crises,
exacerbated by the implementation of inappropriate
policies in terms of efficient land use and food
production.

As in many other countries, in Peru, agriculture
provides 62.8 per cent of national food production and
is the main source of livelihood for the rural
population. However, of that 62.8 per cent, 66 per cent
of the agriculture depends entirely on rain. Peruvian
agriculture is therefore very vulnerable to Climate
change, which affects our food security.

In that context, it is appropriate to continuing
working globally to undertake measures to ensure food
security throughout the world, in particular in the
poorest countries, essentially through effective
strategies managed by every Government to implement
investment plans, develop financing mechanisms, and
broaden North-South and South-South cooperation,
and so on.

Finally, I believe that this is the right time to
make an urgent call for the solidarity of all States
Members of the Organization so that, setting aside
individual interests and looking at the future of all
humankind altruistically, we can draw up as soon as
possible, in the relevant multilateral bodies, an ethical,
joint, far-reaching, inclusive and transparent agreement
 

that will allow us to tackle climate change and to
bequeath a successful outcome to succeeding
generations on our planet.

