Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary- General for Yemen, Martin Griffiths, and the Director of the Coordination Division of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Raj Rajasingham, for their briefings on the political and humanitarian situation in Yemen. We highly value Mr. Griffiths' work of and professionalism. We pay tribute to the courage and dedication of our humanitarian colleagues, who deliver assistance to the Yemeni people in very difficult conditions. The situation in the Republic of Yemen remains of extreme concern. Despite intense mediation efforts, the Stockholm Agreement has still not been fully implemented. The implementation of the Riyadh agreement on the south of Yemen is supposed to make a considerable contribution to stabilizing the situation. Russia, which has historically had friendly relations with Yemen, views Yemen as an independent, sovereign State with territorial integrity. We reaffirm our full support for Mr. Griffiths in his task of convincing the parties to the Yemeni conflict that there is no alternative to a political settlement and encouraging them to develop confidence-building measures and establish a comprehensive ceasefire. From the beginning, we have advocated for an exclusively political and diplomatic solution to the crisis in Yemen, based on inclusive dialogue among all Yemeni forces, without exception. We will continue to support United Nations mediation efforts in Yemen, including through contacts with all political stakeholders in the country and all interested parties, both in our national capacity and as a permanent member of the Security Council. As in other regional conflicts, a unified position among all external players is required in Yemen as we come together in support of our Special Envoy. Early this week, the Security Council unanimously voted to extend the mandate of the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement (see S/PV.8701). We firmly believe that a greater international presence in the country will facilitate the disengagement of opposing forces in the city itself, help stabilize the situation in Yemen overall and allow for the start of discussions on a framework for a comprehensive settlement. We call on all sides to support the efforts of Mr. Griffiths on that track. It is thanks to United Nations mediation efforts that we see an overall decrease in fighting and in the number of air raids. Despite a few isolated incidents, the ceasefire regime has held. Thanks to the agreement reached on the use of customs revenues from the port of Al-Hudaydah to pay the salaries of civil servants, ships have resumed entry and the unloading of commercial cargo in the port, which opens up additional avenues for providing humanitarian assistance. We believe that the political will to find common ground, demonstrated by the parties in Yemen, will help to achieve an expeditious political settlement to the protracted conflict. In that regard, we call on the parties to the conflict to do all in their power to ensure that such positive developments lead to a full cessation of hostilities as soon as possible and, consequently, save human lives and launch a comprehensive peace settlement in Yemen, exclusively under the auspices of the United Nations. That solution would meet the interests of all that Arab country's main political forces and religious and social groups. Ensuring an inclusive process is one of the determining factors in achieving lasting stability. The international community must continue to make collective efforts to put the conflict on a political track and provide the necessary assistance to millions of Yemeni citizens, who, as we have heard today, are in dire need of assistance and experiencing one of the worst humanitarian crises. We are convinced that such a development would serve to not only benefit Yemen,but also to ensure the security of all neighbouring States of the region. While we undertake efforts on the political track, we must not forget that war, chaos and internal conflict only help terrorist groups. We call on all Yemenis to unite in combating that destructive scourge and to suppress terrorism together with a view to restoring State stability, ensuring the smooth functioning of Government institutions and returning the country to the path of progressive development in an atmosphere of cooperation with all its neighbours, including Arab States and Iran. In that regard, we recall resolution 598 (1987), which requested the Secretary-General to develop a regional security architecture, in consultation with States of the region. We once again draw attention to the Russian concept of collective security in the Persian Gulf region, which seeks to resolve conflict situations and develop confidence-building and control measures. The escalation of aggressive, accusatory rhetoric and the artificial stoking of anti-Iranian sentiments are destabilizing the already tense situation in the entire Middle East region. We will mark the fifth anniversary of the outbreak of the war in Yemen in April. We believe that this tragic landmark should impel the people of Yemen and all regional stakeholders to set their differences aside and reach agreement on a political settlement. It is high time for States in the Middle East, which possess rich history, traditions, cultures and vast natural resources, to take the issues of regional security into their own hands and engage in a mutually respectful dialogue, while casting aside negative external influences that are antagonizing inter-State relations and hampering prospects for peaceful coexistence and cooperation under various pretexts. Russia will actively contribute to the peaceful settlement of regional disputes, including in Yemen, based on deep trust with the States of the Middle East.
