Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the convening of this debate and the presence
of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court,
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, as well as her presentation of the
twentieth briefing on the situation in Darfur pursuant
to resolution 1593 (2005).

We note with concern that the humanitarian and
security situation in Darfur has deteriorated with
respect to the information contained in the previous
report (see S/PV.7199). We are alarmed by the fact
that, to date in 2014, the number of internally displaced
persons has surpassed 400,000, which is in addition to
the more than w million internally displaced since the
outbreak of the conflict in Darfur.

In the firm belief that the International Criminal
Court represents a major step forward in the fight
against impunity, we wish to reiterate our support for
the Court and for the work of its Prosecutor. We urge
the Prosecutor to continue to monitor the various crimes
allegedly committed in Darfur as detailed in the report,
which would apparently include, inter alia, aerial
bombardments of civilians; sexual and gender-based
crimes; and crimes against human rights defenders,
members of civil society and community leaders.

My country is particularly concerned by the
repeated crimes of sexual violence and the impunity
with which they are treated. We therefore reiterate that
it is the responsibility of the Government of the Sudan
to investigate all the allegations and, at the same time,
to guarantee freedom of movement for the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur so
that such reports can be duly addressed.

The Prosecutor's report also takes note of the
summmary of the report of the review group concerning
allegations of manipulation in the presentation of
reports on Darfur. We highlight the response of the
Secretary-General in addressing the Prosecutor's
request contained in her report of June 2014. We hope
that the implementation of the measures proposed by
the group, along with its other recommendations, will
help to prevent the repetition of such incidents.

The Council has a special commitment to the
situation in Darfur and to the International Criminal
Court. Once again, my country would like to stress that
it is vital to ensure that, with respect to cases referred
by the Council to the International Criminal Court,
the Council follow-up on the progress of each case in
order to assist the Court in making its work effective
and efficient with respect to accountability for the most
barbaric crimes against humanity.

It is possible to improve cooperaton between the
Security Council and the Court. In that regard, we
again urge the Council to respond to the Court's eight
communications on the matter of non-compliance. In a
similar vein, aware that the success of any investigation
depends on the cooperation of all the States concerned,
we repeat our call for all States parties to the Rome
Statute, as well as those that are not, to cooperate with
the International Criminal Court on the situation in
Darfur.

