I thank the Prosecutor, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her thirty-first report and for her excellent briefing to the Council today. Let me start by reaffirming Estonia's commitment to promoting respect for international law and a rules-based international order. Allow me to express our full confidence in the International Criminal Court (ICC) as an independent and impartial judicial institution. In this light, we further reaffirm our strong support for the work of the ICC and its Prosecutor. In implementing its mandate, the Court has a particular role in eliminating impunity and ensuring justice for the victims of the crimes enshrined in the Rome Statute, without impediments. As of yesterday, the former fugitive Ali Muhammad Ali Abd-Al-Rahman, also known as Ali Kushayb, has been in the custody of the ICC after surrendering himself voluntarily in the Central African Republic. This is an important step in the pursuit of justice for the crimes committed in Darfur. We join the Court in thanking the Central African Republic, France, Chad, the Netherlands and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic for their support in securing the arrest, surrender and transfer of Mr. Kushayb to the Court. I will now turn to the situation of the Sudan. We have followed with interest the positive developments in the Sudan, in particular in relation to the peace process, and we hope that it can be concluded by 20 June. However, peace cannot be achieved without justice. This is why we call on the authorities to extend their meaningful cooperation to the ICC. It is also important to ensure that every effort be made to prevent further violations on the ground. Estonia condemns, and calls for the cessation of, all acts of violence, which unfortunately continue to be perpetrated in the Sudan, including in the Darfur region, in 2020. We are particularly concerned about incidents of sexual and gender-based violence against women. We further join the Office of the Prosecutor in condemning attacks against humanitarian aid workers in Darfur. This is not a path towards sustainable peace. At the same time, we welcome the Sudan's commitment to assuming full responsibility for the protection of civilians. We hope that the African Union- United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, as well as the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in Sudan, will be seen as useful allies by the authorities in helping to build the necessary capacities to provide civilians with full protection. I now turn to the role of the complementarity of the Court. According to the Prosecutor's report, there is currently no information available whereby any of the ICC suspects held in the custody of the Sudanese authorities, including Mr. Al-Bashir, would be subject to domestic investigation or prosecution for the particular grave crimes alleged in the respective ICC warrants. As the ICC warrants remain in force, we call upon all States to fully engage and cooperate with the ICC on the arrest and surrender to The Hague of the now four remaining suspects. We see time and again that, in any peace process, the rebuilding of a resilient society needs to include the elimination of impunity. Six months ago, in December 2019 (see S/PV.8691), the Prosecutor expressed hope that in the near future her Office would be granted access to the Sudan to facilitate its work and discuss the way forward. According to the clarification provided in the latest report, at the end of May, the Office has not been able to access the territory of the Sudan to conduct investigations into the Darfur situation since 2007, precluding the Office from obtaining access to crime scenes, victims and witnesses, as well as documentary, judicial and forensic evidence. Therefore, while wholeheartedly welcoming the steps taken by the Sudan at the national level to begin to implement accountability, we call on the authorities to extend their full cooperation to the ICC in all necessary matters. We hope that the events of yesterday will mark the beginning of a new dialogue between the Sudanese authorities and the Court, which is a prerequisite for any meaningful path to the justice and accountability that the victims still long for and deserve.
