Mr. Moriko (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
cote d'Ivoire welcomes the adoption of resolution 2494
(2019), on the renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
(MINURSO) until 31 October 2020, and commends the
excellent work done by the United States as penholder
on the item.

By voting in favour of the draft resolution,
C6te d'Ivoire wished to reaffirm its support for the
momentum and positive dynamics created by the
two round-table processes with the participation of
Morocco, Algeria, Mauritania and the Frente Popular
para la Liberacion de Saguia el-Hamra y de Rio de Oro,
which give us hope for a lasting political solution to
the dispute under the auspices of the United Nations.
My country sees this resolution as an expression of
the Security Council's full support for the efforts
made so far by Mr. Horst Kohler, Personal Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Western Sahara. It is our
firm hope that the next Personal Envoy will build on
Mr. Kohler's achievements and on the agreement of the
four participants to meet again in the same format. To
that end, it is important that the stakeholders continue
to engage in order to reach a just, lasting and mutually
acceptable solution based on bold compromises to end
regional differences.

In addition, C6te d'Ivoire considers that Morocco's
efforts to reach a final settlement of the dispute,
including through its autonomy initiative, seem to us
to be serious and credible and to constitute a good
basis for discussion. My delegation fully supports
Morocco's accomplishments in the area of human
rights, through the role played by the committees of
the National Council of Human Rights in Dakhla and
Laayoune and the cooperation between Morocco and
the relevant special procedures mechanisms of the
Human Rights Council.

Cote d'Ivoire would like to take this opportunity
to commend the commitment of Mr. Colin Stewart,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Western Sahara and Head of MINURSO, whose work
on the ground in a difficult environment is helping
to ensure compliance with the military agreements
and the relevant obligations and to maintain peace in
the region.

In conclusion, C6te d'Ivoire urges the stakeholders,
the neighbouring States and the international
community to concert their efforts to reach a lasting
settlement to the dispute with a view to revitalizing the
unity of the Arab Maghreb for the benefit of the peoples
of the region.

