The Secretary-General: It is a great honour for
me to participate in this very important high-level
meeting of the Security Council.

First of all, I apologize for being late because of
my unavoidable meeting with the Head of State of the
Republic of Korea, my home country. I hope the
Council will understand the situation.

It is an honour to join this Council and to
welcome members to the United Nations. Allow me to
pay tribute to South Africa for convening this debate
on peace and security in Africa, and for giving us the
opportunity to discuss the important relationship
between the United Nations and the African Union
(AU).

President Mbeki, I am especially happy to
welcome you to the United Nations. Let me commend
your personal engagement in strengthening our
partnership.

Let me also congratulate President Kikwete of
Tanzania on assuming the chairmanship of the African
Union. I look forward to working with you, Sir, in the
months ahead.

In the 15 months that I have served as Secretary-
General, I have devoted more time to African issues
than to those on any other continent - from peace and
security to the Millennium Development Goals. I have
visited 11 African countries thus far, and I will leave
on Friday this week to visit four more.

Preventing and resolving conflict peacefully must
remain high on the shared agenda of the AU and the
United Nations. In this context, I welcome the
announcement of a new Government in Kenya. Now
that the immediate power-sharing issues have been
addressed, I urge all sides to stay committed to
resolving the longer-term causes of the recent unrest.

I am deeply concerned at the uncertainty created
by the prolonged non-release of the election results in
Zimbabwe. Absent a transparent solution to this
impasse, the situation could deteriorate further, with
serious implications for the people of Zimbabwe. The
Zimbabwean authorities and the countries of the region
have insisted that these matters are for the region to
resolve, and the international community continues to
watch and wait for decisive action. The credibility of
the democratic process in Africa could be at stake here.
If there is a second round of elections, they must be
conducted in a fair and transparent manner, with
international observers. I urge the leaders of the
Southern African Development Community (SADC) to
continue their efforts. The United Nations stands ready
to provide assistance in this regard.

Meanwhile, we must step up the work for
desperately needed progress in bringing peace and
stability to Darfur and Somalia. The partnership
between the AU and the United Nations will remain
crucial to these efforts.

The Council has heard Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs Lynn Pascoe introduce my two
reports. As these show, the relationship between the
United Nations and the AU is strong and broad.

The declaration on Enhancing UN-AU
Cooperation, signed in 2006 between Chairperson
Konare and my predecessor, Secretary-General Kofi
Annan, provides a vehicle for the United Nations to
assist in building the capacity of the African Union. We
have already made significant progress in giving life to
the vision behind the declaration.

As provided for in the Ten-Year Capacity-
Building Programme, we are taking concrete steps to
help develop the African Peace and Security
Architecture. This work covers a broad range of
activities, from good offices and mediation on border
issues, to early warning, conflict prevention and
building operational capacity.

We have established a dedicated team to help
operationalize the concept of an African standby force,
which would build on the valiant and pioneering efforts
of the African Union's missions in Burundi, Somalia
and the Sudan. Today, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations team develops training, operational
capacity and technical advice, in collaboration with the
African Union Commission, the subregional
organizations and donors.

Our two Organizations are now far better
equipped for the critical task of mediation, thanks to
the establishment of the secretariat of the AU Panel of
the Wise, and the launch of the United Nations
mediation standby team of experts. Our cooperation
08-30672
during the crisis in Kenya is an example of how we can
achieve more by working together.

Overall, we should be proud of the progress we
have made. But, above all, we should be energized to
do even more as we move ahead.

I am heartened at the deepening cooperation
between this Council and the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union. I warmly welcome
tomorrow's joint meeting of the two Councils - the
second of its kind, and the first to be held at United
Nations Headquarters.

This debate also gives me an opportunity to pay
tribute to the outgoing Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, His Excellency Mr. Alpha Oumar
Konare. Chairman Konare, under your leadership, the
AU has transformed its relationship with the rest of the
world. I look forward to working closely with your
successor, Mr. Jean Ping.

As we consolidate the partnership between our
institutions, I will spare no effort in making it
complementary, effective and inclusive. In the two
reports (S/2008/18, S/2008/186) that the Council will
examine today, I have made a number of specific
proposals for its consideration. I am resolved to
enhance cooperation with all regional organizations, so
as to create in the future effective mechanisms for
conflict prevention and resolution, as well as a
predictable, interlinked and reliable system for global
peacekeeping under the Charter. I am confident that the
Council's meeting today will contribute to that goal.

