The President: I thank Ambassador Rosselli Frieri
for his briefing.

I shall now make a statement as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1636
(2005), the Committee established pursuant to resolution
2140 (2014) and the the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.

I would like to share some of my thoughts and
observations on the activities I have conducted during
these two years as Chair of subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council.

First, the 2140 Committee met four times in
informal consultations this year. The Yemen sanctions
regime can assist in arriving at a political solution to the
conflict. While Yemen's political situation is extremely
fragile, I believe that it is all the more important for
Council members to discuss how the Committee can
contribute to the political process. The Panel of Experts
has been very active and achieved meaningful work.
For example, it has presented helpful case studies, in
addition to its mandated reporting. The Chair has made
efforts to ensure the independence of the Panel and to
support its activities. Unfortunately, I have not been
able to travel to Yemen during my tenure. I believe that
it will be useful for the next Chair and the Committee
members to undertake a visit to the region so as to
acquire first-hand information from the ground.

Allow me now to say a few words in my capacity as
Chair of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions. Japan assumed the
chairmanship of the Informal Working Group for the
third time. This time, we decided to make a focused
effort on two things: first, improving the transitional
arrangements for newly elected Council members; and
secondly, revising the note by the President in document
S/2010/507. In so doing, we desired to make an impact
both through codification and actual practice.

We first tackled the issue of improving transitional
arrangements fornewly elected members. Afterintensive
discussion, the note by the President S/2016/6l9 was
adopted in July last year. The note outlined measures to
facilitate the preparedness of newly elected members
by inviting them to observe the work of the Council
for an expanded period of three months. The note also
set out a more defined and advanced timeline with an
emphasis on inclusiveness in the selection of the Chairs
of subsidiary bodies in response to the strong call of
many outgoing Chairs of subsidiary bodies.

Facilitation for the selection of the Chairs was
carried out both in 2016 and in 2017, in accordance with
the new note, with Japan and one permanent member
serving as co-facilitators in both years. We are now in
the process of conducting the handover to the incoming
Chairs, also in accordance with the note.

The Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Matters went on to explore some
useful ideas and proposals that emerged from our open
debate (see S/PV.7740) during our last presidency
in July 2016 for revising note 507. There were rich
discussions on lessons learned and challenges relating
to past practices. During the course of that process,
I updated members of the Council on the work, and
also exchanged Views with interested non-Council
members. Thanks to the contributions of members
of the Council, as well as those of the wider United
Nations membership, I believe that the revised version
of presidential note 507 (S/2017/507) represents a
comprehensive and balanced text. It is indeed a truly
collective achievement.

We must stress that improving the working
methods of the Council does not end with the adoption
of the revised version of note 507. It is an open-ended,
ongoing process of collective endeavours, and what
is most important is the implementation and actual
practice of the Security Council. During the presidency
this month, I will try my best to implement some useful
measures contained within the note, such as suggesting
a few areas for Council members to focus upon, at least
one day prior to informal consultations and attending
press stakeouts following every session of informal
consultations. We recently issued the 2017 edition
of what is known as the Green Book on the working
methods of the Council. I have brought 100 copies with
me here today, and they have been placed in the quiet
room for anyone interested in taking one.

lneonelusion,Iexpressmygratitudctothcmembcrs I now resume my functions as President of
of the Security Council and the wider membership, 1115 COUUCH-
as well as the Secretariat, for their cooperation over on behalf of the Security Council, 1 take this

the past two years. I am confident that the incoming opportunity to express appreciation to the outgoing
Chairs will bring their enthusiasm and ideas to further Chairs for the manner in WhiCh they have discharged
 

the work. 1 convey my best wishes to them and assure theirimportant responsibilities on behalfofthe Council.

them of my full cooperation from outside the Council. The meeting rose at 10.55 am.
