Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Haysom for presenting the
Secretary-General's quarterly report on the situation in
Afghanistan and its implications for international peace
and security (S/2014/876), as well as Mr. Fedotov for
his substantive briefing on the issues with which he is
tasked concerning the problem of drug trafficking. We
listened attentively and with interest to the statement of
Permanent Representative Tanin.

Not very long ago, Afghanistan completed a
protracted presidential electoral marathon. For the first
time, the Afghan people witnessed the peaceful transfer
of power from one elected governmental authority
to another. We wish the National Unity Government
success and courage in addressing the remaining
challenges. Now that the agreement between Mr. Ghani
and Chief Executive Officer Abdullah has been signed
and sealed, there are new possibilities to correct the
situation and to lay the foundations for the country's
gradual development, which for so many years has been
held back by devastating war.

In that context, we would like to note the important
role that the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) is continuing to play in
the internal affairs of Afghanistan. The Mission's
clear contribution to the electoral process and to the
agreement reached between the two leading presidential
candidates is beyond dispute. For our part, we are
prepared to offer continued support to the activities
of UNAMA, in coordination with the international
community, for the benefit of the Afghan people.
The particular importance of that mechn\anism was
highlighted in last week's resolution 2189 (2014).

One of Afghanistan's gravest problems remains
the production and illicit trafficking of drugs. The
most recent data from the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime are shocking. There was a 7 per
cent increase in the area under cultivation with opium
poppies compared to 2013, with a 9 percent increase in
average yield, while in the southern regions the average
yield increased 27 per cent, for an overall 17 per cent
rise in drug production. It is therefore vital to pay
close attention to the links between the production of
Afghan opiates and international terrorism, including
its financing through drug revenues. There is abundant
information on that matter in the recent report of the
Monitoring Group of the Security Council Committee
on sanctions concerning Al-Qaida and and the Taliban,
as well as in the conclusions of the Financial Action
Task Force.

The dimensions of this problem are such that
it represents a threat to the peace and stability of
Afghanistanandthewholeregionwellbeyonditsborders.
In that regard, we consider the presidential statement
concerning Afghan narcotics (S/PRST/2014/l2), which
the Council adopted in June at Russia's initiative, both
timely and pertinent. It is now essential to develop
practical measures aimed at eliminating the problems.
We hope that a comprehensive review of the issues
related to Afghan opiates will be part of the agenda of
the 2016 special session of the General Assembly on the
global drug problem.

A useful contribution to measures to combat
drug trafficking would be to broaden Afghanistan's
cooperation in bilateral, regional, subregional and
multilateral formats, first of all with its neigbbours in
the region, in order to take necessary steps towards
developing alternative sources of income for its
agricultural population.

For its part, Russia is reinforcing its efforts to
combat illicit drug production and drug trafficking
through regional structures, in particular through
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO), as
well as through bilateral cooperation with Afghanistan.
Moreover, we are continuing our practice of providing
advanced training to Afghan narcotics police at the
training institute of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of
Russia at Domodedovo, the Siberian Legal Institute and
the Russian Federation's North-Western Drug Control
Training Centre for Russian federal drug-control
agents.

A significant contribution to solving the Afghan
drug problem is also being made by the ongoing
presence of the CSTO antinarcotic mechanism "Canal".
Just this year, as a result of the special Canal operation
known as "Southern Trap", more than 10 tons of Afghan
opiates were seized.

In that regard, another question arises with regard
to the complacency of the anti narcotic work of the
soon-to-be-dissolved International Security Assistance
Force. It would appear that the new NATO Resolute
Support Mission is also in no hurry to act. Why is
there no such problem in the context of the bilateral
American-Afghan security agreement? We are very
disappointed that the NATO countries for many years
ignored the pragmatic suggestions of the Collective
Security Treaty Organization for joint action in this
area - yet that alliance is constantly trying to prove its
usefulness. We have to admit that NATO lost one such
opportunity that was very much needed.

The extremely tense security situation is the subject
of our common concern. The country is experiencing
perhaps the most difficult period of recent years.
Since the beginning of the year there has been a rise
of 20 per cent over the previous year in the number of
civilians, Afghan army personnel and police killed at
the hands of militants. The militants are behaving ever
more boldly, sometimes capturing entire districts. The
expected winter lull in their activity did not come. On
the contrary, the number of terrorist attacks recently
saw an almost twofold increase, and there has been a
series of high-profile terrorist attacks in Kabul and
in the country that showed that the Taliban retain a
fearsome capacity. As before, Al-Qaida is still alive,
and I will mention that, strange as it may seem, once
again this fact was not reflected in the latest report of
the Secretary-General (S/2014/876). The progressive
concentration of extremists in the northern districts is
worrisome, especially as that area was relatively calm
until recently.

It is not surprising that we also did not wait for the
comprehensive report on the outcomes of the activity
of the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF),
which we had the right to expect and which was
required from the alliance under the Security Council
resolution. What we did receive was a very compact
document entirely lacking in analysis of the security
situation, yet ISAF had received a mandate specifically
to improve the situation in this area under Council
resolutions 1386 (2001) and 1510 (2003). Pre-empting
this factual knowledge could lead an unsuspecting
public to get the impression that the mandate has been
fully implemented and the major problems solved.
But that in no way reflects what is really going on in
this country. By the way, NATO's report also contains
nothing concrete about what ISAF actually did in
terms of assisting Afghan law enforcement officers
in the counter-narcotics area. One can conclude that
nothing was done. An thoughtful conclusion in that
sphere asserting that more should be done is more than
a decade overdue.

Against the background of all that is happening, we
note with satisfaction President Ghani's declartation
on national reconciliation. The well-known triad of
principles still retains its relevance: laying down
arms, recognizing the Constitution of Afghanistan
and severing ties with Al-Qaida and other terrorist
organizations. We must also not forget that there is
a need for strict compliance with the Taliban and
Al-Qaida sanctions regime.

Many times we have announced that our country will
work constructively with any leadership of Afghanistan
that is supported by the Afghan people themselves. Once
again, we would like to pay tribute to the perseverance
and courage of the new President, Mr. Ghani, and the
Chief Executive Officer, Mr. Abdullah. We are sure
that with the responsible assistance of the international
community, led by the United Nations, they will be
able to put the friendly Afghan people on the right path
towards the peaceful building of an independent, self-
sufficient and economically prosperous Afghanistan
that is free from terrorism and narcotics-related crime.

