Mr. Owada (Japan): Before I address the item
before the Security Council this afternoon, permit me to
offer my heartfelt welcome and deep respect to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Costa Rica, Mr. Fernando
Naranjo Villalobos. In the name of the delegation of
Japan, and also as a personal friend of yours, Sir, I wish
to say how happy I am to see you preside over us in the
chair of the presidency of this Council today.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is about to enter the third
year of the implementation of the Dayton/Paris Peace
Agreement and the last phase of the consolidation period.
During the past two years, the United Nations presence in
Bosnia and Herzegovina has been doing an excellent job
in promoting the peace process. I would like especially to
stress the significant role played by the International
Police Task Force (IPTF). The basic tasks of the IPTF,
such as monitoring the activities of the local police
forces, restructuring and training them, promoting
freedom of movement and investigating human rights
abuse cases, are essential to the building of a multiethnic,
multicultural and democratic society in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. My delegation heartily applauds the efforts
and dedication of all the unarmed men and women who
are serving with the IPTF under very difficult, and quite
frequently dangerous, circumstances in post-war Bosnia.

Indeed, the role of the IPTF is a key factor in the
implementation of the civilian aspects of the Peace
Agreement. My delegation therefore fully supports the
draft resolution which is currently under consideration by
the Security Council and which purports to extend the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and

 

Herzegovina, including the IPTF. In this conjunction, my
delegation would like to stress the continued importance of
the security arrangements currently provided by the
multinational Stabilization Force for the activities of the
IPTF.

Taking this opportunity, I should like to mention that
the Government of Japan welcomes the announcement
made today by President Clinton of the United States that
the United States will in principle take part in an
international military presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina
beyond June 1998.
I must emphasize that the United Nations presence is
making important contributions in other areas as well, such
as human rights monitoring, demining and assisting the
smooth conduct of elections. And it is difficult to find
words that can adequately express the appreciation we have
for the valuable work of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in promoting the
return of refugees and displaced persons. The Government
of Japan fully supports the Open City initiative set out by
the UNHCR.

Japan has made significant contributions to the peace
process in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Within this year alone,
Japan has pledged over $190 million in the fields of
economic reconstruction, humanitarian and refugee
assistance, elections and other peace implementation
activities. It also dispatched a substantial number of
supervisors and monitors to the municipal elections held
under the supervision of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe in September this year and has also
provided long-term advisers to the High Representative.
Japan is doing so in the conviction that genuine peace and
reconciliation in Bosnia should certainly be achievable and
that the Peace Agreement should provide the only path
towards that end.

Regrettably, however, we cannot but recognize that
progress in the implementation of the Peace Agreement,
especially in its civilian aspects, has not kept pace with the
expectations of the international community. Bosnia and
Herzegovina is still without even a common flag, a
common symbol, a common currency and a common
passport. In this regard, the international community should
not tolerate an attempt by any of the parties to dominate the
central authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina or to
undermine the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
country. Japan urges all the parties of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to make maximum efforts to fulfil the
obligations set out in the conclusions of the Peace
Implementation Conference held in Bonn on 9 and 10 of
this month so that the peace process may be substantially
expedited.

Japan is the host country of the Winter Olympic
Games in February next year. The Government and
people of Japan sincerely hope that a unified Bosnian
team, comprising athletes from both entities and
representing all the ethnic groups, will come to Nagano
under a common flag and a common anthem to receive
the wholehearted welcome of the international
community. We call upon the parties to make every effort
to achieve this goal and to revive the spirit of harmony
that prevailed at the Winter Olympic Games in Sarajevo
in 1984.
