Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset I wish to warmly welcome Mr. Spirie,
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and Mr. Inzko, High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina. I take the opportunity to
reiterate our support to the High Representative and to
his Office.

During the 14 years that have passed since the
signing of the Dayton Peace Agreement, Bosnia and
Herzegovina has stayed far away from war, but has not
managed to establish peace firmly. The report of the
High Representative (S/2009/588*) and the statement
of the Chairman of the Council of Ministers clearly
point out the challenges to be faced in consolidating
the progress achieved and in implementing a clear
agenda that would herald a promising future for the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The continued lack of trust among political
leaders and the resulting negative climate has had
undeniable adverse consequences on the functioning of
institutions, on reconciliation among peoples and
consequently on the country's development prospects.
The impasse in the country is essentially due to the
persistent, divisive rhetoric employed and the
continued challenges to the authority of the State and
the High Representative.

The international community expects a change of
attitude on the part of the political leaders of Bosnia
and Herzegovina that is favourable to the establishment
of a multi-ethnic and multinational State and that
would foster democratic interaction among all of the

political parties. Undeniably, the agenda for
membership in the European Union is an important
incentive and provides a framework for action to
overcome the major challenges.

The inhabitants of Bosnia and Herzegovina want
a European future, and that future will only be possible
if their political leaders shoulder their responsibilities
in this historic process. Here, Costa Rica welcomes the
Butmir process as a positive step whose success
depends solely on the commitment of the stakeholders.
The leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina must show
maturity and political will in order to progress towards
achieving unity and the development of the country
and to make progress on the agenda for membership in
the European Union.

In conclusion, I wish to refer specifically to two
aspects that appear vital in the effort to build peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Six months ago we welcomed
the adoption of the National War Crimes Prosecution
Strategy and the National Justice Sector Reform
Strategy. However, today we have become aware that
there has been scant progress on those strategies to
date. My country believes that entrenching the rule of
law and combating impunity are fundamental for
coexistence to prosper, and we thus call for redoubled
efforts to ensure the full implementation of both
strategies.

Lastly, we are concerned that the issue of the
return of refugees and internally displaced persons
continues to be politicized. We trust that the Ministry
for Human Rights and Refugees will soon submit a
revised strategy for the implementation of Annex VII
of the Peace Agreement and that it will be rapidly
adopted by the Bosnia and Herzegovina House of
Peoples in order to ensure the safe and lasting return of
the thousands of people who have not yet seen an end
to this sad chapter in their lives.

