Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the convening of this Security
Council debate on the protection ofjournalists in conflict
situations. We also commend the Council presidency
for choosing this relevant topic, which requires further
commitment on the part of the international community.
The choice of theme is especially timely owing to the
numerous armed conflicts that erupted during the
past 10 years, where journalists have been victims of
violence and unparalleled brutality.

In a report, the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights points out that countries experiencing
or having experienced armed conflict are among the
most dangerous in the world for journalists. The report
indicated that, since 1992, at least 185 journalists
have been killed while working in situations of armed
conflict. That number rises to 1,000 dead since 1992 if
we include the deaths that occurred outside of conflict
zones.

Journalists have also suffered numerous violations
of their rights as a result of their activities. They have
often been kidnapped, tortured, imprisoned without
trial and their equipment confiscated and destroyed, in
addition to restrictions on their freedom of movement
and opinion.

Journalists face extremely vulnerable situations
in conflict zones; the recent barbaric execution of
journalists by Daesh terrorists is the most blatant
expression of such vulnerability. The targeting and
execution of journalists and untoward media coverage
carried out by the executioners notably demonstrate
their goal of finding an audience to their atrocities
and subjugating a frightened population through their
commands. That bears witness to the important role of
journalists in the worldwide exposure of the atrocities
and violations of international law perpetrated in
conflict zones.

While cases of foreign journalists killed or injured
in conflict zones often capture the attention of the
international community, most of the victims of threats
and attacks are local journalists covering local issues.
That is why we must redouble our efforts to protect
journalists in conflict situations.

We all know that under international humanitarian
law journalists should benefit from all of the protections
afforded to civilians in times of conflict. However
special attention and protection should be provided to
journalists because of the nature of their work and their
vulnerability.

Training should be made available to members of
the armed forces and to organizations of journalists
and media personnel on international law obligations
applicable to armed conflict situations, journalists'
legal right to be present in such situations and policies
and procedures aimed at limiting risks for journalists.
Cooperation among international and regional
organizations and civil society aimed at providing such
training could significantly improve that endeavour.

While the digital age has created unlimited
opportunities for disseminating information, new
forms of journalism have appeared that deserve the
same protections as those accorded to journalists.

The issue of impunity for attacks against journalists
also requires our further attention. Several reports on
the subject indicate near total impunity in cases of
violations of the right to life ofjournalists: in 9 out of
10 cases, the perpetrators go unpunished. Any violence
committed against a journalist that goes unpunished
opens the door to further violence. It is a serious and
pervasive problem, as well as a major obstacle in the
effort to protect journalists.

Morocco is seriously concerned about the recent
attacks and violence committed against journalists and
media professionals, particularly in situations of armed
conflict. My country remains deeply concerned about
all violations of human rights and abuses committed
against journalists and affecting their security, in any
manner, and vigorously condemns them.

Convinced that the freedom of expression is the
primary and essential factor in the development of
a democratic society and in guaranteeing greater
protection, Morocco has committed to promoting the
rights and protection of journalists. At the national
level, Morocco is preparing to adopt a new generation
of reforms of the press and media sector. That reform
was developed in coordination with experts with
a view to implementing the provisions of the new
Moroccan Constitution, which guarantees the freedom
of thought, opinion and expression in all its forms. It
also guarantees the right of access to information and
provides that freedom of the press cannot be limited by
any form of prior censorship.

Internationally, Morocco has joined, since

its launch in Geneva in September 2012, the core
group established by Austria to address the safety of
journalists. The group has carried out several initiatives
in the Human Rights Council, including two resolutions
and one decision, and the panel discussion held by the
Council in September 2013, for the first time on that
issue, and the reports by the High Commissioner for
Human Rights on the subject.

We hope that today's discussion will complement
initiatives undertaken in other United Nations bodies
and contribute to strengthening the protection of
journalists, wherever they are, especially in conflict
zones.

