Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Central
Africa and Head of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa (UNOCA), Mr. Francois
Lounceny Fall, for his informative briefing. Bolivia
recognizes the work being carried out by the Office
in the areas of preventive diplomacy and mediation,
as well as the support that it provides to regional and
subregional organizations. We therefore wish it success
in its operations and express our support for the tasks
entrusted to it.

To begin, we recognize that the efforts of UNOCA
contribute to the reduction of tensions in the region;
we therefore commend its work. However, we must
also recognize that other challenges persist in the areas
of peace and security, humanitarian assistance and
economic development, which must be addressed. The
progress made to date, with the support of UNOCA,
should not be overlooked. On the contrary, further
progress should be made, with the help of all regional
and subregional organizations, in accordance with the
principle of respect for sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of every State in which it carries out
its mandate.

We recognize the complexity of such challenges.
Therefore, in order to achieve peace, security and
development in Central Africa, we believe that a
subregional approach should be taken to confront the
current and emerging threats with a view to reducing
the impact that these may have on the stability
of the subregion. In that regard, we welcome the
results obtained by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General during his visit to Burundi. I wish
to highlight in that respect the need for an inclusive
dialogue that contributes to stability. We also underline
ongoing interaction with subregional leaders in order
to address the situation of the Central African Republic
in the framework of the African Initiative and the
Libreville road map. We also highlight the initiatives
carried out in Chad and the collaboration of UNOCA
with the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel, the Economic Community of Central African
States (ECCAS) and the Economic Community of West
African States, among others.

We are of the View that, although the realities of
each country differ, the conflicts in the region must
be resolved through mediation, preventive diplomacy
and mainly through constructive and inclusive political
dialogue. To that must be added coordinated efforts
between neighboring countries, regional organizations
and international cooperation. In that regard, we believe
that the initiative of the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel could be replicated in Central Africa.
In that context, we highlight the progress made by
multinational joint force and regional and international
partners in the fight against Boko Haram in the Lake
Chad basin.

We believe that, in seeking to address terrorism,
both the countries of the region and the international
community as a whole should reflect on the root causes
underlying its existence, one of which is the lack of
control in the exploitation ofnatural resources, which in
turn are used to supply and finance the illicit activities
of these groups.

In his report, the Special Representative refers to
Garamba National Park in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo as a key source of poaching and gold mining
by the Lord's Resistance Army. That systematic sacking
of resources is partly due to the recent withdrawal of
troops who had been fighting the Lord's Resistance
Army. A new strategy must therefore be developed with
the African Union and the countries involved in order
to avoid gaps that could later be exploited by members
of terrorist groups.

Another aspect that Bolivia believes would
accelerate progress in peacebuilding in the region is
the greater participation of women in those processes
and in decision-making. We commend the initiative
of UNOCA, in collaboration with ECCAS, to create
a regional network of women's media for peace
and security in Central Africa, which seeks to help
to mobilize women in the region and promote the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We support
the continuation of that work.

Finally, we urge the international community to
take into account the factors I have outlined, which
we believe could help to resolve the humanitarian
situation. In the Lake Chad basin region alone, there are
some 10 million people in urgent need of humanitarian
assistance and more than 2 million who are internally
displaced. We must continue our work and redouble our
efforts to achieve peace, stability and development in
the Central Africa subregion.

