Mr. Verbeke (Belgium): As stressed in my last
briefing to the Council (see S/PV.5679), the
completeness and accuracy of the 1267 Committee's
07-59786

consolidated list are essential for the effectiveness of
the sanctions measures. Over the past six months, the
Al-Qaida and Taliban Committee has strived to further
improve the quality of the list. I can assure members
that that endeavour remains high on the Committee's
agenda. It is worth recalling that the list belongs to all
States Members of the United Nations and that the
Committee therefore relies on their input and
assistance to attain that objective.

Improving the quality of the list can be done in
three complementary ways: first, by providing
additional identifiers to the existing names to assist
Member States in the effective implementation of the
sanctions; secondly, by listing individuals and entities
that are associated with Al-Qaida, Osama bin Laden
and the Taliban; and thirdly, by removing the names of
those who no longer meet the listing criteria and of
those who are deceased, in accordance with the
procedure described in a note verbale dated 25 April
2006. Continued improvement of the quality of the list
is carried out on the basis of information provided to
the Committee, including through the review pursuant
to paragraph 6 (i) of the Committee's guidelines.

As requested by the Council in resolution 1735
(2006), the Committee has paid particular attention to
the Taliban section of the list. I am pleased to report
that, since my last briefing to the Council, additional
identifiers have been introduced to 67 entries in the
Taliban section of the list, which means that close to
half of the 142 names of the Taliban individuals
currently listed have been updated during the past six
months. The original script of the names of all Taliban
individuals has also been added. Furthermore, for the
first time since 2001, the Committee added one
individual to the Taliban section of the list. The
Committee also removed the last remaining entity from
that section.

In the Al-Qaida section of the list, the names of
seven individuals have been added since my last
briefing, and improvements have been made to the
existing information in 70 out of 350 entries. The
Committee has also decided to remove 2 individuals
and 12 entities from the Al-Qaida section of the list.

I would like to take this opportunity to express
my appreciation to the States that have submitted
information and to encourage others to do likewise and
to come up with new listing requests. The cover sheet,
a standard form, provides a useful tool for the
3
submission of such requests. I would also like to thank
the Al-Qaida and Taliban Monitoring Team for its
tireless efforts aimed at improving the list and to
encourage it to continue that work in close
collaboration with States.

In addition to the PDF and HTML formats, the
consolidated list is now available in the XML format,
which will enhance and facilitate the incorporation of
the list into national watch lists and databases. This
will also make it easier for banks and other financial
institutions, as well as some international
organizations, to incorporate a searchable version into
their databases. The list can now be downloaded in the
three formats from the Committee's website.

As the responsibility to implement the sanctions
measures rests on Member States, the Committee
continues to explore ways and means to enhance a
mutually beneficial dialogue with States. The
Committee therefore attaches great importance to its
website, ensuring that it contains substantive
information for the use of Member States and is as
user-friendly as possible. The Committee's enhanced
website was presented to the broader membership on
the occasion of an open briefing I gave on 20 July 2007
to all Member States. The question-and-answer session
gave all Member States an opportunity to raise
questions and share comments. I would like to continue
with that form of engagement with Member States, and
I welcome any suggestion with regard to the format
and content of such briefings. I intend to hold another
such open briefing in December.

Another way to interact with Member States is
through visits. In accordance with paragraph 30 of
resolution 1735 (2006), I have undertaken two trips as
Chairman to selected countries. Last July I Visited
Ethiopia, Djibouti and Kenya. Two weeks ago I was in
Central Asia, where I visited Kazakhstan, Tajikistan
and Uzbekistan. I want to thank the authorities of the
Visited countries for their cooperation.

That kind of interaction is extremely useful for
the Committee. It indeed provides a unique opportunity
to update Member States directly on the latest
developments, but, more importantly, to listen to the
suggestions - and, in some cases, also the concerns -
of Member States, which are in the front line in
implementing the sanctions measures imposed by the
Security Council. During both trips I could see that,
although the commitment of States is strong and the
terrorist threat is deemed to be quite real, States still
need a better understanding of the possibilities that the
Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions regime can offer to
assist them in their fight against terrorism. My
impression after those visits is that the sanctions
regime has contributed less to that than it might have.

Pursuant to paragraph 29 of resolution 1735
(2006), I would like to renew the standing invitation to
Member States to come to the Committee for more
in-depth discussions on sanctions-related issues.
Dialogues of that nature are essential for both the
Committee and Member States. In that regard,
suggestions and experiences accumulated by States can
be shared with the Committee, and the Committee can
be more proactive and efficient in addressing their
implementation challenges.

For their part, the experts of the Monitoring Team
continue to visit States. Since the last briefing, the
Team has visited four Member States. The Team has
also begun implementing areas of cooperation with
international and regional organizations - such as the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the International Civil Aviation Organization, the
International Air Transport Association and the World
Customs Organization - in accordance with
paragraph 23 of resolution 1735 (2006). In addition,
the Team has expanded cooperation with INTERPOL
to improve implementation of sanctions measures,
which has resulted in the increase of the issuance of
Security Council-INTERPOL special notices for listed
individuals, which currently amount to 298. As a next
step, the Team and INTERPOL are arranging for the
issuance of special notices for listed entities. Finally,
the Team has also participated in several conferences
and meetings on counter-terrorism-related issues.

The Committee has started its consideration of
the seventh report of the Monitoring Team, which was
submitted to the Committee on 30 September 2007 in
accordance with resolution 1735 (2006). As was the
case with its previous reports, it will soon be
transmitted to the Council and become an official
document of the United Nations. The report contains a
great number of recommendations on how to further
improve sanctions implementation. It is the intention of
the Committee to report to the Council on its position
regarding those recommendations.

Pursuant to paragraph 21 of resolution 1735
(2006), the Committee has started its consideration of
the identification of possible cases of non-compliance,
based on a background paper prepared by the
Monitoring Team. The Committee has developed a
methodology to identify possible cases of
non-compliance, to gather additional information if
needed and to take action on specific cases. The
Committee also agreed to develop specific and general
recommendations derived from that empirical analysis
on what could be done to prevent the occurrence of
such cases, including by identifying the difficulties
faced by States in implementing sanctions. The overall
objective of that exercise is to improve the
effectiveness of the sanctions regime. The Committee
intends to forward to the Security Council its findings
to that effect, once the discussion in the Committee has
been concluded.

Since the establishment of the focal point for
de-listing last March, pursuant to resolution 1730
(2006), the Committee has received 16 requests
through that process - 4 individuals and 12 entities. I
am pleased to announce that the Committee today
approved the de-listing of one individual and 12
entities associated with him. Although the Committee
decided to maintain the names of the three other
individuals on the list, the focal point allows
petitioners to have a proper consideration of their
de-listing requests. It is worth mentioning that one
other request has been submitted to the focal point for
de-listing but has not yet reached the Committee.

This month, the Committee intends to hold a
specific discussion on the issue of de-listing
procedures in accordance with paragraphs 13 and 14 of
resolution 1735 (2006). The Committee also intends to
evaluate the first edition of the review pursuant to
paragraph 6 (i) of the Committee's guidelines that was
concluded last July without any change to the list, as
well as to prepare the 2008 edition.

In the application of sanctions measures, the
Committee is specifically mindful that the Council
provided for exemptions, including for humanitarian
purposes. Since 1 January 2007, the Committee has
received five notifications for humanitarian exemptions
under paragraph 1 (a), and 16 requests for extraordinary
expenses under paragraph 1 (b) of resolution 1452
(2002). Out of these, no negative decision has been
taken by the Committee in respect of five notifications
under paragraph 1 (a), and 14 requests under paragraph
1 (b) have been approved. During the same period the
07-59786
Committee received no applications for exemptions to
the travel ban.

The Committee has also started an in-depth
discussion on how to limit and reduce the number of
pending issues.

The criminal misuse of the Internet and the
involvement of banks and financial institutions in the
effective implementation of sanctions have been
discussed based on reports prepared by the Monitoring
Team. The Committee has requested the Team to make
some concrete recommendations that, if approved,
could address both issues in a practical way.

The Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions regime
continues to be a powerful instrument in the fight
against terrorism. However, whereas the threat from
Al-Qaida and the Taliban remains real, the mechanism
to counter that threat has not reached its full potential.
The Committee is trying its best to make the
consolidated list more dynamic, and therefore more
credible, but cannot do it alone. Additional input from
Member States is indeed essential to have a list that
will better reflect the reality on the ground. Greater
involvement by Member States would also contribute
to more effective implementation of the sanctions
measures, which would at the same time strengthen
national and regional efforts in the fight against
terrorism. In that context, I appeal to all States to
increase their support and assistance to the Committee
and the Monitoring Team to achieve our common
objective, namely, to prevent and counter terrorist acts.

