Mr. Matjila (South Africa): I would like to
congratulate your country, Mr. President, on assuming
the presidency this month and convening this open
debate. The theme of the debate is indeed timely
and crucial in the light of the growing geopolitical
challenges with which we are faced.

The current multilateral system was imposed
on us as a consequence of war. Seventy-seven years
ago, on 9 June 1941, the allied representatives of
Australia, Belgium, Canada, Czechoslovakia, France,
Greece, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Poland, South Africa, the United Kingdom
and Yugoslavia met in St. James Palace, London. They
declared that

"[t]he only true basis of enduring peace is the
willing cooperation of free peoples in a world in
which, relieved of the menace of aggression, all
may enjoy economic and social security. It is our
intention to work together, and with other free
peoples, both in war and peace, to that end".

In 1945, 50 nations, including South Africa,
formed the United Nations and collectively agreed
to the Charter of the United Nations. The aspirations
set out in the Charter are more important today than
ever before. The increased threats to multilateralism
undermine the principles to which we subscribed over
70 years ago, when the Organization was established.
The complexities of conflict have evolved, and we
are increasingly more interdependent as nations. That
means that we are all affected in some way by conflicts
that we might have thought were far away from us. The
world is a significantly different place to what it was
when the United Nations was founded, and the need
for multilateral approaches to address our common
challenges is even more necessary and pertinent today.

South Africa, like many other countries, has
benefited from the support of the States Members of
the United Nations, which, through the Organization,
were able to mobilize the international community
to help isolate and defeat the apartheid system. The
United Nations was a beacon of hope that contributed
to the transformation of our country. For that, we
remain grateful.

Two months ago, during the Nelson Mandela
Peace Summit of the General Assembly, our leaders
reaffirmed their commitment to global peace, in
honour of and to revive the values that leaders like
Nelson Mandela stood for, by placing human dignity
at the centre of our actions. They made a strong call
to safeguard multilateralism, in recognition of the new
challenges and threats that our nations face. Emerging
threats to peace and security can threaten any nation,
no matter how stable and prosperous it may be, and a
coordinated and global response is needed to overcome
those threats. Through the political declaration
adopted at the Summit (resolution 73/1), our leaders
committed to redoubling their efforts to build a just,
peaceful, prosperous and inclusive world. It is critical
that we respect, safeguard, enhance and implement the
multilateral agreements constructed around the pillars
of development, human rights, peace and security.

We recognize that the Security Council remains
the primary multilateral body charged with the
maintenance of international peace and security.
However, the Council has been confronted with
challenges where it has been prevented from acting due
to structural impediments that, at times, undermine
its ability to promote conflict prevention and protect
the most vulnerable. It is therefore imperative that
the Council continue to be united and steadfast in
realizing its multilateral commitment to achieving
peace and tangible dividends for vulnerable people on
the ground. The Council's central mandate should not
be undermined by narrow self-interest, which is the
antithesis of multilateralism. Rather, it should draw
on its strength of unity and diversity of perspective in
finding real, proactive and viable solutions to threats to
international peace and security.

It is vital that the Security Council continue to work
closely with regional organizations, in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter. That is fundamental in the
light ofthe significant strides that have been registered in
the continuously growing relationship with the African
Union (AU) and the United Nations - particularly
between the African Union Peace and Security Council
and the United Nations Security Council - in support
of a home-grown peace initiative. In that regard, we
should ensure that the relationship is enhanced and
becomes mutually beneficial to the aspirations of
collective security, as well as to silence the guns on the
African continent, as stated in the AU Agenda 2063:
The Africa We Want.

Furthermore, we should act with determination in
reforming the Council to ensure that it reflects current
geographical realities and is fully representative of the
peoples of the world today. In that context, we should
redress the historical injustice against the 1.2 billion
people of Africa. Similarly, improving the working
methods of the Council would enhance the effectiveness
of the work of this important body.

Efforts aimed at creating an enabling environment
through the prioritization of conflict prevention cannot
be overstated. Consequently, addressing the root causes
of conflict will enable us to better address issues related
to terrorism and migration, among others. The absence
of overt conflict, however, is not an end in itself, and
peacebuilding and post-conflict reconstruction and
development are essential. The implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development is therefore
key, as it aims to address poverty and development and
lays the foundations for achieving sustainable peace.

In closing, we would like to reiterate the sentiment
of the political declaration adopted at the Nelson
Mandela Peace Summit, which captures the essence
of multilateralism.

"It is clear that lasting peace is not realizedjust
by the absence of armed conflict, but is achieved
through a continuing positive, dynamic, inclusive
participatory process of dialogue and engagement
that resolves all outstanding issues in a spirit of
mutual respect and understanding, cooperation and
long-term vision". (resolution 73/1, para. 20)
It therefore supports what South Africa firmly
believes - that the only route to a just and lasting
peace is through multilateralism, which is exemplified
by the achievements of the United Nations. Like many
others, the African way is a multilateral way.

