Mr. Chergui (spoke in French): We are meeting
here to discuss a serious situation that is receiving
increasing international attention. We fervently hope
that this meeting will mark a new and decisive stage in
the international mobilization for the Central African
Republic.

I thank the Security Council for its ongoing follow-
up ofthis issue. I wish in particular to convey the African
Union's (AU) gratitude to the President of the Council
for having been kind enough to change the timing of
this meeting so as to allow our delegation to participate.
Let me also reiterate, on behalf of Nkosazana Dlamini
Zuma, Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
the appreciation of the AU to the Secretary-General for
his continued commitment and personal involvement
to alleviate the suffering of the people of the Central
African Republic.

In recent days, the Secretary-General and the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission have
been in regular contact with respect to what should be
done to help strengthen international action to assist
the Central African Republic. These exchanges also
show their common concern about this tragedy and
their conviction that an effective international response
must necessarily be based on a shared vision of the
actions required, in line with the close and innovative
partnership that the United Nations and the AU are
building in the field of peace and security.

As the Council is aware, the situation in the
Central African Republic has for several years been at
the heart of the priorities of the AU. At the time of the
resumption of hostilities in that country in December
2012, and precisely because we feared that the situation
might lead to generalized violence, with disastrous
consequences for the Central African Republic and its
people, we called for coordinated international action
in support of the efforts of the countries in the region,
under the leadership of Presidents Idriss Deby Itno of
Chad and Denis Sassou Nguesso of the Republic of the
Congo.

I take this opportunity to reiterate our gratitude for
the willingness ofthe Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS), the personal commitment of
the leaders of the region and the sacrifices made in the
quest for peace, security and stability in the Central
African Republic.

Those preventive efforts have not succeeded. We
must draw lessons from this for our future activities
aimed at promoting peace, security and stability on
the continent, as the international community cannot
continue to wait for disastrous situations to develop
before taking the necessary speedy, robust actions.

Today we face a difficult and complex situation
requiring that we be diligent, effective and flexible. Our
actions must be based on a comprehensive assessment
of current efforts and the challenges ahead. They must
deliver tailored responses to the problems we are facing.

On 19 December 2013, the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic (MISCA) took over from the Mission of the
Economic Community of Central African States for the
Consolidation of Peace in the Central African Republic.
The handover took place in an extremely challenging
context marked by the attacks against Bangui in early
December 2013, acts of extreme violence against the
civilian population, forced displacements that affected
both national and foreign communities, as well as
community and religious hatreds and tensions, which
so deeply undermine the future of the country and its
social cohesion.

Given the challenges on the ground, one of the
first measures taken by the AU was reinforcing the
contingents on the ground. We were thus able to
deploy in the month following the transfer of authority,
thanks to the United States, two additional battalions
of 850 personnel each. Just yesterday, in Kinshasa,
a Commission team finalized discussions with the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
with a view to the effective integration of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo contingent in the Mission.

As I speak to the Council, I can confirm that the
Mission has almost reached its authorized level of 6,000
uniformed personnel. Thanks to this reinforcement
and to the support of the French Operation Sangaris,
as well as other measures, especially the division into
sectors of the city of Bangui, the situation in the capital
has improved considerably. The number of security
incidents has been reduced significantly. Obviously,
much remains to be done to ensure a full return to
normalcy.

Unacceptable crimes continue to be committed
against innocent civilians. Acts of vandalism and
looting, explained in part by the social poverty
afflicting Central Africans, especially youth, have not
yet ceased. Many displaced persons, including those
living in subhuman conditions at the airport, have not

been able to return to their homes, and fear is a reality
that we cannot deny.

MISCA, with the support of Operation Sangaris,
is working to meet those challenges by establishing
checkpoints and by carrying out patrols round the clock.

The Mission is about to reach its deployment
plan inside the country; a total of 4,000 military
personnel should be positioned in various areas of the
countryside. That operation is under way even as we
speak. That presence, together with that of Sangaris,
has made it possible to avert many atrocities, to reassure
communities and to facilitate humanitarian action.
Once again, we must do a lot more, act more quickly
and be more effective in our action. MISCA is resolved
to meet those challenges.

I wish also to refer to other functions of MISCA.
They include the task of protecting the transitional
leaders, which is essential so that they can, in the present
security context, accomplish their onerous task. They
also include facilitating the delivery of humanitarian
assistance under the escort and protection of convoys,
which travel along the vital corridor connecting the
Central African Republic to Cameroon. I would add
that 500 trucks and other vehicles have benefited
from this protection, which has also contributed to the
resumption of trade flows and the effective collection
by the Central African Republic of customs duties and
related taxes on merchandise and other goods headed
for the Central African Republic, so that it may have the
resources necessary to carry out its functions.

Those efforts have been supported by the
encouraging developments that have taken place in
the political process as a result of the decisions of
the extraordinary summit of ECCAS, held on 9 and
10 January. The election ost. Catherine Samba-Panza,
the new interim Head of State, and the subsequent
appointment of a new Prime Minister and the formation
of a Government helped to relaunch the transition.

The main security threat we face relates to the so-
called anti-Balaka militias. In response, MISCA, with
the support of Operation Sangaris, is implementing a
series ofpractical measures to neutralize those militias.
Those efforts, which started a few days ago in Bangui,
have been intensified and expanded to the rest of the
territory of the Central African Republic.

Within the framework of periodic reports to the
Security Council, we will be able to provide more
detailed information about the efforts made and the
difficulties encountered. Iwish to mention in that respect
some of the challenges that are hampering MISCA's
activities, which relate to an insufficiency of logistical
and communication means, despite the considerable
support of international partners whose contributions
I wish once again to commend. They relate also to the
current limited capacities of the Government of the
Central African Republic. The absence of a judicial
system makes it very difficult to restore law and order,
as those arrested by the international forces cannot
be brought to justice. With the support of the United
Nations Development Programme, we have been able
to establish a transitional arrangement that is currently
in operation.

At this meeting, the Secretary-General has
submitted proposals on what he believes should be
undertaken with regard to the current situation in the
Central African Republic. In his letter of 17 February,
which we have requested be transmitted to members
of the Security Council for information and action, as
needed, the President of the Commission identified a
series of measures, which, rapidly implemented, will
allow us to significantly strengthen the effectiveness
of our action. I could not list those measures in detail
in this statement, but allow me quickly to go through
them.

First is the pressing need to strengthen MISCA.
That involves increasing both the troop strength of the
Mission, in particular in terms of police personnel,
and the equipment. As we have said before, African
countries are ready to contribute additional personnel.
Also, for that reason and others, related in particular to
the launching of the European operation, we are not in
favour of deploying any coalition of the willing, which
would only deflect us from the urgent and imperative
task of strengthening MISCA. While awaiting the
deployment of additional troops and in response to the
concerns expressed by the Secretary-General over the
distribution of food aid to the interior of the country,
MISCA is ready to escort the humanitarian convoys
headed to the places concerned.

The second step is to undertake additional measures
to consolidate the gains already made and to speed
up the lasting restoration of security throughout the
Central African Republic. In that regard, I refer to the
payment of civil servant salaries and retiree pensions,
as well as support for the resumption of basic public
services, including re-forming core security forces and
restoring the judicial system and prison facilities. In
our view, those are not medium-term problems to be
addressed once security is restored but, instead, they
are urgent issues on which immediate action is required.
Let us not be mistaken: no international force, whatever
its size, will be able to ensure the degree of security
needed without the active involvement of the Central
African side. The financial cost of such measures is
a tiny fraction of what should be mobilized for a new
military operation.

The third measure is consolidating the progress
made in the political process thanks to the decisive
action of ECCAS leaders. It goes without saying that
there will be no lasting security benefit without a viable
political track. The leaders of the region are showing
exceptional willingness and commitment. We must
better support their action, in particular through the
International Contact Group on the Central African
Republic, which, I hope, will be convened soon.

The last step is the rapid and effective
implementation of the relevant provisions of the
resolutions recently adopted by the Security Council.
That involves ensuring the implementation of the
targeted sanctions against individuals and entities that
are undermining the current efforts, and accelerating
the work of the international commission of inquiry
into the violations of human rights and humanitarian
law. Such measures will certainly significantly help to
prevent further atrocities. I congratulate the Secretary-
General on his statement to us today. I can ensure that
commission of the full attention and cooperation of
MISCA and the African Union.

At this stage, I would like to underscore that the
approach that we are proposing will make it possible
to better support the African efforts. That is essential
because there will certainly not be lasting solutions to
the challenges to peace and security on the continent
without African ownership. Where there is a strong
African political will, as is undeniably the case of the
Central African Republic, it must be supported and
nurtured. Our partners, whatever their goodwill, could
still not compensate for our shortcomings.

The proposed approach therefore is part of a
comprehensive approach that makes it possible to
combine the respective comparative advantages of the
African Union and the United Nations. In the current
stabilization phase, a peace support operation by the
African Union is the best proposed option. Its success
will open the way for the deployment of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation to support the recovery process
of the Central African Republic in the long term.

We therefore see MISCA as an essential stage for
stronger involvement by the United Nations and, in
truth, of the entire international community. With that
in mind, in order to leave the United Nations a strong
mission to lead the next phase of the peace process, the
Council must support the establishment of a logistical
support model for MISCA, as the Secretary-General
has just proposed, financed by the contributions made
for the recovery. We thank the Secretary-General for
his commitment to work for that goal.

We are at a crucial stage in our efforts to
successfully overcome the challenges in the Central
African Republic. The priority is clear: to protect
the civilian population, to facilitate the delivery of
humanitarian assistance and to establish conditions
for a successful transition. As the Secretary-General
has so rightly said, the challenges that we face require
the involvement of all. They go beyond our individual
capacities. The effort must be collective in order for it
to succeed.

It is also urgent to decide how to best combine the
respective advantages of each of the actors concerned,
while promoting our common objective for Africa's
greater empowerment in managing the problems
facing the continent. We sincerely believe that the
proposals made by the President of the Commission,
Mrs. Zuma, will allow us to satisfactorily meet the
current challenges.

In a few years, when we look back at the Central
African Republic and the way in which we managed the
current situation, we should be in a position to say that
we responded to the Central African people's appeal for
help while advancing the international partnership for
peace, security and stability in Africa. Members should
not add to the frustration of Africa, the only continent
not to have a permanent representative on this very
importantbody of the Security Council, by strengthening
today and forever the necessary prior consultation of
the African Union for the consideration of any issue
concerning Africa. Our three non-permanent members
are already ready to perform that task, if not as a pen
holder at least as the adviser on conflict situations on
the continent.

I could not conclude without expressing our deep
appreciation to all our international partners that
support MISCA. The donor conference held in Addis
Ababa on 1 February marked the occasion for a true
expression of solidarity with Central Africans and of
support for MISCA. May this meeting of the Council
strengthen that momentum, thereby bringing us still
closer to achieving the noble common objectives that we
are pursuing together in the Central African Republic.

