Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I thank
Minister Moratinos Cuyaube for the very full and
welcome briefing he has given us on the work of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) this year. I would like to commend him, and
Mr. De Gucht before him, for their leadership of the
organization, which is very much appreciated.

British support for the OSCE is long-standing and
well known, and it will continue and be reinforced. We
think that the work that it does, and the work of the
Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights,

are of real value and make important contributions to
both security and democracy in Europe. We also
commend the emphasis that Minister Moratinos
Cuyaube has given to the OSCE's work on building
understanding among religions; the Alliance of
Civilizations, which Spain has led; and the work on
anti-Semitism and Islamophobia. Those are important
dimensions of the organization's work.

We welcome the emphasis of Minister Moratinos
Cuyaube, and of Minister Kubis as well, on the
Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE) treaty. The
regime of arms control established by the CFE is of
real importance to European security as a whole and to
each nation in Europe. We would like to see the early
entry into force of the adapted CFE treaty.

I would like to echo the comments that Mr. Kubis
and Minister De Gucht made about Georgia and the
concern about recent developments there. The
Chairman's account of the OSCE's work on "frozen"
conflicts in general is very welcome, and his action in
pursuing the 6 August missile incident was particularly
welcome. We think that there is a continuing role for
both the United Nations and the OSCE in this area to
calm tensions, establish the facts and promote conflict
resolution and prevention wherever possible. In his
report, after investigating the 6 August incident, I think
Mr. Zuzul recommended that there should be some
rapid reaction mechanisms following up his
investigation, so that the OSCE can react more rapidly
than perhaps it did in this instance. I would be
interested in any comments you may have as to the
implementation of those proposals.

Lastly, several speakers have mentioned the
OSCE's involvement in Kosovo, which we welcome,
including the mission's work in preparing for
parliamentary and municipal elections on
17 November. Those elections will be important; they
come at a sensitive time in Kosovo's own development
and, as the Council knows, the Contact Group met
yesterday at the ministerial level, together with the EU
and NATO Secretaries-General and the Secretary-
General of the United Nations, and today there will be
a further discussion between the parties facilitated by
the European Union, the United States and Russian
representatives that have been appointed. We urge both
sides to redouble their efforts to move forward and to
achieve a sustainable solution.
7

Once again, may I express my thanks to Minister
Moratinos Cuyaube for his briefing and our strong
continued support for his leadership and for the OSCE
as a whole.

