The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Germany.

First, let me thank Ambassador Nestor Osorio for
his briefing. We are grateful for his able leadership,
which has contributed so much to ensure that the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006) remains focused on implementing its important
mandate.

More than two years ago, the Security Council
adopted resolution 1929 (2010), in response to Iran's
continued non-compliance with its international
obligations. To this date, Iran has not engaged seriously,
and without preconditions, in talks aimed at restoring
confidence in the peaceful nature of its nuclear
programme. The latest report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) of 30 August (GOV/2012/37)
is alarming. It shows a massive increase in the 20 per
cent enrichment capacity. Moreover, Iran's continued
refusal to cooperate with the IAEA increases concerns
about a possible military dimension of Iran's nuclear
programme. In a first reaction to the IAEA report, the
European Union's three plus three group co-sponsored
a resolution urging Iran once more to comply fully and
without delay with all its obligations. Likewise, we
remain deeply worried about Iran's renewed ballistic
missile launches of early July 2012, using missile
technology that is in clear violation of paragraph 9 of
resolution 1929 (2010).

We reiterate our deep concern over the continued
weapons exports from Iran to other countries,
especially to Syria. Those concerns are aggravated
by unsettling recent reports indicating that Iran is
shipping arms to Syria under a humanitarian pretext.
In the same context, Ambassador Osorio's 90-day
report underscores the pressing relevance of that issue.
Therefore, the consistent implementation of sanctions
by all Member States is crucial to maintaining the
pressure on Iran. We encourage the Committee to take
swift action. Based on the recommendations contained
in the final report of the Experts, first measures should
aim at operationalizing new designations and updating
the existing listings of sanctions violators as soon as
possible. There is no alternative except to continue to
work towards a diplomatic solution. But we cannot hold
talks for the sake of talks. If Iran does not engage in
serious negotiations, we will have to increase pressure
by further strengthening the sanctions regime. It is
now high time for Iran to live up to its international
obligations.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I shall now give the floor once again to Ambassador
Osorio to respond to comments or questions.

