Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania): We
join in welcoming President Tadic of Serbia. We thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. lessen-Petersen, for his insightful briefing, and we
recognize the presence of Prime Minister Kosumi of
Kosovo in his delegation.

We welcome the election of Mr. Fatmir Sejdiu,
the new President of Kosovo, and we trust that he will
continue the efforts of the late President Ibrahim
Rugova to seek a peaceful resolution of the problems
facing Kosovo.

We regard the future status of Kosovo as one of
the most serious issues remaining in building the
stability and peace we seek for Kosovo in the Balkans.
We are therefore pleased to note the significant
preparations for the talks on the future status of
Kosovo with the facilitation of the former President of
Finland, Mr. Ahtisaari, whom we hold in the highest
regard.

We believe that those efforts need to be
complemented by enhanced momentum in the
implementation of the standards. We join the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in strongly
urging the leaders of Kosovo to renew their efforts to
promote substantive, accelerated and sustainable
progress in the standards implementation process. We
agree with him that such progress will demonstrate the
willingness of Kosovo's leaders to create a foundation
for a multi-ethnic and democratic society.

We also agree that there must be increased efforts
aimed at local government reform, decentralization,
governance and human rights standards. We therefore
regret to note from the Special Representative's
briefing that there is slower progress in the area of
minority rights. Nonetheless, we welcome President
Sejdiu's letter to the Council, in which he reaffirms his
commitment to the implementation of the standards,
which he sees as values that will provide Kosovo with
a path towards broader regional integration. We
welcome that reaffirmation, believing, as we do, that
the issue of Kosovo's status will ultimately be resolved
in the context of wider integration. We see clarity
regarding the status of Kosovo as an important element
in unleashing the potential of its people and of its
economy.

We deplore the violent incidents that have
continued to take place, including the shooting of the
seniormost Kosovo Serb officer of the Kosovo Police
Service. Such incidents risk being perceived as
ethnically motivated, even though some of them may
not be linked to ethnic conflicts.

The low numbers of returnees are also of some
concern. A conducive environment must be created to
ensure that refugees and internally displaced persons
wishing to return to Kosovo can do so in a state of
security.

Finally, we commend the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo, the European
Union and all other countries and organizations that
have made financial, moral and political commitments
to make positive changes in Kosovo and in the Balkans
in general so that the people of various ethnicities in
that region may enjoy peaceful and secure coexistence.

