Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates the initiative of Azerbaijan to host today's
high-level briefing on strenthening the partnership
and synergy between the United Nations and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC). We
welcome Foreign Minister Mammadyarov, who
has presided over this meeting. I thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon; Mr. Ekmeleddin Ihsanoglu,
Secretary-General of the OIC; and Mr. Iyad Madani,
the newly elected Secretary-General of the OIC, for
their attendance. China has listened attentively to the
briefings by Secretaries-General Ban Ki-moon and
Ekmeleddin Ihsanoglu.

China welcomes the presidential statement just
adopted by the Council (S/PRST/2013/16).

The United Nations is the core of our collective
security system, and the Security Council shoulders
the primary responsibility for maintaining world
peace and security. At the same time, various regional
and subregional organizations are playing an ever
more important role in maintaining regional peace
and security and promoting development. They have
become a useful complement to the United Nations.

At present, global and regional threats and
challenges are on the rise, and national security
interests are intertwined. Srenghtening cooperation
between the United Nations and various regional and
subregional organizations is conducive to promoting
multilateralism and solidifying and strenghtening
international collective security mechanisms and our
common efforts to maintain international peace and
security. China appreciates the important role played
by the OIC in promoting unity and cooperation in
the Islamic world and dialogues among different
civilizations. China supports efforts to further deepen
cooperation between the United Nations and this
Council on the one hand, and the OIC on the other hand,
in our common endeavour to promote world peace and
economic development.

I wish to highlight the following three points.

First, the conduct of cooperation between the United
Nations and the OIC should be guided by the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
the basic norms governing international relations. The
purposes and principles of the Charter represent the
cornerstone of contemporary international relations.
The Charter is the guiding document for cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations.
This cooperation should uphold fundamental principles
such as those established in the Charter, namely,
sovereign equality and the peaceful settlement of
disputes. This should be designed to strengthen
coordination in a united effort to solve regional hotspot
issues through good offices and mediation and to
maintain international and regional peace, security,
stability and development.

Secondly, in conducting cooperation between the
United Nations and the OIC, attention should be paid
to the overall coordination with an eye on comparative
advantages. Because of its advantages in terms of
religion, history and culture, the OIC is uniquely placed
to deal well with questions related to Islam. Over the
past years, the OIC has played an important role,
recognized by the international community, in assisting
in the settlement of regional conflicts and bolstering
post-conflict reconstruction. Cooperation between the
United Nations and the Council, on the one hand, and
the OIC, on the other, should be built on coordination
and relative advantages in order to complement each
other's efforts and build synergy.

Thirdly, cooperation between the United Nations
and he OIC can take a variety of forms while focusing
on results. In May 2012, the Secretariat and the OIC
reached an important consensus on strengthening
cooperation in conflict prevention, mediation,
humanitarian assistance and cross-cultural dialogues.
In May, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate and the OIC held a seminar in Jeddah,
Saudi Arabia, on international cooperation in fighting
terrorism with positive results.

Such interaction has furthered cooperation
exchange between the United Nations and the OIC in
areas of mutual concern, while accumulating useful
experiences for future cooperation. In keeping pace
with evolving situations and actual needs, both parties
would do well to to further explore and expand channels
of coordination and enrich the means and ways of
cooperation to achieve better results.

China attaches top priority to the unique role of
the IOC and supports its continuing, positive efforts
to maintain regional peace and security and promote
common development. Over time, China has actively
developed friendly, cooperative relations with Islamic
countries and has formed mutually supportive
political partnerships, mutually beneficial economic
partnerships, and humanistic partnerships built on
exchanges and cooperation.

China stands ready to join with the international
community in further elevating the cooperation
between the Security Council and the OIC in our joint
efforts to build a harmonious world of enduring peace
and a common prosperity.

