Mr. Mmualefe (Botswana): Let me thank you,
Sir, for convening this important meeting. I wish also
to convey our gratitude to the members of the Security
Council mission that visited the Democratic Republic
of the Congo recently for their comprehensive report.
We are convinced that such visits by the Council
members are vital to the work of this body and that
they can contribute immensely to the enhancement of
peace processes whenever undertaken in a timely
fashion and with clear objectives, as was the case with
the visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The report on the Security Council mission visit
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
acknowledges that the ceasefire voluntarily agreed to
by the parties to the conflict in that country continues
generally to hold. This is welcome news to us. We have
also been informed that in addition to concluding a
status-of-forces agreement, the head of State of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has personally
undertaken to ensure full cooperation by his
Government with the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC).

Paragraph 70 of the report states in part that
"The requirement for a professional
ceasefire monitoring and verification force as
mandated in resolution 1291 (2000) is
self-evident. Each of the five Presidents consulted
on this visit was unequivocal in his appeal for
rapid deployment, and apprehensive about the
sustainability of the ceasefire without it. The
desperation of the Congolese people, whose
suffering the mission could for the most part only
imagine, clearly demands an international
response". (S/2000/416)

The Republic of Botswana could not agree more
with that precise analysis. We have urged the Council
before to consider deploying speedily in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Even if conditions
may not be 100 per cent conducive to a United Nations
peacekeeping deployment, we believe that enough
effort has been put in by the parties to the conflict to
deserve the assistance of the international community.
By continuously calling on the parties to abide by their
obligations without an effective peacekeeping presence
on the ground, we run the risk of allowing the
precarious peace process in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to unravel. We would therefore strongly
urge the Council to heed the appeal of the regional
leaders to deploy peacekeepers expeditiously.

We are aware that the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is a complex and difficult one.
That gives us all the more reason to believe that the
presence of peacekeepers will go a long way towards
enhancing mutual confidence among the parties. In the
same breath, we wish to urge our brethren in the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
live by their promises to cooperate with MONUC and,
most important, to ensure the safety and freedom of
movement of United Nations personnel.

We wish to make a solemn appeal to the parties to
the inter-Congolese dialogue to utilize the good offices
of the facilitator, Sir Ketumile Masire, to chart a
fruitful path for their future. The onus is on every one
of them to ensure the productive outcome of their
dialogue. We wish to repeat here once more that the
facilitator can do only as much as the Congolese
themselves are prepared to achieve. There is no doubt
in our mind that Sir Ketumile is driven by no
motivation other than to assist the Congolese in
achieving an outcome they desire for their country.

