Mr. Leon Gonzalez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba supports the statement made by the representative
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The situation in the Middle East region continues to
be of serious concern to the international community.
As we commemorate the one-year anniversary of
the most recent Israeli attack on the Gaza Strip 4 in
which more than 2,000 Palestinians lost their lives,
including at least 299 women and 556 children, and
which plunged the territory into terror, death and mass
destruction 4 the Palestinian people continue to be
victims of acts of vandalism perpetrated by Israel,
which is occupying their lands, killing their children,
destroying their heritage and curtailing their inalienable
rights, including the right to self-determination.

Despiteperiodic opendebatesinthe SecurityCouncil
on this issue, which have shown overwhelming support
for the Palestinian cause, the Council, unfortunately,
has not adopted any resolution demanding that Israel
immediately end its military occupation of Palestinian
and other Arab territories and end the blockade of the
Gaza Strip and the construction and expansion ofillegal
Israeli settlements and the separation wall on occupied
Palestinian territory, and demanding accountability for
war crimes and collective punishment committed by
Israel against the Palestinian people.

The undemocratic veto right in the Security
Council, which has allowed impunity in the conduct
of Israel, must come to an end. This body must
fulfil its obligation to promote a negotiated solution
that guarantees the end of the Israeli occupation of
Palestinian territory, the peaceful coexistence of two
independent States, starting with the establishment of
an independent, sovereign and viable State of Palestine,
and a just solution to the problem of Palestinian
refugees, pursuant to resolution 194(III) of the General
Assembly. We are convinced that a solution to that long-
standing conflict would help to reduce the tensions in
the Middle East region today.

My delegation again reiterates in this forum
its strong condemnation of the Israeli colonization
campaign in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, and all measures, policies and practices
associated with that campaign, which also include
construction and expansion of the illegal settlements
and the wall, the destruction and confiscation of
Palestinian land and property, the forced displacement
of hundreds of thousands of Palestinian families and
the transfer of settlers into the occupied Palestinian
territory, among other violations of international law,
international humanitarian law and United Nations
resolutions.

Cuba also condemns, and calls for a definitive end
to, violence, provocations and incitements to hatred
and terror by Israeli settlers, arbitrary arrests, mass
imprisonment and genocide against the Palestinian
people. Cuba reaffirms its unequivocal solidarity with
that people and the firm and decisive support for all
actions to promote recognition of the State of Palestine
based on the pre-1967 borders, with its capital in East
Jerusalem, and the right of the State of Palestine to
become a full Member of the United Nations. Many of
the promises made for the reconstruction of the Gaza
Strip following the atrocious bombing and massive
destruction inflicted by Israel in July and August 2014
have not materialized. We call on all members of the
international community to honour their commitments
and to work for the reconstruction of that devastated
area.

Peace in Syria is possible only through respect for
the right of its people to decide their own destiny. A
political solution through dialogue and negotiations is
the only alternative to the conflict in Syria. Those who
feed the conflict from the outside with the declared
objective ofregime change are responsible for thousands
of civilian casualties accumulated during four years of
fighting. We reiterate concern about the causes for the
loss of innocent lives as a result of the Syrian conflict
and again condemn all acts of violence that take place
in that country against the civilian population, but the
supposed protection of human life and the fight against
extremist elements cannot serve as a pretext for foreign
intervention.

The United Nations, especially this Council,
should promote an immediate ceasefire to open the way
for dialogue and negotiations and should not promote
initiatives that encourage further tensions in the
country. It should support all efforts in that direction,
such as those that have driven the Russian Federation
and other international actors to oppose those who seek
to fan the conflict by dispatching arms and mercenaries.

The huge human, financial and material resources
currently consumed by wars in the region would be
better utilized to ensure health-care services and quality
education, to encourage construction of infrastructure
that generates progress, to protect and promote all
human rights, including the right to development, to
eradicate poverty and promote social justice. Those
should be our priorities as Members of an Organization
that was founded nearly 70 years ago to maintain
international peace and security and to defend human
dignity.

The role of the Security Council is crucial to
achieving the aspirations of welfare, peace and
development that all peoples in the Middle East deserve.
Its member States should be advocates of peaceful
solutions, without foreign interference, that preserve
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and
contribute decisively to safeguarding the lives of the
peoples affected by the conflicts in the region.

