Mr. Donovan (United States of America):
Contrary to the statements the Council has heard, the
United States has taken a number of actions with
respect to Luis Posada Carriles. The actions of the
United States are consistent with international law as
well as with our domestic legal framework, which
provides for due process and various constitutional
safeguards.

I would like to give the Council a brief overview
of the steps the United States has taken with respect to
Posada within our legal framework. Posada entered the
United States illegally in early 2005. Posada was
detained by immigration authorities in the United
States on 17 May 2005, and he was, in accordance with
United States law, placed in removal proceedings. This
order remains in effect.

Moreover, the United States sought and obtained
a criminal indictment charging Posada with Violations
of our immigration laws. On 8 April 2009, new
criminal charges were brought against Posada in that
case, accusing him of lying to United States
Government officials about his involvement in terrorist
bombings that took place in Havana in 1997. Trial in
that case is presently scheduled to commence in
January 2011.

In sum, with respect to Posada, the United States
continues to be engaged in an ongoing series of actions
consistent with our legal requirements and due process.

In the case of the five Cubans accused of spying,
the facts of the case negate the misrepresentations
issued by the Cuban Government and others in relation
to it. The Cuban five were tried in United States federal
court and were accorded all guarantees of due process
provided under the United States Constitution. They
were convicted on numerous charges, including acting
in the United States as agents of a foreign Power
without making the required notification, conspiring to
do so and conspiring to defraud the United States
concerning its governmental functions and rights. In
addition, three were convicted of conspiracy to commit
espionage related to the covert penetration of United
States military facilities, and one was convicted of
conspiracy to commit murder.

The defendants have never denied that they were
covert agents of the Cuban regime. The defendants
have made full use of their extensive due process
rights, benefiting from their vast procedural protections
and the provision of United States Government-funded
legal assistance. The five convicted Cuban spies are
serving sentences in federal institutions throughout the
United States. They are held among and have the same
privileges as those available to the general prison
population.

