I would like to thank you, Sir, for your leadership on the topic of conflict- induced hunger, illustrated by this timely briefing, as well as for your initiative for a presidential statement, which we support. I thank our briefers for reminding us what this topic is all about. It is about States not protecting their own civilians; about starving civilians; about warring parties denying humanitarian access, attacking civilians and civilian infrastructure, destroying livelihoods, cattle and agricultural fields; and about the disproportionate impact on the most vulnerable, especially on children. It is about Governments impeding humanitarian assistance by imposing less visible administrative impediments and restrictions, and about the difficulties humanitarian organizations experience due to adverse effects of counter-terrorism measures and sanctions. It is also about the less visible effects of conflict-induced hunger; when a whole generation suffers from malnutrition, the long-term consequences compromise the prosperity of the whole society, as well as its prospects for sustainable peace. All 15 members of the Security Council recognized these challenges in unanimously adopting resolution 2417 (2018). You have asked, Sir, how a more comprehensive implementation of that resolution could be achieved. We believe that there are many actions the Security Council and Member States can take to prevent conflicts from causing or aggravating hunger. I will name just a few, inspired, of course, by resolution 2417 (2018). Those States having influence over parties to conflict should use such influence to incite compliance with international humanitarian law, for example by supporting national investigations and encouraging Member States in whose jurisdiction violations are committed to ensure accountability. If and when national jurisdictions fail to take action, the Security Council has the tools to trigger a range of international investigation and accountability mechanisms. We welcome, in this respect, the amendment to the Rome Statute to include as a war crime the intentional starvation of civilians as a method of warfare, including in non-international armed conflicts, and we call on Member States to adhere to the Rome Statute and to ratify this amendment. The Council should also continue to sanction individuals or entities obstructing humanitarian access. Giving appropriate protection-of-civilians mandates to peace operations and having them engage in dialogue on access challenges are other examples. Finally, we believe that the Secretary-General has an important role to play in alerting the Security Council when the risk of conflict-induced famine and widespread food insecurity in the context of armed conflict arises, and in providing us with the necessary information during country-specific and protection-of-civilians briefings. Lastly, we would like to underline that populations in armed conflicts, weakened by years of violence, destruction and malnutrition, and pushed to their limits by the adverse effects of climate change, are now once again particularly vulnerable to the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). We therefore fully support the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire to ensure adequate response to the pandemic. We also recall that COVID-19 does not exempt Governments from their obligations under international, human rights and humanitarian law, and call on all Member States to prevent COVID-19-related restrictions from curtailing the ability of humanitarian actors to provide assistance.
