Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): It is a
particular pleasure, Mr. President, to take part in a
debate presided over by the Prime Minister and the
Foreign Minister of Romania. Your wisdom in
choosing the subject has been demonstrated by the
quality of the debate we have had so far.

Many contributions today have demonstrated why
it is that the partnership between the United Nations
and regional organizations is really so important, and
why it has the potential to be so much more productive.
It is because regional organizations can bring a great
deal to the partnership. They can provide an accepted
framework in which to take forward stabilization. They
have greater knowledge of the situation on the ground.
In many cases they are developing appropriate,
regionally accepted norms and standards, and they
match them with the right mechanisms for monitoring
and enforcement. It is so much better if regionally
owned mechanisms enhance accountability and help
create - on the ground - better government.

Regional organizations can be a means of
providing an incentive in the stabilization process. In
the case of the Balkans, the prospect of European
Union (EU) membership has been a great motivation.
Regional structures can provide ways of pooling
resources to maximize the impact on stabilization:
regional training centres for policing and
peacekeeping, for example. Such structures can help
tackle cross-border aspects of stabilization, such as
refugee flows and the monitoring of sanctions.
Nowhere is that more apparent that in West Africa,
where one cannot tackle individual countries absent the
regional dimension.

Regional organizations have unique and
complementary capacities to offer in support of United
Nations peacekeeping, including, in some cases,
established and evolved rapid response capabilities.
Operation Artemis demonstrated that.

But the regional approach can also help to sustain
political commitment to the stabilization effort.
Regional organizations have a key role to play in
sustainable economic development, which must - as a
number of colleagues have underlined - underpin the
stabilization effort. The Bretton Woods institutions and
regional organizations must be at the heart of a
coordinated response. We have heard from the
Economic Community of West African States very
clearly about what the economic dimension might
mean in West Africa. All of those are strong arguments
for supporting regional efforts where they are
happening indigenously, on the ground.

How we make the partnership work is the key
question. How do we convert it from theory to
practice? There is no one model for partnership
between the United Nations and regional organizations.
It does not make sense to create heavy, formal
mechanisms at Headquarters level, and structures need
to be developed case by case and as flexibly as
possible.

But there is no question that stronger
coordination is required, especially on the ground, and
especially between military and civilian components. I
think a key lesson from the past 15 years of
stabilization, perhaps most recently in Kosovo, is the
need to bring all the different pillars together
coherently. Extrapolating from that, there is a need in
peace-building for the United Nations family, as a
whole, to be coherent - and to be coherent with
regional players and with all the other actors in a
particular area, especially non-governmental
organizations and civil society.

Civilian command and control structures need
attention. There are ways in which that can be done.
But we should also acknowledge that peace-building is
much more complex than any form of conflict
resolution; it needs a range of interventions, done
coherently - and done coherently by all those who
have an interest, including, crucially, regional
organizations. That should be done transparently so
that the decision-making processes between the United
Nations and the regional organization are clear to
everyone. In our view, that is likely to work best where
coordination on the ground is backed up by good
communication at Headquarters level.

How can the United Nations make the most of
that partnership? I would argue, first, that we have a
particular responsibility to help support regional efforts
where they are actually emerging on the ground. The
political and moral authority of the United Nations
should be brought to bear. There is a particular
responsibility for supporting regional structures when
they lack the capacity to deal with problems alone or
when that extra bit of help can make the difference and
convert something into success.

The United Nations should be ready to act as a
clearing house for information exchange, review of
best practice and the sharing of assets to actually make
things happen more easily and more productively. The
United Nations can also help ensure consistency of
approach in important areas, especially, perhaps, in
peacekeeping doctrine. The risk of forces not being
interoperable is obvious. The United Nations can play a
part in pulling them together.

The United Kingdom is trying to play its part in
terms of working with regional organizations. Next
year we will preside over both the Group of Eight and
the European Union: an opportunity, we hope, to
promote a joined-up, outward-looking approach to
regional organizations.

I would like to give three specific examples. The
first relates to cooperation between the European
Union and the United Nations on crisis management,
building on the development of the European security
defence policy initiative and the Battlegroups Concept.
The EU might complement United Nations
peacekeeping efforts and bridge the existing capability

gaps.

Secondly, with regard to Africa, the Commission
for Africa, launched by Tony Blair, will report early
next year. I hope that that will contribute hugely to
what has been said in this Chamber about the New
Partnership for Africa's Development, the importance
of the Millennium Development Goals and so forth.

Lastly, with regard to justice and the rule of law,
the United Kingdom launched an initiative during its
presidency of the Security Council last September. We
await the report of the Secretary-General, but that is an
area where we must all do much more.

The very subject that you, Mr. President, have
chosen for this debate is actually one which is at the
heart of the concerns of the Secretary-General's High-
Level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change. I hope
that in the conclusions that it brings forward later this
year it will not just acknowledge the role of regional
organizations, but give us some very practical ideas as
to how that can be carried forward, because creating
sustainable security requires concerted commitment
from the United Nations, Member States and regional
organizations, all held together, I hope, by political
will.

In conclusion, we need to move the debate on.
Chapter VIII may be the foundation, but regional
organizations are not just subcontractors for
maintaining collective security. In the twenty-first
century we need to develop a mutually reinforcing
partnership between the United Nations and regional
organizations. We should aim to avoid duplication of
effort, allow work to be undertaken by the organization
with comparative advantage, help get regional support
and buy-in for proposed solutions and help mobilize
the necessary resources and capabilities to support
regional initiatives and efforts. That amounts to a full
agenda. In the case of areas such as West Africa, we
know that that approach is indispensable: it is essential.
But if we succeed, the gains for the United Nations, for
regional organizations and, above all, for improving the
situation in our Member States, are obvious.

