Mr. Pressman (United States of America): The
United States strongly supports resolution 2181 (2014),
which targets many of the most serious causes of
instability and insecurity in Somalia. This resolution
reflects the Security Council's knowledge that the
international response to the situation in Somalia
must be comprehensive in order to be effective. That
is why the United States strongly supported language
in the resolution that reflects the Security Council's
commitment to eliminating all sources of funding for
Al-Shabaab, a group that continues to attack innocent
civilians and threaten the peace and stability of both
Somalia and the region.

The international market value of charcoal
exported from Somalia in 2013 and 2014 is estimated
to be $250 million, of which 30 per cent is estimated
to flow directly to Al-Shabaab and fund its operations.
The export of Somali charcoal has long been a concern
for the Council, and we are pleased that the Security
Council is authorizing further means to enforce the
ban on charcoal exports and illicit arms transfers that
violate the arms embargo through maritime interdiction.
The Federal Government of Somalia has called on the
Security Council to take stronger action, and today we
have answered that call.

By renewing the mandate for the African Union
Mission in Somalia, a mission that has found success
in the fight against Al-Shabaab, we will build on
the momentum of the troop surge authorized by the
Security Council last year (resolution 2125 (2013)). The
resolution's renewal of the mandate of the Monitoring
Group on Somalia and Eritrea as well as the extension
of the limited arms embargo suspension will also help
us monitor and stop illicit arms flows.

As Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Kay told the Council 10 days ago, "Somalia's
long night is not over, but the sky is at last getting
lighter" (S/PV. 7278, p. 4). After years of conflict,
Somalia is on the path towards a stable, secure future,
but it is essential that the international community and
the Council remain engaged in Somalia's progress.
Resolution 2182 (2014) reaffirms our commitment to a
peaceful, stable and united future for Somalia, and we
thank Council members for joining with us in sending
that strong and important message.

