Mr. Prendergast: It is a pleasure to be
addressing this Council again in the presence of Ms.
Sima, whom I had the pleasure of meeting in Kabul
during the Secretary-General's Visit there recently and
who struck everyone by the vigour and forthrightness
of her positions.

It has been about a month since this Council last
considered Afghanistan in an open meeting. One month
is quite a long time in the eventful calendar of recent
Afghan history, and this past month has been no
exception. While I will, as usual, try to cover a range
of issues, I would like to begin, if I may, with the
emergency Loya Jirga, which is to take place this June
and which is the single most significant political
benchmark in the Bonn process since the establishment
of the Interim Authority.

As I am sure Council members will recall, the
Loya Jirga is to comprise some 1,500 delegates, of
whom approximately 1,000 will be elected indirectly
by the people and 500 selected by the Independent
Commission for the Emergency Loya Jirga. In the first
phase, district assemblies will gather to select a slate of
representatives, known as "electoral colleges". These
electoral colleges will then travel to one of nine
provincial centres. During the second phase, between
20 May and 3 June, the electoral colleges will elect a
number of delegates from among themselves to
represent each province at the Loya Jirga.

Given the logistical difficulties, the security
environment and the extremely short time frame, even
indirect elections present a great challenge.
Nonetheless, the first phase has begun on schedule and
with success. The first district assembly was held on 14
April in Mordian district, Jowzjan province. Mr.
Lakhdar Brahimi attended that assembly and was
greeted warmly by the 2,000 people who had travelled
there. Mr. Brahimi has reported that enthusiasm for the
Loya Jirga is growing across Afghanistan. People are
looking forward to their first chance in many years to
take part in the political process.

Ten other district assemblies have since taken
place and a total of 200 electoral college members have
been selected. Some results are particularly heartening
to those who hope to see a multi-ethnic, representative

Government in Afghanistan. I refer in particular to the
fact that Pashtuns have been chosen in areas where
they are in a minority and that at least one woman has
already been selected, a modest achievement in most
societies other than Afghanistan. As the Council may
recall, 160 women will be selected by the Independent
Commission itself, but there is no limit to the number
of women who might be elected. We hope to see this
positive precedent repeated many times through both
the first and second phases so that the incredible
sacrifices and tremendous responsibilities that Afghan
women have borne through these past decades of war
are suitably reflected in the composition of the Loya
Jirga.

All possible steps are being taken, given the
limited resources at hand, to promote a fair selection
process. Forty teams of district organizers are currently
being trained by United Nations staff and members of
the Loya Jirga Commission. Operations centres are
being set up in each regional centre and international
monitors will conduct spot checks to ensure that the
process is held in accordance with procedures
established by the Loya Jirga Commission.

However, there is already clear evidence that
some commanders and low-level administrators are
planning to try to force through the selection of their
own people. Discussions on how to provide security for
the second phase of the selection process, and the Loya
Jirga itself, are ongoing with the Interim
Administration and with the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) within the limitations of its
current mandate.

At present, we can say that the emergency Loya
Jirga process is on track. At the same time, I would not
wish to disguise the many problems and obstacles that
lie ahead. The period ahead will be a busy and
challenging one for the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), for the Interim
Administration and for its international partners, but
we remain hopeful and confident that the emergency
Loya Jirga will take place on schedule and that it will
lead to a smooth transition to the next phase of the
Bonn process.

Another significant political development is the
return of the former King, Zahir Shah, who, as the
Council knows, had been exiled since 1973. The
former King has declared his support for Chairman
Karzai and the Interim Administration. He has
emphasized, too, that he returned not to try to revive
the monarchy, but to unite and be close to his fellow
Afghans.

Amid these signs of hope, a series of violent
incidents has heightened security concerns. These
incidents include a failed attempt in Jalalabad to
assassinate the Minister of Defence that killed six
bystanders and injured many more; a rocket attack on
ISAF; several shooting attacks on ISAF patrols; a
general increase in the presence of armed men on the
streets of Kabul; demonstrations in Nangarhar and
Helmand against the Interim Authority's poppy
eradication policy, resulting in 16 deaths; skirmishes
between Pashtun and Tajik troops in the west of the
country; sporadic fighting in Nimroz between a
commander backed by Ismail Khan and the provincial
authorities; and fighting in Wardak province over the
governorship of the province.

In particular, I would like, in this context, to
highlight the tragic killing on 10 April of Mr. Shah
Sayed, an Afghan working for the Food and
Agriculture Organization (FAO). His death adds to a
disturbing pattern of attacks on civilians, including
humanitarian personnel, especially in the north of
Afghanistan.

The Interim Administration has taken some
actions to respond to the deterioration of the security
situation, though its capabilities are limited. In
particular, the Administration sent a delegation to
mediate the conflict in Wardak province, which
occurred at Maidan Shahr, not far from Kabul. This
delegation had some success, although tensions remain.

The Interim Administration's National Security
Directorate also carried out mass arrests in early April,
the aim of which was described as being to pre-empt
suspected terrorist attacks. The International
Committee of the Red Cross was given access to the
prisoners and a few were released, but more than 200
remain in custody. Three weeks after the arrests, no
charges have been brought, nor has evidence against
the suspects been produced. UNAMA representatives
met with the head of the Security Directorate to
express their concerns. They were assured that the
investigation would be completed soon, after which
charges would be pressed or prisoners would be
released. UNAMA will be following this issue very
closely.

The Interim Administration has at the same time
made a determined effort to eradicate this year's poppy
crop. With the financial assistance of the United
Kingdom, the Administration has given farmers a
choice between accepting financial compensation for
each hectare destroyed and facing the forcible
eradication of their crop. This policy has provoked
fierce opposition from the farmers. The Administration
has nonetheless managed to destroy more than 2,000
hectares and has paid $3 million in compensation. I
might mention here that the European wholesale value
of the eradicated crop is in excess of $300 million.

There are, however, 65,000 hectares which are
still estimated to be under poppy cultivation, and
harvesting of the crop has already begun in some
provinces. The Interim Administration faces active
resistance and lacks the means to carry out a
comprehensive destruction of the crop. The
Administration has asked for international assistance to
help farmers plant and market alternative crops. We
urge the international community to respond to these
appeals. If the Administration is successful, this will
not only help to improve security in Afghanistan, but it
will also reduce problems stemming from the illegal
drug trade in consuming countries as well.

Members of the Council have often noted the
need for Afghans to take charge of their own security.
In this regard, the Interim Administration has outlined
a coherent Vision for its future security sector and a
plan to bring about that vision. In his briefing during
informal consultations on 5 April, the Secretary-
General noted the very positive results of the Geneva
conference of security donors. At that conference, the
Interim Administration presented comprehensive
papers on the formation of an Afghan national police
force and army. A follow-up conference will be held
next month.

The need for an effective police and corrections
system is demonstrated by recent allegations of human
rights abuses, which I would like to address now. In
early April, a member of the Loya Jirga Commission
and representatives of the Hazara community
approached UNAMA with allegations that mass graves
had been found in Bamiyan province. UNAMA fielded
a preliminary mission to the area and, based on the
findings of that mission, Mr. Brahimi has asked the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights to
identify forensic experts in the human rights field who
could travel to Bamiyan to conduct a more thorough
investigation. This mission will take place later in the
month.

Also, during his Visit to Mazar-i-Sharif on 14 and
15 April, Mr. Brahimi raised with local leaders,
including Mr. Rashid Dostum and Mr. Mohammad
Atta, the issue of ongoing attacks on Pashtun
minorities in the north. Mr. Brahimi gave them copies
of the Human Rights Watch report that documented
such incidents. He emphasized the need to take
effective steps quickly to end the attacks. The leaders
gave assurances that they would do so.

I turn now to issues of relief and reconstruction.
In the past few months there have been signs that the
economy has begun to recover and that this recovery is
reaching many Afghans. While the international
community must remain focused on meeting basic
human needs, there is growing scope for rehabilitation
and reconstruction activities as well.
It is therefore a matter of great concern that funds
pledged at Tokyo for such activities have been
extremely slow to arrive. While donors may,
understandably, want to wait for more stability before
disbursing funds, we must also recognize that
implementing rehabilitation and reconstruction projects
will greatly help bring about that stability. It is a
chicken-and-egg situation. As resolution 1401
(2002)- which was adopted unanimously by the
Council - recognizes, the provision of reconstruction
assistance can, under certain conditions, promote
conditions of law and order. We would therefore urge
Member States to meet their pledges so that
reconstruction and development funding can be used to
help promote a secure environment for political and
economic change.

In anticipation of the funding pledged at Tokyo,
UNAMA has begun to plan recovery and development
activities in cooperation with the Interim Authority. At
the request of the Authority, UNAMA is leading efforts
to design and implement a series of integrated area
development programmes in ten priority regions of the
country.

On a related matter, the first meeting of the
Implementation Group was held in Kabul on 10 and 11
April. The Council will recall that the Implementation
Group was formed during the Tokyo conference to
oversee the use of funds pledged for the reconstruction
of Afghanistan. At the meeting, the Interim
Administration presented its current operating budget.
Many donors congratulated the Administration on its
ability to produce a clear and realistic budget, an
impressive national development framework draft, and
a list of quick-impact projects to be implemented
immediately. Mr. Karzai told the group that donor
disbursements must be urgently accelerated to meet the
operating budget and emergency needs.

The pace of return of refugees from neighbouring
countries has exceeded expectations. The Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has
estimated that in the first eight weeks of its facilitated
repatriation programme, more than 300,000 refugees
have returned to Afghanistan. This represents the
fastest return of refugees anywhere since the end of the
Kosovo war in 1999.

In the area of food assistance, efforts by the
World Food Programme to meet the immediate food
needs of more than 6 million Afghans are increasingly
jeopardized by a serious depletion of cash and
commodity resources. On 18 April, confirmed donor
pledges for food assistance amounted to less than half
of what is required to sustain current operations.
Furthermore, recent vulnerability assessments have
shown that the food needs in Afghanistan are greater
than originally estimated. United Nations efforts to
mitigate food insecurity have been constrained by
inter-factional fighting and demonstrations against the
poppy eradication campaign in the south and east of the
country.

As we have seen so often in Afghanistan,
humanitarian emergencies succeed each other, and their
damaging effects are exacerbated by destroyed
infrastructure and weakened social coping mechanisms.
After great efforts were made to provide assistance to
the victims of two earthquakes near Nahrin in northern
Afghanistan, reports emerged of a massive plague of
locusts in the north. This plague directly threatens
crops in Balkh, Kunduz, Baghlan and Samanghan
provinces, which are already suffering from drought.
FAO has deployed its existing stocks of pesticides and
is expecting additional stocks in the next three weeks
to address the locust plague.

In the health sector, a nationwide polio
immunization campaign was launched on 16 April,
targeting 6 million Afghan children and mobilizing the
support of 60,000 volunteers. These vaccination efforts
are expected to succeed in stopping the transmission of
polio in Afghanistan by the end of 2002.

I have tried to describe a picture of the United
Nations working with greater coordination among its
constituent parts, as well as hand in hand with the
Interim Authority created by the Bonn Agreement.
International support for the Bonn process has been
generous so far, and instrumental in the progress that
has been made.

At the same time, I would not want to leave any
illusions about the obstacles ahead, the scale of the
resources still required or the pressures that the Interim
Administration continues to face. After so many years
of war and civil war in Afghanistan, the political and
humanitarian progress of the past several months is
very encouraging. However, this progress is still by no
means assured. Security remains a major challenge in
many parts of the country, and substantial financial
assistance is going to be required. I would therefore
like to conclude with an appeal to international
community to speed up the delivery of its assistance
and to broaden its scope to include still unmet needs
related to security.

