Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I join other
speakers in welcoming High Representative Valentin
Inzko back to the Council, and express the United
Kingdom's thanks for his tenth report to the Secretary-
General (see S/2013/646, annex). Once again, it is a
detailed and sobering report that documents objectively
the serious challenges that Bosnia and Herzegovina
continues to face. Against that difficult political
backdrop, the United Kingdom extends its gratitude to
the High Representative for his continued commitment
to the implementation of the Dayton Peace Accords.

The disappointing lack of political progress in
Bosnia and Herzegovina during the reporting period
contrasts starkly with the historic developments that
have taken place elsewhere in the Western Balkans
region. In April, Serbia and Kosovo reached a truly
significant agreement that created momentum for both
of their European Union (EU) perspectives. In July, we
saw the accession of Croatia to the European Union,
marking an important step forward for the region's
future stability and prosperity. That vital progress
could not have been achieved without political leaders
showing commitment, determination and a willingness
to compromise. The results of such political leadership
are apparent in terms of the further progress towards
European integration structures helping to deliver
tangible benefits for their citizens.

It is unfortunate that there has been no sign
that regional progress has influenced Bosnia and
Herzegovina's leaders. There has been no progress on
the EU and NATO paths and no movement towards
delivering the conditionality of the "5+2" agenda needed
for the closure ofthe Office of the High Representative.

While we welcome the conduct of the October
census - the first in Bosnia and Herzegovina in over
20 years - it is disappointing that many chose to use it
as an opportunity for yet more divisive rhetoric, rather
than focus on its potential benefits for the country in
terms of generating accurate data to inform economic
and social planning.

Politicians have shown throughout the reporting
period that they are unwilling to put the needs of their
electorate and their country above their own interests.
That is typified by the continued failure to resolve
the longstanding Sejdie-Finci constitutional issue.
That judgment has now remained unimplemented
for nearly four years. It is a judgment crying out for
rapid implementation, both to tackle a discriminatory
provision in the electoral system and because it is needed
to unlock Bosnia and Herzegovina's EU Stabilization
and Association Agreement.

Yet, despite the tireless work of EU Special
Representative Peter Sorensen to facilitate a solution
through the EU high-level dialogue on the accession
process, Bosnia and Herzegovina's leaders have once
again failed to reach agreement in October.

It is now becoming increasingly difficult to justify
supporting continued pre-accession, given the absence
of progress towards pre-accession. We support, as a
regrettable necessity, a decision by the European Union
Commissioner, Stephan Fuller, to begin cutting Bosnia
and Herzegovina's funding for 2013 by €47 million.
The failure to establish an effective mechanism for
coordination with the European Union is now calling
into question future tranches of sizeable pre-accession
assistance funds. Furthermore, the unwillingness
of political leaders to adapt Bosnia Herzegovina's
Stabilization and Association Agreement following
Croatia's accession could have a negative impact
on trade between Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
European Union.

There is a pattern underlying all of those political
failures. Instead of working to improve the prosperity
and welfare of their citizens by making progress
towards the European Union, Bosnia and Herzegovina's
political leaders seem locked in short-term, narrowly
focused zero-sum-game mindsets. That is a road to
nowhere in terms of the country's future; indeed, it
risks undermining the hard-earned gains of the past
18 years.

We are also deeply disappointed at the failure
of political leaders to complete the registration of
defence property. That failure continues to block the
implementation of Bosnia and Herzegovina's NATO
membership action plan. Inspite ofpromises in February
to the NATO Secretary General and to the Assistant
Secretary General in September, political leaders must
swiftly work together to fulfil their commitment to the
March 2012 agreement and agree a solution.

Protests in June over the single identification
number issue show that citizens are dissatisfied with
Bosnia and Herzegovina's political leaders' inaction.
That this issue was not resolved until earlier this
month demonstrates the elected representatives'
unwillingness or inability to engage with issues of
significant public concern. The United Kingdom urges
the political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina to move
forward from this stagnant political context. They need
to understand they are responsible for the growing
anger and frustration of the public, whose interests are
steadily suffering from a succession ofpolitical failures
outlined in the High Representative's latest report.

We share the High Representative's concern and
condemnation of those in the Republika Srpska who
continue to challenge the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We join other
Council members in condemning such statements,
which are pointless and irresponsible. There can be no
redrawing of the map, nor can Bosnia and Herzegovina
join the European Union as anything other than a single
sovereign State.

We are also concerned at the continued
non-enforcement of constitutional court decisions,
particularly in Mostar, where local elections have
now been delayed for over a year. Political pressure
has been exerted on State level judicial institutions on
a number of ocassions this year, and we welcome the
recent statement by the European Union, the Office of
the High Representative and the United States calling
on the National Assembly of the Republika Srpska to
respect and observe the independence of the judiciary.

Many of the underlying political challenges and
tensions that remain in Bosnia and Herzegovina are
at risk of worsening as we approach the elections in
October 2014. We support the High Representative's
assessment that the European Union Force-Operation
Althea continues to play a crucial role in efforts to
maintain a safe and secure environment. We welcome
the Council's agreement to renew its mandate for a
further 12 months.

