Mr. Kitaoka (Japan): As reflected in the Pretoria
Agreement, the African Union and its mediator for
Cote d'Ivoire, President Mbeki, have been playing
increasingly important roles, which makes close
coordination between the Security Council and the
African Union more important than ever. My
delegation, Mr. President, therefore greatly appreciates
your initiative to convene today's meeting in such a
timely manner. I also wish to express our appreciation
to Mr. Aziz Pahad, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs
of South Africa, and to Ambassador Simeon Adekanye
of Nigeria for their detailed and informative briefings.
I would like to make three points.

First, Japan welcomes the Pretoria Agreement as
a demonstration of the renewed commitment of all
Ivorian parties to the peace process. We commend
President Mbeki and the African Union for their
tenacious efforts to promote the Agreement, providing
a great example of an African problem being resolved
by Africans. We are also encouraged by the first steps
already taken by the Ivorian parties to implement the
Agreement, such as the meeting held on 14 April by
the National Armed Forces of cote d'Ivoire (FANCI)
and the Armed Forces of Forces Nouvelles (FAFN) on
the implementation of the national disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) plan. It should
be stressed nevertheless that it is critical to ensure full
and prompt implementation of all commitments made
in this and previous agreements. All the Ivorian parties
should faithfully respect the provisions of these
agreements, including the decision by President Mbeki
with regard to eligibility for the presidency. Japan is
ready to consider further assistance for both DDR and
the elections, depending upon developments in the
situation in Cote d'Ivoire.

Secondly, as to the question of sanctions
measures, it is not an appropriate time to immediately
apply targeted sanctions against individuals, since the
Ivorian parties have just shown their readiness, through
the Pretoria Agreement, to revitalize the peace process.
It should, however, be underscored that no further
delay can be permitted in the preparations for the
elections scheduled for October. All Ivorian parties
must recognize that any delay in implementing the
commitments made in the Agreement will render them
immediately subject to sanctions measures.

Thirdly, concerning the role of the United
Nations in the peace process, it is significant that the
Ivorian parties have invited the United Nations to
participate in organizing the elections. We look
forward to receiving the views and recommendations
of the Secretary-General in this regard, specifically
with respect to how the United Nations and its mission
on the ground can play an effective role in ensuring
transparent, free and fair elections within the limited
resources available.

At the same time, my Government is fully aware
of the continued precariousness and, at times, volatility
of the security situation in the country. As a result of
our own careful assessment, based on the reports of our
embassy in Abidjan and on information gathered
through the mission that we sent to the country, are
more than ever convinced that serious deliberations
with regard to a certain level of reinforcement of the
peacekeeping operation are needed. The Government
of Japan is now ready to consider such reinforcement,
although we think that, if the situation were not so
precarious, better use could have been made of the
$30 million in funds for the additional
reinforcement - 20 per cent of which will be borne by
Japan - for the reconstruction and development of the
country.

We sincerely hope that the crisis in Cote d'Ivoire
will be brought to an end by the successful holding of
transparent, free and fair presidential elections and
through the faithful implementation of the Pretoria
Agreement and all previous agreements. We have no
doubt that such a process will strengthen the
democratic foundations of the country and help it to
regain its place as an economic driving force for the
entire western African subregion.

