Mr. Petrella (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): Allow me at the outset, Sir, to note the presence
of Mr. Yoo Chong Ha, the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of your country, which has given this important meeting
the appropriate historic formality.

Secondly, this convening of an open debate on
protection for humanitarian assistance to refugees and
others in conflict situations provides us with an excellent
opportunity to contribute to the work of this body. For
this reason, we thank you, Sir, for your initiative and for
the keen sensitivity that you and your predecessor,
Ambassador Antonio Monteiro of Portugal, have shown
in this regard. I believe that these deliberations will help
to bring about a better understanding of the irreplaceable
role of the United Nations in these changing times.

I must also express my appreciation to Mr. Yasushi
Akashi, Mr. Soren Jessen-Petersen, Mr. Stephen Lewis
and Mr. Peter Kung, whose statements reflect not only the
urgency of this question but also the need to devise new

 

instruments that will enhance the effectiveness of the
Council's action.

Most of the items on the Security Council's agenda
today have a very definite humanitarian component. That
component derives from the many kinds of abuses
perpetrated against civilian populations and from the
existence of refugees and displaced persons. We deem
significant the Security Council's stance on supporting the
agencies and organizations devoted to responding to the
plight of refugees and displaced persons by the means
outlined in Chapter VII of the Charter. However, this is a
complex matter that deserves further study.

There is no question that speedy action must be taken
in such cases, but we should ask ourselves to what extent
the Security Council should become involved. In the course
of this debate, very relevant views have been expressed that
can be useful in outlining a body of thought that may lead
to a forward-looking answer based on past experience.

However, to date public opinion has not come to
believe that the concrete measures taken have achieved the
goal of diminishing the scope of these kinds of crises. The
experience of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees has allowed her to formulate proposals conducive
to concrete results. Accordingly, the important suggestions
made during Mrs. Sadako Ogata's last visit to the Security
Council deserve the most serious consideration. Those
proposals cannot be ignored, and it would be advisable for
public opinion to have access to them.

The numbers involved in this crisis speak for
themselves. In recent years, the increase in refugees and
displaced persons has been dramatic: their numbers have
increased fourfold.

The Office of the High Commissioner has estimated
that today 21 million people are within its purview. The
purpose of the Council and of the United Nations in general
should be geared to improving its capacity to anticipate,
provide against and prevent this type of humanitarian
disaster. That should be reconciled with respect for
international law and particularly for the limits imposed by
the domestic jurisdiction of States, when appropriate. There
are many elements that, in dealing with this type of crisis
through collective action, should not be subordinated to any
interests other than preventing harm and tragedy from
befalling the civilian population. As we all know, this is a
delicate matter that deserves the most careful consideration
and sensitivity, because not all of us think alike. This
matter is directly related to the evolution of the
international system, which is today more integrated and
interdependent, and to the changing nature of the issues
that involve the Security Council.

Moreover, within the limits of the Charter the
Secretary-General's capacity for preventive action should
be enhanced as one central aspect of his mandate.
Similarly, it should be clear that humanitarian action
should be accompanied by political and diplomatic
actions, and cannot be carried out without them. Such
political and diplomatic endeavours are the very essence
of the United Nations and are framed by the need to
maintain international peace and security. The words of
Mr. Akashi this morning were eloquent.

Several delegations have spoken of the need to avoid
impunity. Here again we are dealing with a delicate and
complex matter. Fortunately, however, we can say that
tribunals to try persons responsible for atrocities have
already been created. The more effective such tribunals
are, the more they will deter the kind of abuses that
concern us. The Council could also seek a way to
establish machinery that will make it possible to ascribe
responsibility.

Argentina firmly supports the policy of restructuring
the organs of the United Nations and of rationalizing
financial and human resources that is being put into
practice. On the basis of our regional and global
experience on matters of humanitarian assistance we
concur with delegations that have spoken of the need to
obtain a clear mandate before a humanitarian action is
undertaken. But that cannot justify inaction when the facts
and public opinion demand immediate action.

Coordination within the United Nations and
appropriate follow-up to humanitarian action are also
essential. A more prominent and visible role should also
be devised for public information on all these matters.
That will make it easier for countries to make
contributions and more difficult for perpetrators of abuses
to cling to their attitudes. No person or political group is
immune from public condemnation. The principles of the
Charter of the United Nations should be disseminated
today more than ever, especially in areas of conflict.

Finally, we hope that this debate will enable the
Council to adopt concrete measures that incorporate the
suggestions that have been made.

I wish to conclude with a tribute to all those who
have lost their lives or suffered injury in the performance

 

of humanitarian tasks under the auspices of the United
Nations.

