Mr. Toure: I thank the Security Council for this
opportunity to introduce the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2018/110) on the situation in Guinea-Bissau
and the activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS).
As the report already presents a detailed outline of
recent events in Guinea-Bissau, my intervention will
focus on updating the Council on political developments
since its issuance, while analysing present challenges
and making proposals for the way forward.

This briefing takes place against the backdrop of
a rapidly evolving political situation in Guinea-Bissau.
Over the past several weeks, a series of key events have
occurred with important ramifications. At the country
level, President Jose' Mario Vaz dismissed former
Prime Minister Umaro Sissoco Embalo and replaced
him with Mr. Artur Da Silva. The African Party for
the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde (PAIGC)
finally held its party congress despite attempts by
national authorities to block it, and re-elected Domingos
Simoes Pereira as its leader.

At the regional level, on 4 February, the Authority
of Heads of State and Government of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
pursuant to its decision of 27 January, imposed targeted
sanctions on 19 individuals deemed to be obstructing
the implementation of the Conakry Agreement. Those
individuals and their family members are subject to
travel bans and assets freeze. They have also been
suspended from ECOWAS activities. The ECOWAS
Authority also requested the African Union (AU),
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries,
the European Union, the United Nations and other
partners to support and facilitate the enforcement of
the sanctions.

Since the imposition of the sanctions, the reaction
of national stakeholders has been mixed. Those upon
whom the sanctions were imposed have described
them as unsubstantiated and unjust, while those in
favour of the sanctions have characterized them
as a necessary measure to safeguard the country's
democratic course. Meanwhile, national reactions
to the appointment of Mr. Artur Da Silva as the new
Prime Minister have been generally consistent. On
31 January, the PAIGC issued a statement denouncing
Mr. Da Silva's appointment as not being in conformity
with the Conakry Agreement. Last week, the Party for
Social Renewal, the second largest party in Parliament,
and the group of 15 dissident parliamentarians of the
PAIGC also issued public statements stressing that they
would participate only in a Government formed under
a consensual Prime Minister, in strict compliance with
the Conakry Agreement. Thus far, the Prime Minister's
efforts to consult with political parties represented in
the National Assembly on the formation of an inclusive
Government have not borne fruit.

Under my leadership, the group of five
regional and international partners, comprised of
representatives of the African Union, the Community
of Portuguese-speaking Countries, ECOWAS, the
European Union and the United Nations, has continued
to harmonize efforts and messaging at opportune
moments with the aim of creating a stable and enabling
environment for dialogue among political leaders. So
far this year, I have convened three meetings of the
group. My efforts, together with those of the partners,
have focused on engaging national authorities and
key political stakeholders in Guinea-Bissau to defuse
escalating tensions, encourage political dialogue in
order to ease the political gridlock, call for the protection
and respect for the human rights of Bissau-Guinean
citizens, and urge all aggrieved stakeholders to pursue
their grievances through legal and constitutional means.

Furthermore, under my direction, UNIOGBIS
continues to play a central role in supporting and
facilitating the regional mediation efforts of ECOWAS
by, inter alia, ensuring the participation of Bissau-
Guinean stakeholders at the ECOWAS Summit in Abuja
in December 2017, providing substantive and logistical
support for the ECOWAS high-level delegations during
their missions to Bissau and regularly sensitizing
regional leaders to ongoing political developments
within the country, while encouraging them to
exert their influence on protagonists in order to
reach compromises.

The absence of a functioning and stable Government
for more than three years has limited the ability of
UNIOGBIS to effectively and sustainably implement
some of its mandated tasks. As recommended by the
strategic review mission headed by the Department of
Political Affairs in 2016 and endorsed by the Council
last year, I have streamlined the UNIOGBIS leadership
and structure to promote better integration and
complementarity with the United Nations country team
and other international partners, while boosting the
Mission's political capacities, which has enabled me to
exercise my good offices more effectively at the national
level. Those changes have also assisted the broader
United Nations system in Guinea-Bissau in delivering
more focused and integrated peacebuilding support to
national authorities and civil society, including women
and youth.

In this regard, the support provided by the
Peacebuilding Fund has been critical. Going forward,
UNIOGBIS will need to focus its energies on supporting
national leaders in their efforts to appoint an acceptable
Prime Minister, establish an inclusive Government,
organize and conduct timely elections, and implement
the priority reforms outlined in the Conakry Agreement
and the ECOWAS road map.

Until the completion of the electoral cycle in 2019,
Guinea-Bissau remains more than ever a country that
requires a dedicated United Nations presence to prevent
a further deterioration in the political and security
situation at the national level and avoid any negative
consequences in the subregion. In this context, my good
offices, political facilitation, advocacy and mediation
roles, alongside my efforts aimed at promoting respect
for human rights and the rule of law and at carrying
out integrated peacebuilding support, will continue to
be critical.

As the Secretary-General has indicated in his report,
it is vital that the United Nations remain engaged in
peacebuilding efforts in the country while supporting
ECOWAS involvement in resolving the political crisis
for at least one more year. The Secretary-General has
expressed his intention to authorize an assessment of
the current mission at the end of that period and to
present options to the Security Council for a possible
reconfiguration of United Nations presence in the
country. It is my hope that the Council will give
favourable consideration to this recommendation.

The African Union Peace and Security Council
(AUPSC), through its communique of 13 February,
has fully endorsed the measures taken by ECOWAS
on 4 February, including the application of sanctions
against political obstructionists. It has also requested
the African Union Commission to coordinate with
the ECOWAS Commission to ensure the effective
implementation of these measures. Moreover, it has
requested that the Security Council endorse the AUPSC
communique that endorsed the ECOWAS decision. At
this critical juncture, it would be important for the
Security Council to continue to reaffirm the centrality
of the Conakry Agreement and reiterate its full support
for ECOWAS in its mediation efforts and for the
measures that it has taken against political stakeholders
deemed to be obstructing the resolution of the political
crisis. I would further seek the Council's support in
underscoring the importance of urgently organizing and
holding legislative elections within the constitutionally
mandated timeline.

Lastly, throughout the past year, the presence of the
ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB) has
consistently acted as a stabilizing factor in the country.
I would therefore call on members of the Council and
international donors to support the continued presence
of ECOMIB through to the holding of a presidential
election in 2019, including by advocating for the renewal

of its mandate and the provision of the financial support
needed to maintain its deployment.

I would like to express my gratitude to the
Council for its continued interest in promoting peace
and stability in Guinea-Bissau. I would also like to
commend ECOWAS and its current Chair, President
Faure Gnassingbe of Togo, and the ECOWAS Mediator
for Guinea-Bissau, President Alpha Conde of Guinea,
for their tireless mediation efforts.

Finally, I would like to express appreciation to all
multilateral and bilateral partners, especially to the AU,
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries and
the European Union for their commitment to promoting
peace and prosperity in Guinea-Bissau. After several
years of long-term investment in the stability of Guinea-
Bissau, it is time to consolidate and reap the dividends
of our concerted efforts. It is vital that we accompany
this process to its completion.

