Mr. Atieh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, my delegation would like to
congratulate you, Sir, on presiding over the Security
Council this month. We also wish to thank the
Permanent Representative of the Philippines and his
mission staff for their successful leadership of the
Council last month.

My delegation also takes this opportunity to
congratulate the representative of the Russian
Federation, Mr. Alexander Konuzin, on his
chairmanship of the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001). We
thank him for his detailed and comprehensive briefing
this morning, in which he provided the Committee's
programme of work for the next 90-day period.

We also congratulate Ambassador Javier Ruperez
of Spain on his appointment as Executive Director of
the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate.

My delegation commends the work and efforts of
the CTC during the period under consideration. The
Committee strove tirelessly to enhance the capacities
of member States to align their national legislations
with the requirements and provisions of resolution
1373 (2001). My delegation also welcomes the
Committee's work in creating an open and ongoing
dialogue on cooperation and transparency in order to
increase the counter-terrorism capacities of member
States. In that respect, we commend the interactive and
genuine relationship between the Committee and
international, regional and subregional organizations,
as well as the enhanced contacts with such
organizations. We welcome specifically the
Committee's acceptance of the League of Arab States'
proposal to host the fourth special meeting of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee with regional and
subregional organizations, to be held in Cairo later this
year, provided that such a meeting is held in
accordance with applicable procedures for such
meetings.

My delegation welcomes the establishment of the
CTC Executive Directorate, which will work in
cooperation with the newly appointed Executive
Director and the Secretariat to enable this new organ to
begin work as soon as possible. We note in the
Committee's work schedule the fact that it will
consider the organizational plan to be submitted by the
Executive Director. In that respect, we are confident
that members of the Council will discuss the plan in
detail to ensure that it is in keeping with the Charter of
the United Nations, other principles of the
Organization and the mandate of the Committee. We
also hope that they will discuss its financial aspects in
the light of the financial rules and regulations of the
United Nations.

International terrorism has reached a very
dangerous stage, and combating it requires coordinated
international efforts. To uproot it, we must seriously
address its causes and roots. Such an approach should
be implemented objectively, without any double
standard, so as to promote international peace and
security on the basis of the purposes and principles of
the Charter.

The threat posed by terrorism increases if
weapons of mass destruction are involved, and that is
why my country has called on the international
community to fight both in parallel. As an expression
of good faith, my country submitted, during its term as
a non-permanent member of the Council, a draft
resolution on behalf of the Arab Group calling for
making the Middle East a region free from all weapons
of mass destruction, with no exceptions for any country
in the region. That draft resolution is still before the
Council, and we truly hope that it will be unanimously
adopted as soon as possible in view of its importance,
particularly in the light of the challenges and dangers
threatening our world today.

In conclusion, I should like to stress once again
my country's support for the CTC and for all sincere
international efforts to realize the lofty objective of the
international community: to combat terrorism and
thereby help to realize humanity's aspiration to peace
and security.

