Mr. Chen Xu (China) (interpretation from Chinese):
China supports the extension of the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINURCA). Recently, conflicts have repeatedly broken
out in many areas of Africa. However, the Central African
Republic has maintained relative stability and has smoothly
carried out legislative elections. This is the result of the
effort and cooperation of the Government and people of
Central African Republic and MINURCA. MINURCA in
particular has played a special role in this respect. It has
won the widespread appreciation of the people and of
various parties in the country. Once again, this has
demonstrated that the Security Council is clearly able to do
concrete work for African countries and peoples.

China has always maintained that the Bangui
Agreements and the National Reconciliation Pact are the
bases for bringing about peace and stability in the Central
African Republic, and the various sides should fully and
faithfully implement them. We fully support the
Government and people of the Central African Republic in
carrying out reforms in the political, economic, social and
security areas. We urge the international community to
provide the necessary assistance for this. At the same time,
we also believe that such reforms, especially the
restructuring of the armed forces, are the internal affairs of
a country, and the Security Council should not intervene
too much. We therefore hope that, in future consultations,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General will
fully seek and respect the views of the host Government.

China sincerely hopes that the various parties in the
Central African Republic will settle their disputes soon,
smoothly carry out presidential elections and support
MINURCA in providing assistance in this respect.
Finally, I should like to emphasize the importance of
paragraph 16 of the draft resolution. We appeal to the
international community to help the Central African
Republic to bring about sustainable economic and social
development so as to achieve genuine and lasting peace
and stability.

