Mr. Ali (Malaysia): Mr. President, my delegation
wishes to express its appreciation to you for having
convened this meeting, which gives the opportunity for
many of us not represented on this body to address the
Council on an issue of grave importance which affects
the state of international peace and security. In this
regard, my delegation aligns itself with the statement
made earlier by the representative of Cuba on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement.

We should recall that June this year marked the
sixtieth year of the dispossession of Palestine refugees.
Last year was the commemoration of the fortieth year
of the occupation of the Palestinian territories, which is
on record as the longest occupation in modern history.
In view of that background, there is an unmistakable
and pervasive view among many developing countries
that certain members of the Council have been
selective in their approach in tackling issues relating to
international peace and security. The Security Council
has adopted various resolutions on the situation in the
Middle East, particularly resolutions 242 (1967) 338
(1973). The lack of action on the part of the Council to
enforce those resolutions bears negatively on the
credibility of this body.

My delegation recognizes the significance of
recent developments, including the Gaza truce and last
week's prisoner exchange. We hope that those
developments will contribute to the Middle East peace
process, in which the Palestine-Israel conflict
represents the core issue. Last November, Malaysia
was among those present in Annapolis that shared a
sense of optimism that some progress was possible
towards a solution to the conflict. Developments since
then, however, have dashed that optimism. It is indeed
difficult to maintain the hope that we are nearer to
realizing the vision of a viable, territorially contiguous,
sovereign and independent Palestinian State living side
by side in peace and security with Israel.

In particular, my delegation wishes to highlight
the fact that the ongoing expansion of illegal Israeli
settlements in the occupied territories, despite the
undertakings that Israel has made, including in
Annapolis, is a major impediment to the peace process.
The Council simply cannot stand by idle, for doing so
would amount to condoning and abetting the Israeli
confiscation of Palestinian territories. To prod the

08-4336]
Middle East peace process in the right direction, the
Security Council must ensure that Israel complies with
the Council's resolutions.

It is not possible to equate the responsibilities of
Palestinians and Israelis for achieving a solution to the
problem. Israel is the occupier. Israel bears
responsibility as the occupying Power under
international law, particularly the Fourth Geneva
Convention. The time is long overdue for Israel to
cease its policy of imposing collective punishment on
the population of Gaza. Israel should halt all its human
rights violations and illegal actions and respect
international law. In that connection, I wish to recall
the words contained in Israel's Declaration of
Independence, which lays out the moral foundation of
the State:

"We extend our hand to all neighbouring States
and their peoples in an offer of peace and good-
neighborliness, and appeal to them to establish
bonds of cooperation and mutual help with the
sovereign Jewish people settled in its own land.
The State of Israel is prepared to do its share in a
common effort for the advancement of the entire
Middle East."

In 2002, the Arab countries, through the Arab
League's peace proposal, offered peace and normal
relations with Israel in exchange for Israel's
withdrawal from all Arab territories occupied since
1967, its acceptance of an independent Palestinian
State with East Jerusalem as its capital, and its
agreement to a just solution of the Palestinian refugee
problem. That is in line with Security Council
resolution 242 (1967), yet Israel has not grasped that
offer for peace.

This time, the international community must
ensure that the present peace efforts do not fail. The
consequences of an unravelling of the peace process
would be devastating, the prospects for peacemaking in
the future would dim, and the region would sink into
further turmoil.

Ultimately, the current peace efforts should bring
an end to the occupation of all the Arab territories
occupied by Israel since 1967 - the occupied
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem, and
the occupied Syrian Golan - and lead to the
establishment of an independent State of Palestine with
East Jerusalem as its capital, as well as a just solution
to the question of the refugees on the basis of General
Assembly resolution 194 (111). That will be possible
only if the Security Council implements its resolution.

