Mr. Kasanda (Zambia): Mr. President, I join other
delegations in expressing appreciation for the leadership
you are providing to the Security Council during the
month of October.

The Zambian delegation shares the grave concerns
of the international community about the critical situation
in Angola. We are particularly concerned that UNITA
seems to be fostering a negative climate in that country
that stands in the way of national reconciliation and the
formation of a Government of National Unity and
Reconciliation under the terms of the 1994 Lusaka
Protocol. The results of the UNIT A Congress held on
28 August 1996, which, inter alia, rejected the Angolan
Government's offer of the position of Vice-President to
Mr. Jonas Savimbi under a Government of National

 

Unity; the unexplained absence of Mr. Jonas Savimbi from
the Southern African Development Community (SADC)
summit on Angola, held in Luanda on 2 October 1996; the
unfilled UNITA quotas in the Angolan national army that
is being formed; these among other things are all unfulfilled
obligations on the part of UNITA under the Lusaka
Protocol.

At this stage of emerging uncertainty on the future
direction of the Angolan peace process, the international
community, through the Security Council, should
unequivocally urge Mr. Savimbi and the other UNITA
leaders to be more resolute in the implementation of the
commitments made in the Lusaka Protocol. There is also a
need to send a clear signal that failure by UN ITA to honour
these commitments will be considered a threat to the peace
and security of Angola that could undermine the work of
the United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III). It should be recalled that the Security Council has in
the past taken decisive steps to secure UNITA's compliance
in the Angolan peace process, such as those contained in
section B of Security Council resolution 864 (1993) of 15
September 1993. This is the time for the Security Council
to enforce those measures comprehensively.

As we have already heard, there are many pending
issues that need to be resolved to facilitate the Angolan
peace process. In the view of my delegation, these issues
are not insurmountable, if only we secure the unreserved
cooperation of UNITA. For example, conditions that seem
to contribute to desertions in the quartering process could
be removed with appropriate intervention. Similarly we are
hopeful that UNITA, with political will, can meet its quotas
in the Angolan national army that is being created.

It will be recalled that the UNITA leader, Mr. Jonas
Savimbi, was absent from the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) summit on Angola of 2
October 1996. In spite of this unexplained absence, the
leaders of southern Africa will continue their efforts to
secure durable peace in Angola. It can only be hoped that
Mr. Savimbi will not fail to attend future summits, in order
to ensure that the Angolan peace process is consolidated.

I would like to express words of thanks to Maitre
Alioune Blondin Beye and the three observer States to the
Angolan peace process, namely Portugal, the Russian
Federation and the United States of America, who have
worked tirelessly to keep the Angolan peace process on
track.

 

Finally, I would like to express the hope that UNITA
will this time heed the unanimous call from the
international community to honour its obligations freely
entered into under the Lusaka Protocol.

