Let me begin by expressing our deepest condolences in connection with the fallen Blue Helmets in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali. I also would like to express our appreciation to Special Representative of the Secretary-General Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert for her important update. Following her most recent briefing, in early March (see S/PV.8739), we were pleased to learn that Iraq is on the path of recovery and reconstruction and that there are signs of progress towards stable nation-building. Indonesia further reiterates its support for Iraqi sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity. I would also like to underscore, as mentioned by Jeanine, that attacks and counter-attacks on Iraqi soil remain a constant threat to the stability of the country. I should also like to underscore the following. First, on the political situation, we would like to echo the Secretary-General's welcome of the new Government of Iraq, led by Prime Minister Mustafa Al-Kadhimi. As Iraq is a young democracy, its journey will not be easy; however, if we always put the interests of the people first, the efforts made will yield the desired results. In particular, during a challenging time such as this Iraq needs a stable and effective Government, and the authorities need to work in unison in the spirit of national unity in addressing the challenges confronting the Iraqi people. That will enable the Government to deliver basic services and to address the immediate needs, demands and interests of Iraq's diverse communities, including ethnic and religious minorities, women and youth. We also welcome Prime Minister's Al-Kadhimi's priorities in tackling the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and on accountability, as mentioned by Jeanine. Also, as noted in the Secretary-General's report (S/2020/363), the COVID-19 pandemic has had a significant impact on the overall situation in Iraq and is compounded by political, security, economic, humanitarian and other challenges. In that connection, to improve the economic situation, which has also been affected by the pandemic, and compensate for the fall in global oil prices, there is a need to undertake structural reform, combat corruption and promote sustainable economic growth and diversification. It is easy for us to say all these words, but it is more important that we translate them into reality by supporting Iraq, as it is in the interest of the international community to support the country's economic growth and stability. A stable and prosperous Iraq will contribute to peace in the region. Secondly, concerning the security situation, Indonesia is concerned that the remnants of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant have continued to launch frequent attacks against civilians and security forces in some areas, doubling their claimed activities to 370 incidents since January 2020, as compared with 187 incidents during the same period last year. We express our support for the efforts of the Government and the security forces in combating terrorism. Security and stability are crucial to nation-building and economic development. The same goes for support by the countries of the region and key countries aimed at achieving a stable and prosperous Iraq, which in turn will bring benefits regionally and globally. Thirdly, concerning the humanitarian situation, we welcome the efforts of the Government, supported by the United Nations, to address the humanitarian situation, particularly in providing durable solutions for the internally displaced. We also note that efforts concerning the missing Kuwaiti persons and third-country nationals, as well as the return of Kuwaiti property, are being delayed because of constraints relating to the COVID-19 pandemic. Nevertheless, we have confidence that with continued collaboration within the Tripartite Commission, progress is attainable. To conclude, Indonesia supports the work of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) as well as the renewal of UNAMI's mandate this month. We are certain that the work of UNAMI in supporting the Government and the people of Iraq, particularly in terms of the COVID-19 response, will be of monumental importance to the well-being of the people of Iraq and the region. As mentioned earlier, Iraq does not have the luxury of time, and thus it is incumbent for us in the Council not to forget the Iraqi people, who rely on the international community, in particular in this time of COVID-19. Let the Iraqi people have a peaceful Ramadan month.
