Mr. Konfourou (Mali) (spoke in French): First of
all, my delegation is pleased with the holding of this
public meeting on peace-building efforts in the Central
African Republic. I appreciate the helpful statement
made by Mr. Cheikh Tidiane Sy, Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Peace-building Support Office in the Central African
Republic (BONUCA). I also appreciate the statements
made by Mr. Frederick Lyons, Acting Deputy Director
of the Regional Bureau for Africa of the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP); Mr. Agba
Otikpo Mezode, Minister for the Promotion of Civic
Responsibility in charge of relations with the
Parliament of the Central African Republic; and
Mr. Mats Karlsson, Vice-President of the World Bank.
We also appreciate the presence among us at this
meeting of the Council, and the relevant statement
made by Mr. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Regional Cooperation of the
Republic of Mauritius.

The information that has been provided indicates
that progress is being made in the Central African
Republic towards national reconciliation and
strengthening peace and national unity. My delegation
welcomes the new progress reported by the United
Nations Peace-building Support Office in the Central
African Republic and by the Representative of the
Secretary-General, in particular in the areas of
disarmament, restructuring security and defence forces
and respect for human rights by law enforcement
officers.

My delegation regrets the slow pace of the
demobilization and reintegration programme. While we
thank donor countries for the efforts that have been
made, we also invite them to provide further assistance
in this area. Mali attaches particular importance to the
consolidation of efforts in this regard.

My delegation notes with satisfaction the recent
statement by the Government of the Central African
Republic regarding settling some of the salary arrears
due civil servants and the release of political prisoners.
We trust this will mark the beginning of a de-escalation
of the political and social situation in the country. In
this regard, Mali calls for an open and frank dialogue
among all the players in the Central African Republic.

We believe that settling the problem of refugees
and displaced persons in the Central African Republic
and other countries of the region would help promote
regional stability. My delegation remains deeply
concerned about the continuing social and political
tensions in the country, which are not conducive to the
process of peace and national reconciliation.

The human rights situation is also a cause for
concern to my delegation. In that regard, we support
the Secretary-General's idea for continuing to stress to
the authorities of the Central African Republic the need
to respect the rights of all its citizens, including those
who have been accused.

We are also concerned about the very fragile
economic situation in the Central African Republic,
which has been aggravated by a disruption in fuel
supplies. In this regard, Mali welcomes the Secretary-
General's efforts, through the Bretton Woods
institutions, to extend assistance to the Government of
the Central African Republic so that it can resolve the
financial problems confronting it. In that regard, we
welcome the encouraging response on the part of the
World Bank and the International Monetary Fund.

However, my delegation continues to believe that
no international support can replace the political will of
the people of the Central African Republic to resolve
their own problems and achieve national reconciliation.
We urge all political actors in the country to carry out a
constructive dialogue in the interests of all the people
of the country.

Finally, we endorse the draft presidential
statement before the Council.

