Mr. Nteturuye (Burundi) (spoke in French): My
delegation is sincerely pleased to see you, Sir,
presiding over the work of the Security Council for the
first time since you assumed your new duties. We wish
you every success in your mission. How fortunate that
the first public meeting of the Council over which you
are presiding is dedicated to the situation of children in
armed conflicts, a subject of utmost importance and
one to which France has always given special attention.
I also congratulate the new members of the Security
Council and wish them every success in their noble
task.

I would like to welcome the presence among us
of our brother Mr. Olara Otunnu, who has made such
great efforts to raise the awareness of the international
community and mobilize it to assist children, whose
innocence is brutalized by the belligerents of the
conflicts currently raging throughout the world.

The report of the Secretary-General
(S/2002/1299) before us is extremely clear on the
suffering of children in conflicts and on the proposed
approaches for a solution, especially through the
implementation of international conventions that
already exist or are in the process of being adopted.

Burundi is mentioned in the report, in which the
principal belligerents - the Government, the rebels of
the Front pour la defense de la democratic (FDD) and
of the Parti pour la liberation du peuple hutu/Forces
nationales pour la liberation (PALIPEHUTU/FNL) -
are accused of using child soldiers in their conflict.

I should like to recall here that the war that has
been raging in Burundi since 1993 has particularly
affected the vulnerable populations, including children.
They are the ones who suffer most from diseases
related to the poor hygiene and other negative
conditions prevailing in camps for internally displaced
persons and refugees. They also suffer most from poor
nutrition and food shortages; the destruction or closing
of schools, health clinics and hospitals; and from the
many horrors of war. The phenomenon of street
children in urban areas - in Burundi and elsewhere -
is a shocking reality of civil war in our States.

The task of rehabilitating children therefore is a
multidimensional one, as indicated by international
norms to protect children in situations of conflict.

In Burundi, there is, however, a glimmer of hope
for the entire population, and in particular for children.
That hope was kindled by the signing of the Arusha
Peace Agreement in August 2000 and, more recently,
by the signing of a ceasefire between the Transitional
Government and the three armed factions. We hope that
the armed group that has remained outside of this peace
process - the PALIPEHUTU/FNL - will soon join it.

The Arusha Peace Agreement makes explicit
reference to the rehabilitation of the educational and
health sectors for the benefit of children, and there are
plans to introduce peace education and tolerance
programmes into school curricula.

With respect to child soldiers, the Peace
Agreement, as well as the ceasefire agreement signed
on 2 December 2002 at Arusha with the FDD armed
group, both define the ceasefire as, inter alia, the
cessation of all acts of violence against the population
as well as an end to the use of child soldiers and to
sexual violence.

The ceasefire agreement also specified in the
annex - which is an integral part of the agreement -
that the question of child soldiers is one of the
technical issues still to be negotiated between the
Government and the FDD, and that the Government
and the rebel groups must agree on a common solution.
Such a solution can be found in the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation or
resettlement programme, which is the most important
part of the ceasefire agreement, and for which,
thankfully, the international community has planned
substantial funding, within the framework of a possible
United Nations peacekeeping mission in Burundi.

As concerns the Government, we recognize the
existence of child soldiers recruited on a voluntary
basis due to a lack of other options following
unsuccessful primary schooling. In 1989 we signed the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, and then, in
2001, the Optional Protocol to that Convention on the
involvement of children in armed conflict. Ratification
proceedings are under way. We have already set up,
jointly with the United Nations Children's Fund, a
programme for the demobilization of child soldiers,
and a census of these children is under way.

However, with respect to the armed groups, the
situation is quite distressing, because, following the
signing of the ceasefire agreement on 2 December
2002, the FDD rebels carried out a forced mass
recruitment of young schoolchildren and students,
promising them the world, including military ranks and
large sums of money, which the international
community was to give them if some of them were to
be demobilized some day. This attitude should be
condemned by the Security Council, because it is
cynical, anachronistic and constitutes a violation of the
ceasefire and of the agreed truce.

Let me recall here that the Burundian armed
groups are notorious for the horrific killing of children
in boarding schools - the most infamous being the
burning alive in 1993 of dozens of Kibimba Normal
School students, as well as the slaughter of young
seminarians in Buta in 1996, who were killed in cold
blood because they refused to group themselves by
ethnicity, as had been ordered by the FDD rebel
execution squad. The rebels also have excelled in the
destruction of schools and hospitals, as well as in the
kidnapping of schoolchildren and students under the
age of 15, with the goal of recruiting them or making
them carry plundered goods. As the report points out,
these actions are true war crimes, which, thankfully,
the International Criminal Court plans to prosecute.

The challenge raised by the situation of children
in the Burundian conflict can be taken up now that the
combatants seem to want to put an end to the war. Once
the war has ended, the national and international
community will be able to reweave the physical, social
and moral fabric of the country. Children will once
again be able to smile and to live a full and happy life
with their parents - who themselves will welcome the
chance to rebuild their lives in a reconciled nation. We
ask the international community and the Security
Council in particular to continue to help Burundi, so
that it may continue forward on the path to peace.

