Mr. Kolga (Estonia): At the outset, I would like
to thank you, Madam President, for your initiative
in convening this timely open debate on the Security
Council's working methods and for the comprehensive
concept note (S/2014/725, annex). I would also like to
thank Ms. Prost and Ms. Bensouda for their statements
today.

The very fact that this discussion is being
conducted as an open debate reflects credit on the
Argentinian presidency for enhancing transparency
and including the wider United Nations membership
in the Council's discussion of issues, and I recommend
that every presidency follow suit. Estonia, as a member
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group, aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
representative of Switzerland earlier today.

Estonia firmly believes that enhancing transparency
in the actions of the Security Council, as well as in
the Council's interaction with non-Council members
and bodies, is crucial to building greater trust in the
institution that has the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Protecting human life is the greatest responsibility
and priority that we, as the international community,
have been entrusted with, and the Security Council's
execution of that mandate should be clear and
understandable to us all. To meet that goal, we urge
that the Council should ordinarily meet in public and
that detailed records be published even for private
meetings. Furthermore, the wider membership's
involvement should be a continuous process from the
very beginning of the discussion of a decision until its
implementation, giving the stakeholders greater input
into decision-making.

Concerning one of the sub-topics of the concept
note, the Security Council's follow-up to its referrals
to the International Criminal Court (ICC), I would
like to say that the Council and the ICC are first and
foremost linked by their common concern of crimes
that threaten the peace, security and well-being of
the world. The Court is available to its States parties
and to the Council, which has the power to refer cases
to the Court that otherwise would not fall under its
jurisdiction. Whenever there is evidence that atrocity
crimes are being committed with impunity, the Council
should refer the situation to the Court. It should,
however, do so in a way that fully empowers the Court
to fulfil its mandate, as well as supporting the Court
in its investigations and prosecutions so as to ensure
accountability.

The Council should take measures to ensure that
there can be no room for doubt as to the support that
it and the United Nations give the Court in delivering
on its mandate. The reports from the Office of the
Prosecutor on the basis of resolutions 1593 (2005) and
1970 (2011) should result in the Council's reaffirmation
of its responsibility to support the Court and its
recognition of the Court's work. Follow-up measures
should be implemented with resolve and determination
to ensure that the Court's decisions, including the
arrest warrants it issues, are executed. It should also
be recalled that, given the Court's limited jurisdiction
in the absence of ratification, referrals by the Council
are necessary.

Several attempts to adopt resolutions on an
effective international response aimed at ensuring
accountability for perpetrators of atrocity crimes have
been blocked by permanent members of the Council.
Far too often, history has shown us how the privilege
of the veto, or even the mere threat of using it, has been
abused, leaving the Security Council paralysed and
passive on the sidelines, in situations where it is most
needed. Under the Charter of the United Nations, the
Council's permanent members are given great power,
but also great responsibility to use it in a responsible
manner. Today we know that inaction is the biggest
challenge to maintaining and restoring peace and that it
can ensure that the Council's legitimacy and credibility
quickly fade. We therefore gladly welcome the French
proposal on establishing a code of conduct for voluntary
restraint in the use of the veto, and firmly believe that
such a step would help the Security Council live up to
its mandate. Horizon-scanning briefings and Arria-
formula meetings would also increase the preventive
impact of the Council's work.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that in
our view efforts to achieve transparency should be
made more consistent, and more attention should be
paid to providing feedback from the Council both to
non-Council Member States and the ICC, whether in
the form of holding open meetings or by answering
letters addressed to the Council. It is only through such
feedback that we, the international community, can
better assess how best to contribute to the legitimacy
and effectiveness of the Council.

