Mr. Grauls (spoke in French): I thank you,
Madame President, for giving me the opportunity to
address the Security Council in my capacity of Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission's country-specific
configuration for the Central African Republic. I would
like to highlight some of the issues related to the
implementation of the strategic framework for
peacebuilding in the Central African Republic since I
last updated the Council in June (see S/PV.643 5).

First of all, however, allow me to express the
sincere appreciation of the Central African Republic
configuration to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Sable-Work Zewde, for her
tireless and determined efforts under sometimes
difficult circumstances.

I am pleased that the integrated strategic
framework developed by the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic
(BINUCA) for 2011 incorporates the peacebuilding
priorities identified by the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), furthering the convergence of and coherence
between the work of our Commission and that of the
United Nations system on the ground in support of the
Government's priorities.

Such coherence would also be improved by
establishing an operational focal point within BINUCA
in order to ensure the continuity of our work on a daily
basis. The PBC also looks forward to the opportunity
to contribute in due time to formulating the United
Nations Development Assistance Framework for 2012-
2016, another measure that will contribute to the
coherence of our efforts.

As the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General just pointed out, the presidential and
parliamentary elections are still scheduled to take place
on 23 January 2011, according to a consensual
timetable established by the Independent Electoral
Commission. The Peacebuilding Commission has
contributed considerably to bridging the $7.5 million
gap in the electoral budget. The successful completion
of the electoral process that we all expect should create
positive momentum for the Central African Republic
Government's plans for the next stages of its
peacebuilding process. The Commission stands ready
to continue its support for the Government's efforts in
this area.

In the past year, the Commission's attention has
been focused mainly on the electoral preparations and
on the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process. The latter has been continually delayed. So
far, the good news is that the verification phase of the
process has been completed in the country's north-
west. Unfortunately, the volatile security situation and
the reluctance of several armed groups to join the
peace process have not allowed this phase to start in
the north-east, from which the United Nations Mission
in the Central African Republic and Chad
(MINURCAT) withdrew in November. As a result, the
disarmament and demobilization phases there cannot
be completed before the elections.

It is even more important, however, that the
Government of the Central African Republic establish
a complete strategy for the reintegration phase,
including the reinsertion of some former combatants
into the national security forces. The reintegration
phase should be financed with funds from States
members of Central African Economic and Monetary
Community and the Bank of Central African States. I
am therefore certain that a clear message from the
10-68048
Security Council to the recalcitrant rebel movements
and the Government about the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process would greatly
contribute to the achievement of our common goals.

On 20 September, the Central African Republic
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission and
the World Bank organized a high-level event here in
New York to address the peacebuilding and
development challenges facing the Central African
Republic. This took place in the presence of the
Secretary-General, President Bozize' of the Central
African Republic, the Vice-President for Africa of the
World Bank, the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, and high-level representatives of various
countries and regional and subregional organizations.
The purpose of the event was threefold: to showcase
the positive progress that has been made in the Central
African Republic in recent years; to generate attention
for the considerable challenges that remain; and to
serve as a stepping stone to a donors conference, to be
organized after the successful holding of the elections
in order to mobilize funding for other priorities.
Thanks to a collective effort, I believe that this
threefold goal was achieved.

One of the most important priority areas for the
months and years to come will be security sector
reform (SSR). As noted in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2010/584), the implementation of the SSR
agenda has been stalled, but the Government has
indicated its willingness to revive the process in
cooperation with its international partners. In the run-
up to the aforementioned donors conference, the list of
existing security sector reform projects should be
updated and prioritized in order to have a clear project
to submit to potential donors. I welcome in this regard
the establishment of a Security Institutions Unit within
BINUCA, which will undoubtedly give renewed
impetus to Government efforts in this area.

Good governance and the rule of law are also part
of the peacebuilding priorities for the coming year. The
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
already runs a multi-year programme that should be
complemented and refined. At our configuration's
request, UNDP is working on a strategy paper on the
rule of law that will identify the key priorities in the
field, which should include impunity and human rights
violations. Our configuration will also continue to
monitor with particular attention the issues of women
and peace and security, child protection and the human
rights of internally displaced persons in the Central
African Republic.

The year 2011 will also see the effective launch of
the development hubs project, piloted by the European
Union, which constitutes the third priority of the
strategic framework for peacebuilding. This ambitious
project, whose aim is to re-establish a Government
presence in nine secondary centres in the provinces,
starting with the provision of basic services, will require
substantially greater resources than the €40 million
allocated by the European Union so far.

Finally, I would like to address the question of
MINURCAT's departure from north-eastern Central
African Republic. During the last briefing on BINUCA
and the interactive consultative dialogue of this
Council with the Foreign Minister of the Central
African Republic, I consistently pleaded for a
transitional phase, to include a presence of the Mission
for the Consolidation of Peace in the Central African
Republic in the Vakaga region, with international
support, to allow more time for the requested
reinforcement of the Central African security forces.
The recent rebel attack by the Convention of Patriots
for Justice and Peace on Birao once again illustrated
that the danger of instability remains real and
persistent in that part of the Central African Republic.
Regional spillover should be avoided at all cost. Once
again, a strong message from the Security Council in
this regard would be most welcome.

