Mr. Kodama (Japan): At the outset, I wish to
express my deep appreciation for the condolences and
support offered by many Member States and
international organizations, as well as people from all
over the world, to the people and Government of Japan
following the devastating earthquake and tsunami.
Since last year's earthquake in Haiti, the Haitian
people have made determined efforts to address many
challenges similar to those that the Japanese people
now face. I strongly believe that Haiti and Japan will
overcome these difficulties through mutual
encouragement and the assistance of international
partners.

We welcome the fact that the final stage of the
presidential election last month was largely peaceful
and conducted without significant confusion. Japan
assisted the Government of Haiti in implementing the
elections through logistical support and by supplying
election observers. We hope that the President's
inauguration will proceed smoothly and that the new
Administration will begin work immediately to address
the many challenges ahead. Japan intends to establish
close cooperation with the new Administration in order
to accelerate the reconstruction efforts in Haiti.

As all members are aware, the final results of the
presidential elections will be announced by the
Provisional Electoral Council on 16 April. We would
like to stress that all political actors have a solemn
responsibility to call on their supporters to remain
calm, refrain from violence and resolve any electoral
disputes through established legal mechanisms.

We commend the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and the troop- and
police-contributing countries for their efforts to
maintain relative calm in the security situation in Haiti.
We also welcome the fact that the operational
performance of the Haitian National Police has
generally improved. At the same time, there are some
concerns about the occurrence of sexual violence
around camps for internally displaced persons (IDPs),
the increase in gang activities and the presence of
escaped inmates from collapsed prisons. In that regard,
we further encourage MINUSTAH to make every effort
to maintain a secure environment and to provide
sufficient capacity-building support for the Haitian
National Police.

In addition, the Haitian Government must ensure
a durable socio-economic foundation through efforts to
strengthen the rule of law in order to achieve
sustainable development. In Haiti, the needs for
capacity-building support in the area of the rule of law
are still considerable. The various contributions by the
international community should be continued. It is also
essential to appropriately ensure ownership for the
reinforcement of the rule of law. In that regard, we
wish to underscore that all international partners
should coordinate their efforts closely with the Haitian
Government, and that the Government itself must make
a further commitment to these efforts.

In addition, the latest report of the Secretary-
General on MINUSTAH (S/2011/183*) mentions that
the United Nations will conduct a comprehensive
security assessment in Haiti in the near future. We look
forward to learning the outcome of the assessment, as
it will have a major impact on decisions regarding the
future mandate and scale of MINUSTAH.

At this juncture, more than a year after the
earthquake that devastated Haiti, we recognize that
reconstruction efforts must be further accelerated
through comprehensive measures, including the
rebuilding of infrastructure, the creation of
employment and support for State institutions. In that
regard, we encourage MINUSTAH to continue to
utilize its capacity for the reconstruction of Haiti.

The Government of Japan has dispatched Japan
Ground Self-Defence Forces to MINUSTAH, who have
made a contribution to the reconstruction of Haiti by
engaging in tasks such as the removal of rubble,
levelling ground for IDP camps, road repairs, the
construction of orphanage facilities and water
distribution efforts in response to the outbreak of
cholera. The Government of Japan has also provided
assistance, in cooperation with international
organizations, in providing temporary housing, taking
measures against infectious diseases and distributing
food.

Japan has pledged $100 million for Haiti, which
has already been implemented or disbursed, including a
contribution of $30 million to the Haiti Reconstruction
Fund. The remainder of the pledge has been

authorized. I would like to stress that the quick
disbursement of pledges by all relevant partners is
highly encouraged for the early reconstruction of Haiti.

Let me conclude by providing assurances that
Japan, together with the international community, will
continue to provide maximum support far Haiti's
efforts towards reconstruction and stabilization.

