The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sweden.

Our image of Africa today is a multifaceted one. In
this forum, we deal with crises and threats to peace and
security. Sadly, a heavy agenda has been offered by
events unfolding on the African continent.

But this is not the whole picture. We should not
forget the positive development in Africa during the last
decades: health and education have greatly improved, a
majority of States have had democratic elections and in
many countries the downward economic trend has been
broken and real growth is taking place.

Africa is opening up to the challenges of
globalization, to free political debate and to the search for
new models grown from within rather than imported from
abroad. There is great vitality, but also turmoil.

 

The point of departure of today's meeting is our
common responsibility for international peace and security
as it applies to Africa. We need to consider openly and
self-critically how the Council has met this responsibility.
We need to look ahead at what the Security Council and we
as Member States can do differently and better.

First and foremost, the Security Council must summon
the necessary political will. It must be ready to take action,
in Africa as elsewhere, from early warning, prevention and
political persuasion to peacekeeping and, if need be,
Chapter VII action, as well as post-conflict peace-building.

The Council should continue to develop a new
generation of peacekeeping operations, with better balance
and coordination between military, political, civilian-police
and other civilian components. When new or expanded
peacekeeping operations are needed, all Council members
must be ready to reach decisions without undue delay and
to take financial responsibility for them.

Secondly, the Council must support African action for
regional security, not as a way of minimizing its own
involvement, but in order to ensure sustainable regional
support for peaceful solutions. There is also a need for an
active Council role in following up operations which it has
mandated.

Thirdly, the Security Council and the United Nations
system as a whole must close the gap between political and
humanitarian action. The African continent bears a heavy
burden of refugees and internally displaced people.
Landmines and the proliferation of small arms cripple
people and nations. Child soldiers are permanently
brutalized. These are serious threats to human security.

Every State must exercise its responsibility for the
well-being of its people. The Security Council also has an
important role to provide support through humanitarian
action. It should do its utmost to ensure that the measures
it takes in doing so can also serve as stepping stones to
longer-term political solutions.

Fourthly, we should see to it that the United Nations
system as a whole, together with African organizations,
gives full priority to conflict prevention. This is a moral
imperative and, in fact, a political, humanitarian and
economic necessity.

In the end, conflict prevention is a question of political
will. Solidarity and sovereignty can never mean that
potentially disastrous domestic behaviour should be immune
to international attention until the disaster occurs. The
international community must be ready to respond quickly
and generously to requests for assistance.

The report of the Secretary-General on the causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa is an impressive
document. It is candid in its analysis and clear in its
message. Africa and Africans should rise to the challenge,
but they must not be left standing alone.

The Security Council is engaged in a wide-ranging
process to consider recommendations from the Secretary-
General and from Member States. It is an opportunity for
the Security Council to move beyond its everyday agenda
of crisis management and apply a broader and longer-term
perspective. This work has already produced a number of
concrete results in key areas such as the relationship
between the United Nations and regional organizations in
Africa, peacekeeping and sanctions. The work will
continue on important questions such as refugee security,
reducing arms flows and post-conflict peace-building. It
will gradually involve all parts of the United Nations
system.

Peace and security in Africa can only be attained
through common action by Africa and by the international
community, by civic organizations and by ordinary men
and women committed to a better future for themselves
and for their children.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council met on 24 September
1998, at the level of Foreign Ministers, in
accordance with its resolution 1170 (1998) of 28
May 1998, to assess progress in achieving peace and
security in Africa since the last Ministerial Meeting
on 25 September 1997. It recalls the statement of its
President (S/PRST/1997/46) of 25 September 1997
and reiterates its appreciation to the Secretary-
General for his report of 13 April 1998 (A/52/871- S/1998/318).

"The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to Africa in the areas of conflict
prevention and the maintenance of international

 

peace and security, in accordance with its
responsibility under the Charter of the United Nations.
It also reaffirms the principles of the political

independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
all States.

"The Security Council underlines that peaceful
societies rest upon respect for fundamental human
rights and the dignity and worth of the human person.
It recognizes the close linkage between the promotion
of economic and social development and the
prevention of conflict. It stresses that the quest for
peace in Africa requires a comprehensive, concerted
and determined approach, encompassing the
eradication of poverty, the promotion of democracy,
sustainable development and respect for human rights,
as well as conflict prevention and resolution, including
peacekeeping, and humanitarian assistance. It
underlines that genuine political will is necessary, in
Africa and beyond, to achieve durable results towards
these ends, and stresses the urgent need for Member
States, the United Nations system, including the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council, the international financial institutions and
other relevant organizations to continue to consider
appropriate action in response to the comprehensive
recommendations set out by the Secretary-General in
his report.

"The Security Council recognizes the positive
developments in Africa in the past year and welcomes
progress achieved by African States in promoting
democratization, economic reform, the protection of
human rights and sustainable development. It
commends efforts by African States and regional and
subregional organizations, in particular the
Organization of African Unity, to resolve conflicts by
peaceful means. It welcomes progress made in Sierra
Leone and the Central African Republic, and in the
peace process in Burundi. It urges all States and
relevant bodies to provide financial and technical
support to strengthen African regional and subregional
arrangements for conflict prevention, the maintenance
of peace and security and dispute settlement. It calls
for an enhanced partnership between the United
Nations and African regional and subregional
organizations in support of these efforts.

"The Security Council expresses its continuing
concern over the number and intensity of, and the
interrelationship among, conflicts in Africa, and
especially at the emergence of new conflicts during

the past year. The border conflict between Ethiopia
and Eritrea, the resurgence of the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the impasse in
the peace process in Angola, the continued Violence
in Sierra Leone, and the complex emergencies in
Somalia and Sudan, among others, cause grave
concern. These situations, which in some cases
threaten the stability of large parts of the continent,
call for concerted action by African States, the
international community and the United Nations
system to prevent further tragedy.

"The Security Council urgently calls on African
States and all parties concerned to demonstrate the
political will to settle their disputes by peaceful
rather than military means, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations, and to respect
international humanitarian law and the sovereignty,
political independence and territorial integrity of
States in the region. It also encourages States in the
region to continue to improve the implementation of
good governance and undertake the various reforms
needed to promote economic growth. It calls upon
the international community to assist those efforts
initiated by African States and regional and
subregional organizations aimed at such goals.
"For its part, the Security Council expresses its
renewed commitment to contributing to conflict
resolution in Africa. In this context, it recalls its
decisions during the past year to authorize two new
United Nations peacekeeping operations, in the
Central African Republic and Sierra Leone, to assist
efforts towards peace and national reconciliation. It
also expresses its determination to improve further
its ability to prevent conflicts, and to make its
responses to conflicts more efficient and effective,
and underlines its support for measures taken within
the United Nations system to strengthen post-conflict
peace-building efforts.

"The Security Council, based on the
recommendations of its ad hoc Working Group
established pursuant to its resolution 1170 (1998),
has already begun to take concrete steps as part of
a wider, comprehensive response to the
recommendations put forward by the Secretary-
General. It has taken action to help strengthen
support for regional and subregional initiatives as
well as to enhance coordination between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in the areas of conflict prevention and the

 

maintenance of peace. It has also taken action in order
to strengthen the effectiveness of arms embargoes
imposed by the Council and addressed the need to
support the strengthening of African peacekeeping
capacity.

"The Security Council encourages the ad hoe
Working Group to continue its work. in accordance

with its mandate. and to elaborate further concrete
recommendations to the Council, in particular on the
need to stem illicit anns Flows to and in Africa and
with regard to measures to assist host Governments
in Africa in maintaining the security and neutrality
of refugee camps and to enhance the ability of the
Council to monitor activities authorized by it but
carried out by Member States or coalitions of
Member States.

"The Security Council, recognizing that the
challenge of achieving peace and security in Africa
is a continuous process, will continue to assess
progress in promoting peace and security in Africa
at the level of Foreign Ministers. on a biennial basis,
in accordance with its resolution 1170 (1998)."

This statement will be issued as a document of the

Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1998/29.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present

stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose in 1.50 jun.
