The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.

I thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his
briefing, and Minister for Foreign Affairs Diop for
coming here today. Mali's support for the objectives
of United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) is essential.
We appreciate his interest in personally sharing his
Government's views with us.

Later today, the Security Council will hear a
briefing from the Secretary General on United Nations
peacekeeping. My message will be that we need to
give peacekeeping missions mandates that they can
actually achieve. We need to see host Governments and
peacekeepers working together to make life safer for
people on the ground. We need to make sure that we
have the backs of peacekeepers when they cannot do
their jobs. And we need to make sure missions have
benchmarks for accountability.

We will have a lot more to say this afternoon
about peacekeeping, but the Mission in Mali is a
key example of where the United States believes the
Security Council needs to take a hard look. This is the
world's most dangerous peacekeeping mission. We are
putting troops in harm's way, asking them to patrol
deserts where Al-Qaida thrives. The United States is
deeply grateful to the courageous troop contributors,
and we condemn, in the strongest terms, the cowards
who continue to threaten them.

But the Mission today faces two critical problems.
The first is that in far too many parts of Mali there
is no peace for the Blue Helmets to keep. It has been
almost two years since the Government and armed
groups signed a peace agreement. The United States
welcomes the installation of three of the five interim
authorities in Mali's northern regions, but we still see
delay after delay in actually implementing the peace
agreement. The Government is absent from many parts
of the country, thus providing few services despite the
humanitarian needs ofMali's people. Violence is getting
worse, armed groups are not laying down their arms
and terrorist groups are deepening their cooperation
with each other. We therefore have peacekeepers on
the ground to support a peace agreement that is not
gaining traction.

The second problem is that the Mission's equipment
is simply not up to standard. The force has a mandate
to make its presence felt to counter the influence of
extremist and armed groups, but chronic equipment
shortages force the peacekeepers in Mali to curtail
their operations. Consider these examples. Even as the
threat from improvised explosive devices grows, the
force is operating withjust 62 per cent of the armoured
personnel carriers it is supposed to have deployed.
Without enough carriers, the peacekeepers cannot
patrol much beyond their bases in the places where
Mali's people are most desperate for the help of the
United Nations. In the second half of 2016 just 10 per
cent of patrols in the Mission's dangerous western
sector were medium- or long-range patrols. That means
peacekeepers in Mali are not able to be present in areas
where the extremists thrive.
Another problem is the Mission's helicopter
shortages. Many of the force's bases are in very remote
areas. Without helicopters, peacekeepers in Mali must
rely on treacherous roads to reach those bases. The lack
of helicopters means medical evacuation response times
are far too high when peacekeepers get into trouble.
That is a dangerous situation but, if we act urgently,
there is hope. We can and we must do better. We need to
start with the political process. That is why I appreciate
the Foreign Minister's presence here today. The United
States knows that Mali's Government can do more to
implement the peace agreement.

We call on the Government to immediately focus
on extending the authority of the State, and for all
three signatory parties to the accord to live up to their
commitments to stop the violence. That will make
Mali safer and more stable. We can also work harder
to address the Mission's shortfalls. The resources are
out there. While peacekeepers in Mali are desperate for
additional armoured personnel carriers, peacekeepers
in southern Lebanon have many times more than Mali,
with much less need. Countries have pledged more
equipment to Mali's peacekeepers. The United States
urges those countries to follow through as quickly as
possible. The Mission's troop contributors must also
live up to their commitments to give their troops the
necessary training and equipment to operate in those
tough conditions.

Finally, our conversations in the Security Council
about the peacekeeping Mission in Mali cannot be only
about equipment. The Mission's mandate has to be
reasonable and achievable. That is why, in the coming
months, the United States will be taking a careful look
at the force's mandated tasks and the distribution of its
personnel. I am sure that the Council can agree that
peacekeepers in Mali need to be prepared to succeed.
We want a mandate that helps the Mission play a
more effective role. Peacekeepers in Mali operate in
very challenging circumstances, but their mission is
essential. They put their lives on the line every day to
help Mali's people. By working together, the Council,
troop contributors and supporters in the international
community can help this peacekeeping operation make
real progress towards supporting peace in Mali. We
have no time to waste.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
International Cooperation and African Integration of
the Republic of Mali.

