Mr. Paschalis (South Africa): The Security
Council has been considering the issue of small arms
and light weapons during regular open debates since
1999, informed by the recognition that the excessive
and destabilizing accumulation of small arms and light
weapons has a direct bearing on the Security Council's
mandate. Small arms and light weapons have the
potential to increase the intensity and the duration of
armed conflicts, undermine the sustainability of peace
agreements, impede the success of peacebuilding and
post-conflict reconstruction, frustrate efforts aimed at
the prevention of armed conflict, and hinder the
provision of humanitarian assistance.

South Africa therefore congratulates the
delegation of Gabon for taking up this important issue
during its presidency of Security Council in order to,
inter alia, promote international support for the efforts
of the Central African countries to address a specific
dynamic of this issue, namely, the illicit trafficking of
small arms and light weapons in their region.

The issue of small arms and light weapons is
complex and has a direct bearing on a number of other
important policy areas, such as sustainable
development, human rights, poverty and
underdevelopment. It is, therefore, clear that that
scourge requires attention at the national, subregional,
regional and international levels in order for it to be
effectively addressed. It also remains vitally important
that each of the relevant United Nations organs afford
the issue priority attention, based on their respective
mandates and in cooperation with one another.

It is equally important for the international
community, particularly the United Nations family, to
render effective support to the home-grown solutions
of regions and subregions, such as the Central African
initiative. Legally binding agreements adopted at the
subregional level represent concrete building blocks in
the fight against the illicit proliferation of small arms
and light weapons at the broader regional and global
levels. In that regard, we may add that the Southern
African Development Community (SADC) adopted the
Protocol on the Control of Firearms, Ammunition and
Other Related Materials in the Southern African
Development Community Region in August 2001 as a
comprehensive legally binding agreement aimed at
preventing, combating and eradicating the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons, as well as at
promoting greater cooperation amongst SADC member
States, inter alia by enhancing and harmonizing
national controls.

The United Nations Programme of Action on the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons remains
the central global instrument to prevent, combat and
eradicate the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. The Programme of Action represents a hard-
won agreement by the international community, and its
full implementation in all its aspects should remain
central to all our national, subregional, regional and
international efforts.
With reference to the issues addressed today, we
wish to underline the importance of the General
Assembly as the custodian of the Programme of Action
to further explore ways to advance the synergies
between the Programme's provisions on cooperation,
capacity-building and assistance, on the one hand, and
regional and subregional initiatives, on the other hand.

The issue of small arms and light weapons has a
particular bearing on two aspects of the Security
Council's mandate, namely, arms embargoes, and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
efforts. Guided by our commitment to the peaceful
resolution of conflicts, we support arms embargoes that
contribute to lasting peace and stability, in this case
also as it pertains to the Central African region.

Our involvement in peacekeeping operations led
us to recognize the value of effective DDR activities as
a vital element that contributes to the success of entire
peace processes. The mandates of peacekeeping
operations, handed down through Security Council
resolutions, need to be backed up with the system-wide
resources of the United Nations so as to ensure that
such mandates are sufficiently sustainable and
effectively carried out.

In conclusion, South Africa welcomes today's
open debate as a further opportunity for the Council
and the broader United Nations membership to develop
and refine our common understanding of such issues in
order to contribute concretely to the attainment of
peace and security in the heart of Africa.

