Ms. Gamba: Iwould like to thankyou, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
enduring and tragic impact of the conflict in Yemen
on children.

As Council members know, the monitoring and
reporting mechanism on children and armed conflict
established through resolution 1612 (2005) enables the
collection of information on the six grave violations
against children in armed conflict, including on
recruitment and use, killing and maiming, rape and
other forms of sexual Violence, attacks on schools
and hospitals, abductions, and denial of humanitarian
access. The mechanism was formally established in
Yemen 2013. As of today, there are six parties listed
in the annexes to the annual report of the Secretary-
General on children and armed conflict for having
perpetrated one or more grave violations against
children in Yemen.
A country-specific report on Yemen will shortly
be presented to the Security Council Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict, covering the period
between April 2013 and the end of 2018. The figures
for verified grave violations against children in Yemen
during that period are staggering: more than 3,000
children were verified as recruited and used; more than
7,500 children were killed or maimed; and over 800
incidents of denial of humanitarian access to children
were documented. In addition, over 350 attacks against
schools and hospitals were verified. Unfortunately,
due to difficulties in gathering information, sexual
violence against children is chronically underreported
in Yemen, and only a few cases could be verified in that
period. In addition, due to the ongoing conflict, access
restrictions, detention and threats against monitors,
as well as intimidation of communities reporting on
grave violations, the numbers I present to the Council
today represent a mere fraction of Violations committed
against children in Yemen.

The impact of this conflict on children has been
horrific. All parties to the conflict have acted and
reacted militarily to events, resulting in the use and
abuse of children in multiple ways. There have been
exponential increases in Violations throughout the years,
as was the case at the end of 2014, when recruitment
and use increased significantly, and in 2015, which was
a devastating year for children, with over 900 children
recruited and used, 2,400 killed or maimed and over
150 attacks against schools and hospitals.

As military surges occurred, children continued
to take the brunt of them. At the end of 2017, during
intensified fighting in Sa'ada, Al-Hudaydah and
Hajjah, killing and maiming of children increased
25 per cent as compared to 2016. And last year, fighting
and offensives in Al-Hudaydah alone resulted in the
killing and maiming of more than 500 children. As the
fundamental principles of international humanitarian
and human rights law have been violated by all parties to
the conflict, children have paid a high price. I would like
to draw the attention of the Council to three persistent
concerns in Yemen, notably the denial of humanitarian
access for children, children's recruitment and use and
their killing and maiming.

My first concern is about humanitarian access for
and to children. The cumulative effects of years of
war, compounded by the economic crisis, have taken
a devastating toll on children, who have been dying
of curable diseases such as cholera and starvation. Yet
the fact that close to 70 per cent of districts in Yemen
are currently at risk of famine cannot be explained
by the raging conflict alone. The United Nations
has verified more than 800 incidents of denial of
humanitarian access since the establishment of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism in Yemen. Most
cases have involved restrictions on humanitarian
movement, Violence against humanitarian personnel
or the destruction of their assets and facilities. Key
civilian infrastructure, such as water reservoirs that
are indispensable to the survival of surrounding
communities, have also been attacked, and a recent air
strike close to a hospital resulted in casualties among
civilians, including children.

The consequences of each and every one of those
cases are tragic, as 80 per cent of the Yemeni population
is currently in need of humanitarian assistance
and protection and 2 million children are acutely
malnourished and fighting to stay alive. In a case in
point, on 11 March, a mission delivering food, including
to schools, in Saada governorate was cancelled owing
to obstructions and checkpoints on the road. A large
majority - more than 70 per cent - of the incidents
of denial of humanitarian access were attributed to
the Houthis, with almost 10 per cent attributed to the
coalition and 7 per cent to Yemeni Government forces.

The recruitment and use of children remains a key
concern. Between April 2013 and December 2018, more
than 3,000 children were verified as recruited and used
by the parties to the conflict in various roles - fighting
on the front line, manning checkpoints, delivering
supplies and assisting in intelligence-gathering. In
2018, almost 40 per cent of those children, 50 per cent
of whom were under 15 years old, were used in active
combat. In the same period, more than 200 children were
killed or injured while being used by the parties to the
conflict in Yemen. This recruitment and use continues
unabated, with more than 500 children verified as
recruited and used in the first three months of this year.
Two thirds were recruited by the Houthis, followed by
the Popular Resistance Committees, the Yemeni armed
forces and the Security Belt Forces, as well as Al-Qaida
in the Arabian Peninsula and the Salafist movement, to
name only a few.

The raging conflict has fuelled that trend, which
is exacerbated by the deteriorating humanitarian
situation. Joining a party to the conflict has increasingly
become a coping mechanism for families on the brink
of survival, and the children recruited are often among
the poorest. Many children have explained how they
felt that they had no choice but to join in order to
sustain their families. As the war continues, I fear that
this push factor will only get stronger. The ideological
indoctrination of children to defend their communities
against a perceived enemy has also been an important
factor in inciting children to join a party to the conflict.
Children have reportedly been forcibly recruited from
schools, orphanages and communities. While the vast
majority are boys between the ages of 15 and 17, for the
first time cases of the recruitment of girls were verified
in 2018. The girls were used to pressure their peers to
send male members of their families to the battlefields,
and they were threatened with expulsion from school if
they refused to comply.

The level of the killing and wounding of children
are unsettling. Between April 2013 and January of
this year, the United Nations verified the killing and
maiming of more than 7,500 children, one third of them
girls, making it the most prevalent type of violation in
Yemen. Almost half of those casualties were caused
by air strikes, for which the coalition bears the main
responsibility. As for fighting on the ground, which has
caused 40 per cent of the casualties among children, the
shelling ofurban areas and the use of mortars and small
arms were the predominant causes of child casualties.
The Houthis were responsible for the majority of child
casualties as a result of ground fighting, followed by the
Yemeni Government forces, among others. Landmines
and unexploded ordnance have also been a major
source of danger for children, causing more than 700
casualties between 2013 and now.

During this time I have consistently engaged with
the parties to the conflict in urging them to end and
prevent grave violations, which is at the very core of
my mandate in support of United Nations efforts on the
ground. To that effect, in December 2018, the Yemeni
Government endorsed a road map aimed at revitalizing
and expediting the implementation of the action plan
signed in 2014 to end and prevent the recruitment and
use of children. The road map lays out measures to
ensure the release, reintegration and prevention of child
recruitment. In October 2018 the Government of Yemen
also endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration, which is
an important first step to improving the protection of
schools, education personnel and children. We now look
to the Government to swiftly implement the road map
and prioritize the development of standard operating
procedures for releasing and reintegrating children
associated with armed forces and groups.

In March, following engagements with the coalition
since 2017, I signed a memorandum of understanding
on strengthening the protection of children affected
by the armed conflict in Yemen. It includes provisions
on building the capacity of the child protection unit
established at the coalition's headquarters in September
2017, as well as on accountability and the revision of
the standard operating procedures for the handover
of children intercepted during military operations.
Most importantly, however, it stipulates that a work
plan containing concrete measures to strengthen the
protection of children will be developed in the next few
weeks and months.

In conclusion, the violence that Yemeni children
have been subjected to, and are still being subjected to,
is simply unacceptable. I urge the parties to the conflict
to take immediate measures to ensure that their military
operations are conducted in full compliance with
international law, including by respecting the principles
of distinction, proportionality and precaution. Today
thousands of children and their families are in dire need
of assistance and support, from basic aid to reintegration
assistance. I reiterate my call to the parties to facilitate
the rapid and unimpeded passage of the delivery of
life-saving assistance to children and families in need.
I also call on the international community to prioritize
funding for Yemen, or the disbursement of funds that
have already been pledged, in order to give children
a chance to survive, learn and build the Yemen of
the future.

There is no alternative to peace. To end the suffering,
the Stockholm Agreement late last year provided hope.
Yet, as fighting continues and intensifies in parts of
the country, I urge the parties to swiftly implement the
commitments made. The tragedy of Yemeni children
and their role in the Yemen of tomorrow serves to
underscore the need to put them at the heart of the
peace process.

Provisions related to the unconditional release,
handover and reintegration of children associated
with parties to conflict should be given priority, and
children deprived ofliberty for their alleged association
with opposing parties should be treated primarily as
victims and with dignity. Importantly, perpetrators of
grave violations should be held to account for their acts
before the relevant jurisdictions. This is why I urge
the Security Council to heed my call and ensure that
child protection is central to efforts for peace in Yemen
going forward.

