Mr. Acharya (Nepal) (spoke in English): First of
all, Mr. President, I wish to thank you very much for
organizing this open debate on the important issue of
children and armed conflict.

On behalf of the delegation of Nepal, I would like
to welcome the report of the Secretary General of
21 December 2007 (S/2007/757), including the
comments on progress in the implementation of various
Council resolutions on the subject. We especially
appreciate the presentations on the subject by the
Special Representative of the Secretary General,
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, and the Executive
Director of UNICEF, Ms. Ann Veneman.

My delegation feels that the Council, through its
resolutions, including resolution 1612 (2005), has
contributed immensely to improving the plight of
children in armed conflicts in various parts of the
world. Since the question of children in armed conflict
is undoubtedly one that cuts across a number of
complex social, cultural, economic and legal issues, it
requires simultaneous actions on multiple fronts.

Recruitment of children in armed conflicts
continues to be the issue of overarching concern.
Needless to say, a successful reintegration of children
recruited in armed conflicts is a key to finding a lasting
solution in any situation involving children and armed
conflict.

As mentioned in the report of the Secretary-
General, the sexual abuse and exploitation of children
during armed conflicts is an issue of a serious concern.
Impunity on such heinous crimes should not be
tolerated. We welcome the recommendation that the
Council give the same importance to all categories of
grave violations, including rape and sexual violence as
well as abductions of children in all situations, as it
does to the recruitment of children in armed groups.

Allow me to make a few points with regard to the
section in the report on children affected by armed
conflict in Nepal. Nepal has attached high priority to
protecting and promoting the rights of the children who
have been victims of armed conflict.

In accordance with the provisions of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement, the process of
verification of the Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist)
combatants now living in cantonments has been
completed and children under the age of 18 have been
identified. At the moment, we are working with the
United Nations Mission in Nepal, UNICEF and
relevant United Nations agencies in developing
modalities with regard to releasing and rehabilitating
the minors from the cantonments, as provided for in
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement. In that regard,
we particularly welcome the recommendation that the
United Nations agencies, donors and partners should
provide adequate support to national Governments in
the rehabilitation and reintegration of children affected
by armed conflicts.

We are confident that the election to the
Constituent Assembly, to be held on 10 April, will pave
the way for a better future for children affected by the
decade-long conflict in Nepal. The Government of
Nepal is committed to preventing children and youth
from being part of any violent activities and is also
determined to end impunity for crimes committed
against them under any pretext. We believe that the
establishment of the truth and reconciliation
commission, which is under active consideration, will
also address that issue. As a party to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocol,
Nepal is committed to taking measures to enact and
implement the provisions of those instruments.

I wish to take this opportunity to express my
thanks to the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict for the important work it has one under the
chairmanship of the Permanent Representative of
France. The Government of Nepal is committed to
implementing various recommendations of the
Working Group adopted on 12 June last year,
especially in the context of the ongoing peace process.
Let me also take this opportunity to inform the Council
that the Government of Nepal looks forward to
seriously engaging in discussions during the proposed
visit to Nepal later this month of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, on various protection measures for
children affected by the conflict.

In closing, let me reiterate that Nepal is steadfast
in fulfilling its responsibilities in providing effective
protection and promoting the rights of children affected
by armed conflict, and in that regard is ready to extend
full cooperation to the monitoring and reporting
mechanism established under Security Council
resolution 1612 (2005).

