Mr. Mavros (Cyprus): At the outset, let me express
our sincere gratitude to Sweden for convening this
open debate, as well as to commend the new Secretary-
General for outlining his promising vision.

Cyprus aligns itself with the statement delivered on
behalf of the European Union and would like to add the
following in its national capacity.

With the new Secretary-General taking office, we
welcome this opportunity to re-invigorate the focus
on conflict prevention and sustaining peace. As a
country facing a long-standing conflict, with first-hand
experience on the numerous ways in which a conflict
can be detrimental, we warmly welcome the vision of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio Guterres, to drive
forward the sustaining peace agenda, with a particular
focus on conflict prevention.

It is undeniable that the United Nations is dealing
with an unprecedented number of ongoing conflicts,
which seriously impedes the effort to allocate resources
and funds in such a way as to achieve the desired shift
towards conflict prevention. It has been well established
that the costs associated with conflict resolution,
humanitarian assistance and peacekeeping operations
can be much higher than conflict prevention. That
clearly indicates how the conflicts currently under way
also limit the capacity of the United Nations to prevent
future conflicts.

One of the key determinants of building and
sustaining peace is timely political leadership.
Therefore, it is of paramount importance that the
Council and the new Secretary-General pave the
way for much-needed consensus within the Security
Council, especially on the political track and at times
of humanitarian emergencies.

In order to achieve lasting peace, the Council
must explore ways of improving its ability to prevent
conflicts and facilitate the establishment of dialogue on
a political level, in line with the principle of nationally
owned and nationally driven political processes. It has
been stated repeatedly in this organ and beyond that
there can be no sustainable military solution to ongoing
conflicts. We would add that there can be no sustainable
peace without ensuring local inclusive ownership of the
peace process and of the eventual peace agreement. We
encourage shifting the focus to political-level dialogue.
Moreover, we believe that the role of the Council and
the Secretary-General in the framework prescribed
by the Charter of the United Nations is vital to the
accomplishment of lasting peace.

Action in conflict prevention and peacekeeping
needs to be conducted in compliance with the
principles of neutrality, objectivity and non-bias, in
line with agreed mandates. Those principles should
be applied as an integral part of the role of the United
Nations to ensure the restoration of law and order and
compliance with international law. Neutrality must
not be interpreted as the median line between legality
and illegality.

It is necessary to highlight the link between
development and security as a key determinant in
preventing conflicts and sustaining peace. Widening
gaps and increased inequalities are the yeast of
new conflicts. In that regard, a shift towards a more
all-encompassing and diverse approach to conflict
prevention is imperative, including incorporating the
basic elements of the sustaining peace agenda and
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
interlinking the recommendations and proposals for
action put forward in the reports on peacekeeping
reform (see S/2015/446), the peacebuilding architecture
(see S/2015/490) and the women and peace and
security agenda.

In conclusion, there is significant political and
financial justification for a collective, United Nations
system-wide recommitment to conflict prevention.
This open debate provides a valuable opportunity for all
Member States to express their individual commitment
to the new vision of conflict prevention and sustaining
peace. Therefore, Cyprus also calls upon Security
Council members to reiterate their own commitment to
demonstrate the political will and leadership necessary
to ensure that conflict prevention and sustaining peace
can be tangible goals for the world.

