Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): Over the past few
weeks, despite the international community's appeal,
military assaults against the Palestinian Authority and
the Palestinian people have continued to intensify.
Security Council resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1403
(2002) continue unimplemented and ignored. Israel
continues to defy the international community and,
instead of withdrawing its forces from Palestinian
cities, including Ramallah, it has increased and
intensified its presence and is setting up its own
timetable and conditions for withdrawal. Such defiance
constitutes a clear threat to international peace and
security. It is appalling and unacceptable, and it should
not be tolerated by the Council.

The international community as a whole has
denounced Israel's military escalation. The United
States National Security Adviser said two days ago that
Israel should withdraw and should withdraw now. Any
other country that challenged Security Council
resolutions in such a manner would have been
subjected to all kinds of sanctions. On many occasions
the Security Council has insisted on the need for it to
be credible, forceful and authoritative enough to ensure
the implementation of its resolutions. Israel's non-
compliance with Security Council resolutions 1402
(2002) and 1403 (2002) is an open challenge to this
Council and its credibility. The Security Council needs
to take whatever further steps are necessary to ensure
the implementation of these resolutions.

The escalation of violence, if not immediately
stopped, has the potential of making the wedge existing
between Israel and Palestine become so wide that the
Council's vision of them living in peace and within
secure borders would be severely compromised for a
very long time. This Council needs to take immediate,
concrete action to stop the ongoing violence and Israeli
assaults against the Palestinian people.

The current situation on the ground justifies,
more than ever, the deployment of impartial
international observers in the region. In our view, such
deployment represents the only hope to get out of this
impasse, to put an end to the cycle of violence and to
consolidate eventually confidence-building measures
between the two sides. The non-aligned members of
the Security Council have on various occasions over
the past 18 months made concrete proposals for the
deployment of such an international presence. Had the
Security Council positively considered these proposals,
the Middle East region would not be in as explosive a
situation as it is today.

We support all the efforts that the facilitators,
including the "quartet" and the United States envoys,
are making to find a solution.

We understand that United States Secretary of
State Powell has travelled to the region in an attempt to
break the deadlock and to secure an Israeli withdrawal
and a ceasefire. He has the full support of our
delegation and of the Council, as well as that of the
entire international community. But we must also
understand that, as the Secretary-General himself has
said, Secretary of State Powell has no magic wand.
Hence, it is imperative for the Security Council to
favourably consider the deployment of international
observers before we reach the point of no return.

The humanitarian situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories is extremely precarious. The
constant violation of international humanitarian law
has almost become the norm on the ground. How can
we conceive of any country acting so irresponsibly,
disregarding all the calls made by the international
community for full respect of the basic rights of the
Palestinian people in the occupied territories? Israel
claims that its military assaults are aimed at rooting out
terrorist networks and at the elements of Hamas and the
Hizbullah terrorists who have killed innocent Israeli
citizens. But over the past 18 months of hostilities,
more than 400 of the 1,300 Palestinians killed by Israel
have been children and women. One wonders,
therefore, which side is involved in terror. If this is not
terror, it closely resembles terror. We believe that Israel
should stop those senseless acts.

The Commission on Human Rights last Friday
adopted a resolution calling upon the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Mrs. Mary
Robinson, to undertake a fact-finding mission to the
occupied Palestinian territories and to report to the
Commission at its current session. We are very pleased
that Mrs. Robinson has agreed to lead such a mission
as soon as is practicable. We urge Israel to fully
cooperate with the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights and to facilitate such a mission. The
international community has the right to be fully
informed about the human rights situation in the
territories.

Finally, we would like to reiterate what we have
said on many occasions in the Council: Chairman
Arafat remains the only valid interlocutor that Israel
has to make peace with. Any attempt to sideline or
marginalize him would not be acceptable.

