Mr. De Ruyt (Belgium) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union.
The countries of Central and Eastern Europe associated
with the European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech
Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland,
Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia - and the associated
countries Cyprus, Malta and Turkey align themselves
with this statement. I am particularly gratified that my
first statement to the Security Council on behalf of the
European Union should be on the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, a matter that, as
members know, is of particular interest to my country.
This public meeting of the Security Council is
most timely. It allows us to review United Nations
action in the field, to evaluate the practical
achievements of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) and to propose improvements in that
peacekeeping operation for the near future.

The European Union thanks the Secretary-
General for his presence here today and for his
personal involvement in this difficult matter. Along
with previous speakers, we congratulate the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kamel
Morjane, on his outstanding performance as head of
MONUC over the past 20 months. The task of
deploying and setting up MONUC was by no means
easy, but the challenge was taken up with courage and
spirit. It will not be easy to replace Ambassador
Morjane, but the European Union urges that this be
done without delay, as it would be particularly
inopportune to leave such a strategic post vacant in the
present circumstances.

The international community hopes for a return to
peace and economic recovery in the Great Lakes
region, especially in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which is most unusual geopolitically, as it lies
at the centre of the African continent, and which is
exceptionally rich in a wide variety of natural

resources, whose overexploitation by the
belligerents - without the least benefit to the people
of the Congo - is one of the leading causes of the

conflict. The international community is well aware
that regional stability depends on the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The European Union has consistently affirmed
that only a political solution to the ongoing conflict in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo can be Viable.
Should the belligerent parties choose to pursue the
military option, that would only lead to further
suffering, of which a population already hard-pressed
by years of war has had enough.

The European Union considers that the window
of opportunity which has been open in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo since the beginning of the year
remains despite the real danger that the situation could
erode. In the eyes of the European Union, the
international community's diplomatic efforts must now
concentrate above all on the following: national
dialogue; the economic situation of the country, and
foreign aid; withdrawal of foreign troops; and the
process of the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation or resettlement of armed
factions.

The European Union has taken note of Sir
Ketumile Masire's announcement that the formal start
of the inter-Congolese dialogue process would be
postponed to 20 August 2001 as a result of the
consultations now under way between the facilitator's
team and civil society entities. It is vital that the
meeting be held without further postponement. Such a
dialogue must accompany the implementation of the
Lusaka Agreement; it will test the desire of the parties
to seek a lasting solution to the conflict. The European
Union believes that the participants in the dialogue will
set realistic goals and will decide on a compact time-
frame. The facilitator can count on the support of the
European Union.

The renewed commitment of the international
community and the gradual and balanced resumption of
cooperation assistance in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo are dependent on the resumption of
dialogue, on progress in that dialogue, and on overall
progress in the implementation of the Lusaka
Agreement.

On the subject of assistance, it is possible to go
beyond mere emergency humanitarian assistance. For
that reason, the European Union has decided on a
gradual resumption of cooperation - a resumption
based on progress in the field - and has decided that
this should extend to the whole population. The
European Union welcomes the fact that international
financial institutions are currently moving in the same
direction, and it hopes that other donor countries will
announce their participation in such endeavours, for
example at the next meeting coordinated by the World
Bank. In that context, we underscore the need for all
humanitarian workers to have access to all parts of the
territory of the country.

Through the European Commissioner for
Development and Humanitarian Aid, who visited the
Democratic Republic of the Congo last week, the
European Union has confirmed its readiness to disburse
120 million euros in assistance contingent on concrete
progress in the peace process and in the inter-
Congolese dialogue.

As the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General has said, MONUC is now facing real
difficulties, especially in Kisangani, a city that which
we hope will become a symbol of national
reconciliation. The immediate demilitarization of
Kisangani is necessary to bring that about. But there
must also be genuine disengagement in the rest of the
country in strict compliance with the disengagement
plans approved at Kampala and at Harare.

To that end it is necessary jointly to keep the
pressure on all parties and thus to put their desire for
peace to the test. We must also encourage bilateral
contacts between various regional leaders, such as the
recent meeting, in the presence of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Kofi Annan, between Presidents Kabila
and Kagame parallel to the Assembly of Heads of State
and Government of the Organization of African Unity.

Let me speak briefly about the serious issue of
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation or resettlement, to which nearly all
speakers have made reference. The question of a plan
for disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation or resettlement is a vital one, because the
problem of the armed factions that are at large in the
eastern Congo, with the attendant risk of
destabilization, is a key - indeed the key - to this
conflict. Recent developments suggest that the
international community may very soon need to
implement such a plan. The requirements must be
known as soon as possible so that a carefully devised,
effective programme can be formulated and so that the
donor community can contribute. But developing such
programmes is a complex matter. We hope that the
United Nations, as the natural body to steer such a
plan, will, through the Secretary-General, provide the
necessary impetus to launch it, and that a follow-up
mechanism will be created to ensure that preparations
are speedily made.

The Council of Ministers of Foreign Affairs of
the European Union has mandated the Union's Special
Representative to contact the Secretary-General and
ask him to appoint a pilot body to draw up and
implement a plan. The mandate and the staff of
MONUC will probably have to be modified to
implement such a programme. With the necessary
sense of urgency, the European Union will press the
Security Council to take action to adapt MONUC's
mandate as required. For its part, the European Union
would certainly be one of the major contributors to the
establishment of such a programme.

In conclusion, the European Union expresses the
hope that the parties to the conflict will make every
effort to ensure the success of the Lusaka Agreement
and that they will heed the message from the
international community, headed by the Security
Council, the guarantor of international peace and
security.
