Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate you,
Sir, on Pakistan's assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I am confident that
your experience and wisdom will enable the Council
to achieve appropriate outcomes on the sensitive
issues under consideration. Moreover, I express my
deep gratitude to you for convening this open debate
on counter-terrorism, and particularly thank Her
Excellency Ms. Hina Rabbani Khar, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Pakistan, for attending and presiding
over our meeting today. In addition, we underscore our
alignment with the statements delivered on behalf of
the Group of Arab States, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation and the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.

There is clearly no need for us to reiterate the well-
known fact that terrorism is a global phenomenon,
unassociated with a specific religion or race. Although
it threatens no specific country or region, it represents a
threat to the entire world; the international community
must therefore combat it with determined action and
cooperation aimed at achieving the desired results.

My country remains a leader in the fight against
terrorism. At the international level, the Kingdom
continually reiterates its rejection and condemnation
of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
regardless of its source or objectives. Since 1963, my
country has acceded to 14 regional and international
agreements and conventions against terrorism and its
funding. Moreover, the Kingdom has implemented all
resolutions ofthe Security Council to counter terrorism
and its funding, including through the freezing of
assets, travel bans and arms embargos against all
persons and entities listed on the Security Council
sanctions committees consolidated list, and through its
close cooperation with other countries and international
organizations in the fight against terrorism. Those
include, in particular, United Nations entities and their
subsidiary bodies, such as the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities and
the Working Group on Counter-terrorism.

I also recall the High-Level Meeting on Countering
Nuclear Terrorism, with a Specific Focus on
Strengthening the Legal Framework, which was held
at the start of the sixty-seventh session of the General
Assembly on 28 September 2012. In that regard, I take
this opportunity to commend the efforts of the Security
Council, especially its Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), to control and prevent the
use of nuclear, chemical or biological weapons and
their means of delivery to non-State actors, whether
individuals or organizations, who attempt to develop,
acquire, manufacture, possess, transport, transfer
or use those weapons. In that context, last year the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia contributed an $500,000 in
support of the work of that Committee. We reiterate
the importance of such resolutions in limiting terrorist
organizations' access to weapons of mass destruction
and in intensifying the policing of providers of
nuclear services in order to ensure that they are not
providing illegitimate entities with nuclear materials or
technology.

As always, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has
continued to undertake effective leadership initiatives
in support of international cooperation in combating
terrorism, in the form of the International Conference
on Counter-Terrorism, held in Riyadh in 2005 by
invitation of the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques,
King Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud. An idea
emerged at the Conference that is today a reality,
namely, the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre,
which is now effectively and actively shouldering
its responsibilities in strengthening international
cooperation in combating terrorism. Saudi Arabia's
support for the Centre demonstrates our commitment to
collective action and the maintenance of international
peace and security. Accordingly, we call on all members
of the international community to cooperate with the
Centre in providing it the benefit of their expertise,
which will in turn enable the Centre to achieve the
goals for which it was established. In that respect, I am
pleased to announce that my country is cooperating with
the United Nations on convening meeting, to be held in
mid-February, on cooperation between internationals
centres to fight terrorism in Riyadh.

At the national level, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
has instituted several important measures and security
safeguards aimed at combating and limiting terrorism.
Those include establishing new security departments
specialized in counter-terrorism activities; enacting
and amending many laws, rules and regulations related
to combating terrorism; and strengthening rules
and restrictions regulating the weapons, munitions,
equipment and/or spare parts industry and the import,
sale, possession and/or trade in such weapons, so as to
prevent them from falling into the hands of terrorists.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has also tightened border

controls in order to prevent the infiltration of terrorists
and arms smuggling.

However, my country's efforts to combat terrorism
are not limited to security measures. Saudi Arabia has
been keen to address the ideological, economic and
social aspects of terrorism, as well as to compensate
the victims of terrorist crimes and provide them with
the necessary psychological treatment. In that regard,
we have established the Prince Mohammed Bin Nayef
Rehabilitation Centre, which provides counselling and
guidance to repentant terrorists, in order to reintegrate
them into the societies of their homelands as active
citizens. The Centre has now become a model for the
eradication of the roots of terrorism and its ideologies.
I would like to recall the outcome of the third
review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, which was adopted by consensus by the
General Assembly at its sixty-sixth session (General Assembly resolution 66/282). While I reiterate my
country's support for, and commitment to, all the
elements and pillars of the Strategy, I should like point
out that most international efforts have focused on the
Strategy's second and third pillars, concerning ways
to confront and combat terrorism, build countries'
capacity and develop the role of the United Nations.

We are fully aware of the sensitivity of discussing
the first pillar of the Strategy, which refers to the
factors that lead to the spread of terrorism. But in order
to be fair and honest with ourselves, we must admit that
it is important that we look into ways to eradicate the
causes that lead to terrorism. Those include occupation,
oppression, colonization, ethnic cleansing, and, finally,
depriving people of their right to self-determination,
achieving national independence and meeting people's
aspirations to freedom and dignity. In particular, they
include the aggressive Israeli practices perpetrated
on a daily basis against the Palestinian people in the
State of Palestine, which is still under occupation. It
is important to note that the acts of resistance to such
occupation cannot be classified as terrorism, because
acts of legitimate resistance are no more than a form
of self-defence against the systematic State terrorism
manifested through occupation.

With regard to the fourth pillar, which addresses
human rights, I would like to express our appreciation
for the efforts of Mr. Ben Emmerson, Special Rapporteur
on the promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism,
particularly for his report to the Human Rights Council
on framework principles for securing the human rights
of victims of terrorism (A/HRC/20/14). We emphasize
that the fight against terrorism cannot retain its high
morals unless they are fully aligned with respect for
human rights. We also stress that combating terrorism
can never justify harming innocent civilians or
considering them mere collateral damage.

