Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): Let me begin by joining others in welcoming you, Mr. President, and the Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany to the Chamber. We thank Assistant Secretary-General Mueller and UNICEF Executive Director Fore for their important briefings. My delegation welcomes the most recent report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council resolution 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017), 2401 (2018), 2449 (2018) and 2504 (2020) (S/2020/141), as well as the report of the Secretary-General on the review of alternative modalities for the border crossing of Al-Yarubiyah (S/2020/139). We share the Secretary-General's call for an immediate and unconditional ceasefire in Idlib. Indonesia would like to highlight, in that regard, the existing request from the Council to the Secretary- General, in resolution 2254 (2015), to lead the effort, through the office of his Special Envoy and in consultation with relevant parties, to determine the modalities and requirements of a ceasefire, as well as to continue planning for the support of ceasefire implementation. While acknowledging the close linkage between a ceasefire and a parallel political process, Indonesia would like to reaffirm its strong support to the ongoing work of the Special Envoy. I wish to underline three points. First, Indonesia urges all parties to the conflict to immediately cease hostilities. The humanitarian situation in the north-west is extremely disturbing, with approximately 950,000 people displaced since 1 December 2019. That number has_ increased significantly in a short period of time. The number of civilians killed as a result of hostilities is also increasing. We condemn any targeted attacks on civilian infrastructure and camps for internally displaced persons. We urge all parties to take the necessary steps to protect civilians and to ensure respect for international humanitarian law, including the principles of distinction and proportionality. Once again, Indonesia appeals to all relevant parties in the conflict to stop the violence, especially their military operations in densely populated areas. Secondly, my delegation notes that the cross-border operation remains a key mechanism for providing live-saving humanitarian assistance to people in need. The increased demand in the north-west should be immediately addressed. When humanitarian responses are overwhelmed, the international community must redouble its efforts to support humanitarian operations in north-western Syria. Thirdly, we take note of the observations made in the report of the Secretary-General on the reviewof alternative modalities for the border crossing of Al-Yarubiyah. A combination of more cross-border and cross-line access is indeed necessary to maintain the levels of humanitarian assistance in north-eastern Syria. We also believe that it is crucial for the Syrian Government to facilitate more cross-line access to north-eastern Syria, especially to allow medical distribution, in a timely manner, to all civilians in need. We therefore appreciate the Syrian Government's cooperation in its decision to authorize the delivery of cross-line humanitarian aid and the transportation of medical aid via land routes, as indicated in the letter received yesterday from the Syrian Permanent Representative. Indonesia sincerely hopes that humanitarian operations in targeted areas can be enhanced and sustained as a result. My delegation reiterates the importance for all parties to allow safe, unimpeded and sustained access for the United Nations humanitarian response to all requested areas, based on the United Nations assessment of needs in all parts of Syria. Let me stress one important last point. The issue of humanitarian assistance should not be politicized by anyone. It is crucial for us, the members of the Security Council, to lead by example. In conclusion, my delegation commends the tireless efforts of all humanitarian workers on the ground, in spite of the security situation, in responding to the increasing needs in the north-west. They are our real heroes.
