Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): First, I
would like to congratulate Kuwait and its delegation for
their presidency of the Security Council in June. I wish
you every success, Mr. President, during your country's
presidency in July.

I would also like to thank the Ambassador of China
for his outstanding contribution to the Council's work
in recent months and years. Lastly, I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, and colleagues for welcoming me to
the Council.

I should like to thank Peru for convening today's
open debate. I also thank our briefers - Yury Fedotov,
Michele Coninsx and Tamara Makarenko - for
their briefings.

France aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

Since last year's Arria Formula meeting, we have
had several opportunities to hear various regional
perspectives and to share experiences and good practices
in this area, which France welcomes. I will therefore
limit myself to making two observations today.

The first is the undeniable overlap between
criminal and terrorist groups, the nature and scope of
which vary from one region of the world to another.
In Europe, very few cases of verified cooperation
between transnational criminal networks and terrorist
groups have been reported in recent years. However,
the attacks in Paris in November 2015 and Brussels
in March 2016 demonstrated the existence of links
between terrorism and, in particular, petty crime, as the
Permanent Representative of Belgium just said.

Elsewhere in the world, especially in the Sahel
and Afghanistan - that is to say in regions in which
the State's authority is challenged by terrorist and
criminal groups responsible for sustaining high
levels of violence - links can be stronger and lead to
more active cooperation and, at times, even to hybrid
phenomena whereby terrorism and organized crime
are merged into a single security threat. In that regard,
groups such as Al-Qaida and Da'esh often recruit from
the same populations and encourage their supporters
to commit crimes to finance their own activities.
Criminal and terrorist groups frequently use similar
means of communication to carry out their activities, in
particular by using the Internet to access the Dark Web.

We must therefore remain focused on the evolution
of the threat in order to adapt our response as effectively
as possible. Recent reports, including the World Atlas
of Illicit Flows, published in September 2018, have
shown accordingly that environmental crime, in the
broad sense of the term, has become the primary source
of funding for certain non-State armed groups and
terrorist organizations. We must take that development
into account, as has been done by the Commission on
Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice.

That brings me to my second observation, which
concerns the response to be provided at the national,
regional and international levels. In that regard, France
is fully committed to combating terrorism in all its
forms, as well as the fight against organized crime. As
an example, France is leading and supporting several
initiatives, including, in particular, its effort together
with Germany to combat trafficking in small arms and
light weapons in the Western Balkans, given that such
illicit trafficking is responsible for sustaining high
levels of violence and corruption and can facilitate the
commission of terrorist acts by individuals in Europe
and elsewhere.

As President ofthe Group of Seven, France has also
launched a multipartite initiative to combat trafficking
in drugs, small arms and light weapons, human
trafficking and the illegal trafficking of migrants
in the Sahel, which fuel instability and corruption,
endanger the rule of law and peace efforts, provide
fertile ground for terrorist organizations and contribute
to the deterioration of the humanitarian situation. The
initiative is aimed at providing the technical assistance
to the countries of the Sahel region that they require.

Moreover, the multidimensional nature of the fight
against terrorism and the types of trafficking potentially
capable of fuelling it also demands an integrated
regional response, linking development and security
and taking intraregional dynamics into account. The
support of subregional and regional organizations, such
as the Group of Five for the Sahel and the European
Union - to name but two - is crucial to developing an
effective regional response to such phenomena, which
know no borders.

In conclusion, the United Nations has a unique
role to play in improving our understanding of the
links between terrorism and organized crime so as
to encourage international cooperation and build the
capacity of States that request it. Resolution 2462
(2019), adopted in March, clearly identifies the risks
posed by the links between terrorist financing and
organized crime in various regions ofthe world and calls
on States, in close cooperation with relevant regional
organizations and the United Nations, to redouble
their efforts to address them. We must ensure that it is
fully implemented. France will continue to support all
initiatives enabling us to move forward in this area, in
particular with regard to the draft resolution proposed
by the Peruvian presidency.

