Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): South Africa
unequivocally condemns the assassinations of the
former Lebanese Prime Minister, Mr. Rafiq Hariri, and
other Lebanese leaders. Indeed, there is a consensus
within Lebanon and internationally on the need for the
United Nations to assist the Lebanese authorities in
their efforts to bring to justice those responsible for
those grave crimes and to end all impunity. It is for that
reason that the United Nations International
Independent Investigation Commission was set up to
assist Lebanon with its criminal investigation. The
decision was also taken to set up a special tribunal
comprised of Lebanese and international jurists and
prosecutors located outside Lebanon to prosecute any
persons identified by the investigation and the
Lebanese authorities as suspects in the assassination of
former Prime Minister Rafiq Hariri and other Lebanese
leaders.
3
South Africa fully supports the establishment of
the tribunal and expects it to operate with impartiality
and in accordance with Lebanese law and the highest
international standards of criminal justice. My
delegation regards Lebanese ownership of the tribunal
as being of paramount importance and believes that it
is incumbent upon the Lebanese authorities and people
to reach a consensus position on the matter. Therefore,
we still hold out the hope that the Lebanese parties can
use the period specified in the draft resolution -
between now and 10 June 2007 - to come to a
political agreement on the tribunal, and not leave it to
be imposed upon Lebanon.

We maintain that it is not appropriate for the
Security Council to impose such a tribunal on
Lebanon, especially under Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations. In that regard, my delegation
has frequently cautioned that the Security Council
should be judicious in its invocation of Chapter VII of
the Charter. We also do not believe that the Council has
the right to bypass the procedures required by the
Lebanese Constitution for the entry into force of an
agreement with the United Nations. In discarding the
Lebanese Constitution the Security Council is
contravening its own decision regarding the need to
respect the sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and
political independence of Lebanon.

The Security Council is mandated to act with
impartiality and without bias. It cannot be seen to be
taking sides in internal Lebanese politics. There is a
danger that the imposition of the special tribunal on
Lebanon without the consent of all the parties
concerned will detrimentally affect the political
stability of the already fragile Lebanese State. It will
also politicize international criminal law, thereby
undermining the very foundations of international law.

Furthermore, we have concerns about the
precedent that this draft resolution will set. The
principle of national consensus in establishing
international tribunals is an important aspect of
peacebuilding and national reconciliation.

Therefore, regrettably, South Africa will abstain
in the voting on the draft resolution before us.

