Mr. Aslov (Tajikistan) (spoke in Russian): I have
the honour to make this statement on behalf of the
group of members of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference (OIC). The thirty-seventh session of the
OIC Council of Foreign Ministers, held in Dushanbe,
Tajikistan, on 18 to 20 May 2010, once again stressed
that the situation in the Middle East will remain tense
as long as Israel persists with its illegal policies and
practices and hinders the peace efforts, and until a just,
lasting and comprehensive settlement of all aspects of
the question of Palestine and the Arab-Israeli conflict
is achieved. Such a settlement will be achieved only by
ending the Israeli occupation of Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem and other Arab territories
occupied since 1967, and by enabling the Palestinian
people to establish their independent, sovereign and
viable State based on the 1967 borders, with Jerusalem
as its capital. In that regard, the OIC again calls on the
international community, including the Security
Council, to intensify its efforts to accelerate the Middle
East peace process based on its responsibilities under
the Charter.

While we meet to address issues related to the
question of Palestine and the situation in the Middle
East, including Israel's attack on the freedom flotilla
and its blockade of Palestinians in the Gaza Strip,
Israel is undertaking other illegal and provocative
actions in the holy city of Jerusalem. These actions
include the recent Israeli decision to build new
settlements in occupied East Jerusalem and to demolish
Palestinian homes in several neighbourhoods in order
to alter the character, status and demographic
composition of the city.

In addition to Israel's illegal colonial settlement
activities, construction of the separation wall and
demolition of Palestinian homes, it has revoked the
residency rights of Palestinian J erusalemites, including
four elected members of the Palestinian Legislative
Council in order to deport them from Jerusalem.
Moreover, Israel is continuing its illegal activities in
the occupied West Bank, including imposing
restrictions on the movement of persons and goods
through numerous checkpoints, carrying out military
incursions and illegally arresting Palestinians. Illegal
10-45934
Israeli settlers also continue to carry out provocations
against the peaceful Palestinian population. These
actions are illegal, discriminatory and provocative, and
constitute flagrant violations of international law,
including humanitarian and human rights law.

The international community, including the
Security Council, should act immediately and
effectively to compel Israel to cease its illegal actions
in the occupied Palestinian territories, particularly in
East Jerusalem.

The illegal and inhuman blockade imposed by
Israel, the occupying Power, on the Gaza Strip for
more than three years constitutes collective punishment
of the Palestinian civilian population, violates
international law and qualifies as a crime against
humanity. More than 1.5 million Palestinians living in
the Gaza Strip under the blockade continue to suffer
from a scarcity of food, electricity, medicine and
construction materials. They await the day when the
international community will take prompt action to end
their tragedy and suffering by compelling Israel to
immediately and fully lift the blockade and open all
border crossings to allow for the free movement of
persons and goods to and from the Gaza Strip.

In response to the unjust Israeli blockade, the
international flotilla of civilian activists set sail for
Gaza to deliver humanitarian supplies and to break the
blockade. However, Israel, with disregard for human
rights and innocent lives, carried out a military attack
in international waters against the peaceful
international convoy, killing and injuring innocent,
unarmed international peace activists.

As Council members realize, tinkering at the
margins of the ongoing crisis in the Gaza Strip is not
enough. The time has come to end the plight of more
than 1.5 million Palestinians, lift the blockade and
enable the people to live with dignity. Undoubtedly, the
military attack on the freedom flotilla demands a
prompt, full, impartial, transparent, independent and
credible investigation conforming to international
standards, based on the Security Council's presidential
statement of 1 June (S/PRST/2010/9) and the
resolution adopted by the Human Rights Council on
2 June.

The OIC is deeply concerned by Israel's ongoing
air and land violations of Lebanon's sovereignty, in
breach of resolution 1701 (2006), and calls on Israel to
withdraw fully from the remaining occupied Lebanese

land in the Shab'a farms, the Kfar Shuba hills and the
northern part of Al-Ghajar village.

The OIC also supports the position of the
international community reaffirming that all measures
and actions taken or to be taken by Israel, the
occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical and
demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan or its
institutional structures, as well as Israeli measures to
impose its jurisdiction and administration there, are
null and void and have no international legal effect.
The OIC demands that Israel abide fully and
immediately by resolution 497 (1981) and fully
withdraw from the occupied Syrian Golan to the lines
of 4 June 1967, in implementation of resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973).

The OIC group reiterates that peace in the Middle
East will be achieved only by ending the Israeli
occupation of the Palestinian and Arab territories that
began in 1967 and by establishing the independent
State of Palestine with East Jerusalem as its capital,
and by achieving a just solution to the plight of the
Palestinian refugees in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 194 (III) of 1948.

It is incumbent upon the international community,
particularly the Security Council, to shoulder its legal
and moral responsibilities and take prompt and
decisive actions and measures to implement relevant
resolutions of international legitimacy. We must
confront the challenges to the maintenance of
international peace and security.

