Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to thank you, Sir, for giving us the
opportunity to participate in this important meeting.

I believe that the presidential statement that has
just been adopted is balanced. I should like, however,
to clarify a few truths that may have been omitted. I do
so not to attack or to go on the offensive, but simply to
clarify certain facts.

I affirm that we fully intend to resolve all
pending questions between us and the sisterly State of
South Sudan through negotiations. We have not started
a war, but were forced into one despite hating the idea
of entering into hostilities with the sisterly State of
South Sudan. That is the first truth.

The second truth is that we have cooperated with
the Security Council and the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel (AUHIP) in order find lasting
solutions to this issue. I affirm our good intentions and
wish to clarify the following points.

As I informed you yesterday, Sir, we have some
12,000 brotherly students from South Sudan in our
educational institutions. They are treated with great
dignity, and we shall continue to treat them thus in our
educational system. Moreover, Council members may
not be aware that Southerners have not been expelled
from the military schools and institutions that train our
military officers and many of our brothers from the
South. They have never been subjected to ill-treatment;
on the contrary, they have been treated with great
dignity. I reiterate that we shall extend our assistance
to their attendance at these military institutions until
they have fully completed their studies and received
their diplomas. They will then be transferred to South
Sudan in the most dignified manner.

The Sudan has always accepted and will continue
to accept all mediation proposals put forward by
AUHIP. As Mr. Thabo Mbeki has said, we have
rejected no proposal and have cooperated extensively.

Another point I wish to raise is that some three
weeks ago we welcomed to Khartoum our brother the
Minister for Humanitarian Affairs of the brotherly
State of South Sudan. We signed an agreement with
him concerning the citizens of South Sudan who are to
return there, stipulating the need for flexibility with
regard to the 8 April deadline. As I said, all these facts
may be unknown to the members of the Council. I feel
that Council members should be aware of certain facts
concerning the other side. Again, I wish not to go on
the attack, but simply to describe genuine realities.

In conducting operations to assist citizens
returning to South Sudan, we have done so in three
ways. With the cooperation of the International
Organization for Migration, they have been transported
by rail, river and air. We dispatched five boats laden
with returnees to South Sudan. River transport is the
best means of conveying passengers and freight alike.
In providing the five boats to transport returnees to the
South, we agreed to allow South Sudan to transfer
through the Sudan and on its rivers all equipment
belonging to the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
(UNMIS).

Does all this not sufficiently demonstrate our
good intentions? And yet, some 12 Sudanese vessels
were confiscated by South Sudan and not returned;
indeed, they have been used for military purposes. The
Council should be aware of these facts. What does all
this mean? Clearly, it will delay the return of Southern
citizens who remain in the North. In the light of the
confiscation of our vessels, I will leave it to the
Council to determine what it must do to help us return
the citizens of the South to their country.

With regard to cooperation with the peacekeeping
Mission, I should like to emphasize that, as it has in the
past, the Government of the Sudan will continue to
cooperate with missions deployed on Sudanese
territory with the consent of its Government. With
regard to other missions deployed on the territory of
other countries with their consent, they are of no
concern to us whatsoever - although, as I have
indicated, we did provide assistance in transporting
equipment for the United Nations Mission in the
Republic of South Sudan.

The last point that I would like to mention
pertains to the humanitarian situation in Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile states. The Sudan would like
to underscore its cooperation with the United Nations.
Speaking here two days ago, the Sudan's Minister for
Social Affairs, who is responsible for humanitarian
issues, told Ms. Valerie Amos that our country would
consider the tripartite initiative, which we accepted in
principle. We will continue to review the proposals
over the next few days, so as to reach a definite
solution to this matter.
12-25259

In accordance with the latest information we have
available on the humanitarian situation, the situation in
Southern Kordofan is far from reaching the crisis stage.
A recent development relating to cooperation with
United Nations agencies involved in humanitarian
affairs - the Food and Agriculture Organization,
UNICEF, the World Health Organization and the
International Organization for Migration, among
others - has resulted in an improvement in that
regard. Lastly, we have no doubt that the situation will
continue move in a positive direction in the course of
the coming days.

