Mr. Brahimi: It is, as ever, a privilege to address
the Security Council, and I am particularly honoured to
be speaking under your presidency, Mr. Ambassador.

The Secretary-General has been far too kind and
generous, and I thank him on behalf of my colleagues
and on my own account for his confidence, his
encouragement and his support. I am also deeply
grateful for the assistance that the members of the
Security Council have given us.

The Secretary-General mentioned that the process
of forming the interim Government that is poised to
take power in Iraq by 30 June did not begin in May, but
much earlier. I hope the Council will permit me to
describe that process in some detail, especially as
concerns last month's events. The United Nations
account of how the process has unfolded should be a
matter of public record.

My own personal involvement commenced with
the fact-finding team I was privileged to lead to Iraq in
the beginning of February. During that visit, the first of
three in total, my team and I began a process of
consultations with Iraqi political parties, professional
associations, trade unions, religious and tribal leaders,
women's groups and youth movements, intellectuals
and academics, amongst others.

It was on the basis of those consultations, in
addition to those with the Coalition Provisional
Authority and the Governing Council, that we
formulated the observations and recommendations in
the fact-finding team's report. That report, which the
Secretary-General transmitted to the Security Council
on 23 February (S/2004/ 140), made clear that there was
an overwhelming desire on the part of Iraqis for an
elected Government to take over from the Coalition
Provisional Authority. But there was also an
understanding that such a Government would not be
viable if the elections held for it were not genuine and
credible. Our technical assessment was that the
conditions simply were not there for this to happen
before 30 June. Eight months at the very least would be
needed to organize a proper election from the time that
an electoral authority and an electoral framework had
been put in place.

Naturally, delaying the end of occupation was not
an option. There was therefore no alternative but to
accept that restoration of sovereignty by 30 June would
be made to a non-elected Government.

What was the alternative to the caucus-style
system that had been rejected? It was naturally not
possible to present a preferred option from the United
Nations. It was up to the people of Iraq to reflect on
this question, free of the sometimes politically
motivated rhetoric that had surrounded the debate on
whether credible elections could be held by 30 June.
This was not a time to hastily push through a solution,
especially because, as we pointed out in the fact-
finding team's report, the country was so divided.

The Council will recall that the Transitional
Administrative Law was adopted by the Governing
Council and the Coalition Provisional Authority on 8
March 2004. Article 2(B)(1) of the Transitional
Administrative Law stated that the interim Government
to take power by 30 June would be

"constituted in accordance with a process of
extensive deliberations and consultations with
cross-sections of the Iraqi people conducted by
the Governing Council and the Coalition
Provisional Authority and possibly in
consultation with the United Nations".

Then, in a letter to the Secretary-General dated 17
March 2004 (S/2004/225, annex II), the President of
the Iraqi Governing Council reaffirmed that the
Governing Council welcomed United Nations
consultation in the national dialogue on the shape and
scope of the interim Government. In a letter dated the
same day, Ambassador Paul Bremer indicated to the
Secretary-General his hope that my team and I would
"return to Iraq to help build consensus among Iraqis
on the powers, structure and composition of the interim
Government and the process for its establishment"
(S/2004/225, annex IV). The Secretary-General
informed the Security Council the following day of the
letters that he had received, as well as of his positive
response to them.

Against that backdrop, my team and I returned to
Iraq for a second time, from 4 to 15 April. On arrival,
we found that some members of the Governing Council
were arguing that continuity above all would be
required to face the magnitude of the challenges that
would persist through the next phase of the transition.
For that reason, they favoured transferring sovereignty
by 30 June to themselves or to an expanded version of
their Council. On the other hand, our extensive
consultations with people outside the Governing
Council revealed a desire for a more pronounced
change.

In the end, the Governing Council itself
recognized that the 15 November 2003 agreement, as
well as the Transitional Administrative Law, had called
for its dissolution, along with that of the Coalition
Provisional Authority, by 30 June. A consensus
appeared to emerge on the formation of an interim
Government composed of a President, two Vice-
Presidents and a Cabinet of ministers headed by a
Prime Minister. Outside of the Governing Council there
was a call for the Government to consist of honest and
competent people who would effectively run the
country for seven months or so while preparations for
elections were being made. Once again, the people of
Iraq, in all quarters, stressed that the elections were the
most important milestone for them.

On 14 April, I informed the Iraqi public of the
status of our work in progress at a joint press
conference with the then President of the Governing
Council, Mr. Massoud Barzani. After returning to New
York for consultations with the Secretary-General, I
briefed the Security Council in greater detail on 27
April. In that briefing, members will recall, I added
that, ideally, those serving in the Government would
choose, themselves, not to stand as candidates in the
elections for the National Assembly that is to be
elected by next January.

I also stressed that the formation of the interim
Government alone would not be sufficient to help turn
the tide of violence. Confidence-building measures
would also be needed, in tandem, to address such
controversial and divisive issues as the manner in
which the new army would be formed, de-
Baathification, and the issue of detainees and due
process. Within this context, we suggested that a
national conference be convened once sovereignty had
been restored, in order to provide a forum for Iraqi men
and women around the country to debate and hopefully
to forge consensus on the challenges that they face for
their immediate and long-term future. We also
proposed that this conference, bringing together 1,000
to 1,500 people reflecting the diversity of the country,
should select a smaller national council that could
continue the discussions and advise the interim
Government throughout its short tenure. In order for
this national conference to be well prepared, we
recommended that a diverse preparatory committee
should be formed as quickly as possible.

A few days after I briefed the Council, my team
and I departed again from New York, arriving in
Baghdad on 1 May, for our third and final visit. Our
immediate task was to gauge the reactions to the
preliminary ideas that we had presented. After all,
these were not ideas that we had come up with on our
own, but rather were a reflection of what we heard
Iraqis telling us. Did they believe that it was a faithful
reflection? With the benefit of some time to think about
the proposals, did they have additional views? If they
were on board with the framework, what names did
they see best matching up with the positions?

These are the questions we put to our
interlocutors during this third visit as we resumed our
consultations. What we found was that there was
virtual consensus on the structure of the Government.
It had the merit of simplicity while containing enough
positions of real and symbolic importance to allow
most, if not all key constituencies to feel represented.

There was debate, however, on two key issues.
First, how was this Government to be selected?
Secondly, to what extent should political parties be
represented in it?

The idea that an Iraqi Government could be even
partially selected by foreigners, understandably, did not
sit well with some. On the other hand, many voices
were heard demanding that the United Nations alone be
involved in this exercise, without the participation of
the CPA and the Governing Council. On both sides of
this debate, it was argued that if sufficient time were
not available for a credible national conference to be
convened by 30 June, then we should take six weeks or
so to bring together an even smaller round table of
notable figures, who would be charged with selecting
the interim Government.

Our concerns with this suggestion, however, were
three-fold. First, if we left the formation of the
Government until the eve of 30 June, then it would not
have sufficient time to prepare to take power or the
opportunity to engage in the discussions on the draft
resolution now before the Council. Secondly, the
choice of who should participate in the round table
would be influenced by foreigners and would be no
less controversial than the choice of the Government
itself. Thirdly, if the round table failed to reach
agreement on the composition of the Government by
30 June, then the termination of the occupation would
be delayed. This would not be acceptable to anyone in
Iraq.

At the end of the day, there was no getting away
from the fact that the interim Government would not be
elected. It would be an imperfect and ambiguous
process of selection, and it would not be fair to the
people of Iraq to pretend otherwise.

As concerns the participation of political parties
in the interim Government, we discovered that the
leaders of those parties were not alone in support of
their participation. Quite a few independent Iraqi
figures argued in favour of it. They stressed that, by
definition, any composition of the Iraqi Government
selected through these means would be controversial.
They added that the magnitude of the challenges the
Government would face from the outset made it
imperative for its composition to be as inclusive as
possible. The interim Government could ill afford to
start its work with influential opposition surrounding it
on all sides. Inclusion thus meant the inclusion of the
larger political parties as well, and there were plenty of
highly competent professionals within their ranks. The
key would be to ensure that the participation of
political parties did not lead to rising sectarianism, the
crowding out of competent independent candidates or
the disproportionate influence of any one political
party in the Government.

When the time came to start discussions on actual
names, we proposed the idea of forming a working
group comprised of the United Nations, the CPA and
the Iraqi Governing Council. It would have been
impractical to include all 24 members of the Governing
Council in this working group. So, instead, we
suggested working with a troika of the past, present
and future Presidents of the Governing Council. They
were Massoud Barzani, a Kurd; Ezzedine Selim, an
Arab Shia; and Sheikh Ghazi Al-Yawer, an Arab Sunni.
It was in that forum that we began to discuss formally
the criteria for determining which names would be
considered for the positions in the interim Government,
including the post of prime minister.

That the CPA and the Governing Council would
need to be formally included in the discussions was, of
course, a foregone conclusion for us from the outset.
After all, it was they who had requested the United
Nations assistance and not the other way around.
Furthermore, the CPA was running the country and the
Governing Council had been officially recognized by
the Security Council as the highest Iraqi institution in
the country.

However, the CPA and the Governing Council
members themselves recognized that they could not
legitimately claim to speak for all Iraqis. It was for that
reason, among others, that they called on the United
Nations to assist in the process in the first place. Both
parties accepted, therefore, that the United Nations
would introduce into the discussions the views we had
been hearing from Iraqis around the country.

To be sure, due to time and security constraints,
we did not consult as visibly or as widely with a
sufficient number of the many civic associations or the
several hundred political parties that are said to exist.
Nevertheless, we did meet, during our three visits, with
thousands of Iraqis from around the country - many
of whom travelled to Baghdad, Erbil, Mosul and Basra
to see us - when we could not go to them. I sincerely
apologize to all those who sought to see us and were
unable to do so.

We made a particular effort to seek out the views
of the extreme critics. We also tried to give a voice to
those who had been relatively silent to date, including
by their own choice. One of their concerns that we kept
at the forefront of our minds during the working
group's discussions was a desire to avoid the
reinforcement of a purely sectarian mindset in the new
Government.

This working group proved to be a reasonably
effective forum for thrashing ideas out. Tragically, just
one day after the working group had met in Erbil,
Ezzedine Selim was assassinated in Baghdad on 17
May 2004. His death was not only a blow to the
process, but a real loss for the country. He was a
remarkably thoughtful and decent man who had no
particular personal agenda other than to help move his
country in the right direction. Soon thereafter, we
invited Mr. Hamid Majid Moussa, Chairman of the
Governing Council's Committee on the Transfer of
Sovereignty, to replace Ezzedine Selim on the working

group.

While we discussed options for different
positions in the interim Government, people around the
country, as well in the international community at
large, were particularly focused on the prime minister.
Our discussions in the working group, as well as with
many groups outside of it, revealed difficulty, at first,
in reaching consensus on any one particular name.

At the end of the day, the name that appeared to
be gathering the most support within the Governing
Council and the CPA, as well as with key communities,
was that of Mr. Ayad Allawi. Though his political party
is not religiously based, he maintains good relations
with important religious figures. Though known for his
attempts to overthrow the former regime, with outside
help, he has in the past year been publicly critical of
the CPA's approach to the de-baathification policy and
the manner in which the former army was disbanded.
Though a Shia, he enjoys good relations with key
Kurdish and Arab Sunni actors alike. His resume
understandably provokes controversy, but whose name,
in connection with the post of prime minister, does not
in today's Iraq?

The case of Mr. Hussein Shahrastani is a good
example of how difficult it is to build consensus around
anyone's name. Here was a brilliant scientist and head
of a charity who spent 11 years in jail. He is secular,
but a devout Muslim. He is close to religious leaders
and he has been active and effective in providing aid
and relief to the needy. Yet his name provoked strong
opposition from almost all quarters, not least among
those who later opposed strongly the selection of Mr.
Ayad Allawi.

Be that as it may, we made it clear to the
members of the working group that we were ready to
respect the emerging consensus on Mr. Ayad Allawi's
selection as prime minister and that we were ready to
work with him in the selection of the cabinet. The list
of the full Cabinet was finalized on Tuesday, 1 June, on
the basis of the recommendations that we had formally
handed over to Mr. Allawi.

Prior to describing to the Council the nature of
the Cabinet, I should say a word about the manner in
which the three-person Presidency Council was
formed. Although some very difficult compromises and
statesmanship were required on all sides, consensus
eventually emerged on the choice of Mr. Ibrahim
J aafari and Mr. Rowsch Shaways as Deputy Presidents.
Both men command a great deal of respect and enjoy
popularity in their respective communities and beyond.
As for the position of President, the field narrowed
relatively quickly to two candidates: Mr. Adnan
Pachachi, the former Foreign Minister of Iraq, and
Sheikh Ghazi Mashal Ajil al-Yawer, who, as President
of the Governing Council during the difficult month of
May, earned the support and respect of his colleagues.
In the end, Mr. Pachachi declined the position and
Sheikh Ghazi became President. I am confident that the
President and his two Deputies will demonstrate the
leadership and the example of unity required to help
bring the country together as we travel the difficult
road ahead.

As for the Council of Ministers, it is full of
promise. It includes some of the best-performing
incumbents, such as Ms. Nasreen Berwari, Minister of
Public Works, and Mehdi Al-Hafidh, Minister of
Planning. They will help bring continuity to the work
already started over the past year or so. But there are
also many new faces, including the Ministers for
Defence, Interior, Trade and Finance. Almost two
thirds of the Cabinet is new, and only two former
members of the Governing Council will be taking up
Cabinet positions. The newly appointed Ministers
include some of Iraq's most highly qualified and
educated professionals. For example, few in Iraq can
dispute the fact that the new Ministers of Oil, Health,
Housing and Construction, Justice and Transport,
among others, are among the most qualified people in
their respective fields.

The Council of Ministers reflects to a large extent
the rich regional, ethnic and religious diversity of the
country. Very able Ministers from the Turkomen and
Caldo-Assyrian communities are represented in the
Cabinet. There are also new political figures in the
Government from constituencies that had not been well
represented on the Governing Council.

The Council of Ministers is composed largely of
technocrats, although some of them are politically
affiliated, as is often the case in many countries. I am
also pleased to note that almost 20 per cent of the
Council are women. Those women are known for their
competence, their expertise and their dedication to the
empowerment of women in public life.

Taken as a complete package, the interim
Government has a great deal of talent and is well
positioned to bring the country together during the next
seven months or so. As Ayatollah al-Sistani recently
said, it deserves to be given a fair chance and full
support. At the same time, the Iraqi people will
ultimately judge the interim Government on the basis
of what it does.

The interim Government will need to start taking
ownership of the solutions that must be found to the
grave insecurity that continues to affect the country.
Iraq will need an effective police force and a well-
trained and professional army. Efforts to bring those
about must be expedited. So, too, must the right legal,
political and practical arrangements be worked out
between the interim Government and any foreign
forces that are sought to assist with the maintenance of
security in the meantime. How that relationship is
managed will greatly affect the interim Government's
credibility in the eyes of the people.

In that context, it is encouraging to hear that the
Prime Minister has reached agreement with the
concerned parties for the dissolution of militias. That,
as members may recall, was listed among the urgent
confidence-building measures that we recommended
after our second visit to Iraq. An equally important and
urgent matter is the grave issue of the prisoners
detained in the notorious Abu Ghraib detention centre
and elsewhere. It would greatly help the new
Government if that problem were to be completely
solved even before 30 June.

We must also bear in mind that the majority of
Iraqis with whom we met stressed that the problem of
insecurity cannot be solved through military means
alone. A political solution is required. The interim
Government will need to lead the discussions on what
that political solution should comprise. It will need to
reach out to those who have been vocal critics of this
past year's process and engage them in dialogue. It will
need to resist the temptation to characterize all who
have opposed the occupation as terrorists and "bitter-
enders".

The National Conference provides an ideal
opportunity to start that process of outreach and to
build a genuinely national consensus on how to address
the prevailing insecurity. Mr. Fouad Massoum will
head the Committee that has been charged with
preparing the National Conference, to be held in July.
Mr. Massoum has already started to reflect on the
composition of the Committee, drawing on numerous
recommendations that my team and I have passed on.

During that process, I am sure that Mr. Massoum
and his colleagues on the Preparatory Committee will
recall that the Governing Council was established
strictly on a quota basis, which was universally decried
and rejected. Yet all wanted fair representation for their
communities and groups. It was not possible at this
stage to avoid reproducing the balance of the
Governing Council in the interim Government. But
everyone said that that should not be a precedent and
that, in future, Iraq may well have a Kurdish President
or an Arab Sunni Prime Minister or, indeed, that it may
see those positions occupied by individuals from
smaller communities.

We believe that the National Conference should
not be convened on the basis of any quota system,
although care should be taken to reflect the country's
diversity. In that connection, I feel that I must convey
the justified demand of the Turkomen to be recognized
as the third-largest community in Iraq. Similar
demands have been formulated by other, smaller
communities. I believe that those legitimate demands
should be heeded and that they can be accommodated
in the forthcoming constitution.

In conclusion, as the Secretary-General said a
moment ago, the United Nations has completed its task
for this particular stage in full and on time. After a
long, complicated and delicate process that took place
under less- than-optimal conditions, Iraq now has two
institutions that are essential for the next phase: an
interim Government and a national Independent
Electoral Commission. As Council members may have
seen through the media, that Government is generally
found to be acceptable by the Iraqi people. Some are
more cautious, and in some quarters there may be
stronger opposition, but the Iraqi people seem to be
willing to give the Government a chance to prove
itself. There should be no illusion, however. The days
and weeks ahead will severely test this new
Government, and the solutions to Iraq's current
challenges will take years, not months, to overcome.
On 30 June, Iraq will reach a new phase of the political
process, not the end of that process.

The fact remains, however, that neither the
interim Government nor the National Council that we
expect to be chosen by the National Conference will be
elected bodies. And only an elected Government and
an elected legislature can legitimately claim to
represent Iraq. All of the work that needs to be done
now - especially with respect to security - must be
focused on the objective of creating the conditions for
genuine and credible elections to be held by January
2005.

In order to create the right conditions for
elections, as well as to face the enormous challenges
before them, the people of Iraq urgently need the help
of the international community. Iraq needs the clear
and united support of its neighbours. Iraq needs the
generosity of its creditors. Iraq needs the patient,
strong and sustained support of this body, the Security
Council, and that of the United Nations as a whole.

