Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation thanks Mr. Martin Griffiths,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen;
Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator; Mr. David Beasley, Executive Director
of the United Nations World Food Programme; and
Ms. Rasha Jarhum, Founder and Director of the Peace
Track Initiative Yemen, for their excellent, enlightening
and poignant briefings.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is closely
following the clashes that have characterized the power
struggle in Yemen for years. Their persistence and
development are worrisome to such a degree that they
call for the increased attention of the members of the
Security Council and the international community.
Despite all efforts carried out since its beginning,
the situation of the civilian population has not seen
any improvement in stability. Recently, Al-Thawra
Hospital - the main health-care facility serving
Al-Hudaydah - was shut down, and its patients fled
owing to the proximity of the clashes related to the
offensive of the Yemeni Government and its allies
against the Houthi rebels. We are deeply concerned about
the persistent and widespread insecurity encroaching
upon the civilian population of the areas most affected
by the conflict, who live in daily fear of being hit by a
stray bullet and worried that members of their families
will not return home after a day's work. In most cases
marked by years-long deprivation, inability to pay for
food, lack of health care and inability to attend school
regularly, we would expect to see a people in the throes
of desperation. Although they have been faced by that
reality, we admire the fact that the people continue to
do everything they can to draw on their energy and deal
with the situation despite the fact that war and the fear
of death continue to confront them daily.

My delegation calls on the parties to the conflict to
respect international humanitarian law, while bearing in
mind that, at the most recent Security Council meeting
on this subject in October (see S/PV.8379), Mr. Lowcock
spoke of the more than 5,000 recorded violations of
international humanitarian law since late May - a
significantly large number - including heavy civilian
casualties and the destruction and damage to critical
civilian infrastructure, such as hospitals, electricity
and water systems, markets, roads and bridges, among
others. During that same meeting, he mentioned
delays in issuing visas, restrictions on the importation
of equipment and cargo, retractions of permits,
interference in humanitarian assessment exercises,
interference in monitoring and other obstructions that
limit the ability of humanitarian agencies to provide
vital assistance to innocent civilians.

Given the situation, we are convinced that hostilities
in proximity to all infrastructure and facilities on
which providing assistance and commercial imports
depend must cease. It is undeniable that a humanitarian
ceasefire would reflect the obligations of the parties
to the conflict to uphold international humanitarian
law and to do everything possible to facilitate the
provision of humanitarian assistance. My delegation
acknowledges and is grateful for the efforts of the
World Health Organization (WHO), the United Nations
Children's Fund, the World Food Programme and other
agencies to attenuate the threat of cholera and famine,
including WHO's delivery of cholera vaccines to more
than half a million Yemenis in October.

In conclusion, we support the mediation efforts
of the Special Envoy Griffiths. We believe that his
initiative to launch the negotiation process is important
to our shared goal of bringing peace to Yemen - a
proposal that we hope will enjoy the full approval of the
opposing parties to the conflict. We ask the members of
the Council to remain united and support Mr. Lowcock's
requests here so that they can work to the benefit of the
Yemeni people.
