Mr. Thiebaud (France)(interpretation from French):
The French delegation supports the draft resolution that is
to be put to the vote.

On 30 June the Security Council adopted Security
Council resolution 1118 (1997), which established the
United Nations Observer Mission in Angola. In taking
that decision, the members of the Council acknowledged
the progress made in the course of the peace process in
Angola. However, at the same time, they expressed their
concern over the obstacles in the way of the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol. This is why
resolution 1118 (1997) made specific demands,
particularly to UNITA, and called upon UNITA to strictly
respect the obligations undertaken.

Today, we must unfortunately note that since 30
June, and in spite of the terms of the statement of the
President of the Security Council of 23 July 1997,
UNITA has not yet fulfilled its commitments under the
Lusaka Protocol, nor has it complied with the Security
Council's resolutions. It therefore bears the principal
responsibility for the difficulties experienced in the peace
process, the most serious ones encountered in this process
in the past 30 months. The members of the Security
Council cannot accept that the efforts made by the United
Nations and the results achieved should be jeopardized by
UNITA's non-compliance with the Lusaka Protocol.

The provisions of the draft resolution that is to be
put to the vote have been carefully defined. This applies
to the modalities for the implementation of possible
sanctions. It also applies to the mechanism for the lifting
of those sanctions, should they be imposed; they would be
lifted on the basis of specific criteria, respect for which
the Secretary-General will have to assess.

I do not believe I need to refer again to the
consistent position of France, which wants the sanctions
to be time-bound, with a set duration, and wants the
question of their extension to be decided by the Security
Council.

What does the Security Council want? It wants to
bring pressure to bear on UNITA's leaders so they will
understand that only participation in political life, in
compliance with and within the framework of the
commitments undertaken, provides them with prospects

 

for the future. They must cooperate fully in the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol. It is our hope that
UNITA will take advantage of the time allowed it to meet
its obligations, especially the demilitarization of its forces,
the transformation of its radio into a non-partisan station
and its participation in the process of extending the State
administration. Our objective, in fact, is not to impose
coercive measures but rather to give every chance to peace
and national reconciliation in Angola and to prevent any
action that might lead to a resumption of fighting.

The Government of Angola may be assured of the
determination of the French authorities to help it in its work
of reconstructing a reconciled Angola.

The French delegation would also like to pay tribute
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Maitre Blondin Beye, and to his tireless and resolute action
in the service of Angola and its people.

