Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Oscar
Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing today on the
situation in the Middle East. I would also like to thank
the Permanent Representative of Israel for being with
us as well as the Permanent Observer of the Palestinian
Authority.

The open debate today on the situation in the
Middle East is taking place within the framework of
important diplomatic initiatives aimed at providing a
new impetus to the peace process. After the conflict
and political transition period which characterized the
region during the first half of this year, the time has
come for dialogue and negotiation.

Mexico hopes that during the second half of 2009
tangible progress will be achieved in the peace process,
which will lead us towards the objective that has been
endorsed by the international community - the
establishment of a Palestinian State living in peace
with Israel within secure and internationally
recognized borders.

That is why we welcome the diplomatic initiative
undertaken by the President of the United States,
Barack Obama, in the Middle East, as well as the
important message he gave during his recent talk in
Cairo on 4 June.

We have also taken note of the fact that Prime
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has acknowledged the
need for the establishment of a Palestinian State.
However, in our View, the significant preconditions and
in some cases very restrictive conditions that have been
imposed for achieving this objective only run the risk
of further complicating the negotiation process and a
future settlement. We hope that this initiative will be a
first step in the right direction, which will allow all
political sectors in Israel to be involved in the
negotiating process.

Similarly, we welcome the statement made by the
Quartet in Trieste on 26 June, in which the
determination of the international community to
support the parties in the negotiation process and to
implement the resulting agreement was reiterated.
Mexico supports this statement which has a renewed
appeal to the parties to comply with their obligations
under the road map and to work together for a two-
State solution.
We hope that these diplomatic initiatives will
generate the right conditions for the holding, at an
appropriate time, of an international conference in
Moscow that will enable us to consolidate the objective
of a final outcome in the Middle East peace process.

Mexico has participated actively in international efforts
for peace, and we would join any initiative of this sort.

Meeting the objectives of the peace process
should not remain wishful thinking. The critical
situation for the people in the region as well as the
constant tensions among actors who have been
involved in this conflict for decades demands that
progress be achieved as soon as possible.

A few days ago, we received new reports of
serious incidents along the border between Gaza and
Israel, which confirms the fact that tensions and
insecurity continue to be present following the military
operations that took place at the beginning of this year.
We condemn these acts of Violence, in particular the
acts and attacks against the civilian population, and
once again we urge all actors to respect the provisions
of international humanitarian law at all times.

The living conditions in the Gaza Strip have
continued to worsen due to the fact that humanitarian
assistance has had difficulty gaining access and there
have been ongoing restrictions on the provision of
building materials, fuel and cash. According to figures
provided by the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), the goods entering Gaza in recent weeks
totalled only one fifth of those for the corresponding
period in 2007.

This situation is not acceptable. It contributes to
the worsening of the humanitarian situation and a sense
of frustration and injustice among the population,
which helps to promote extremism and violence. The
restrictions on Gaza lead to illicit trafficking in
construction materials, fuel and food, and this in turn
creates a vicious circle, opening the door for illicit
trafficking in weapons and jeopardizing security
throughout the region.

We therefore continue to insist on the need to
establish an international monitoring mechanism that
will guarantee a lasting ceasefire, the opening of
border crossings and the monitoring of illicit
trafficking in weapons, in accordance with resolution
1860 (2009). We support all initiatives aimed at
establishing a mechanism of this type, the only way to
ensure progressive normalization of the situation in the
Gaza Strip.

This normalization also requires ongoing efforts
aimed at achieving intra-Palestinian reconciliation,

efforts which have received encouragement from the
Government of Egypt. We regret the fact that the recent
rounds of negotiations have not led to significant
progress and we hope that the various factions will
renew their commitment to reconciliation in order to
promote the peace dialogue with Israel. We also urge
Hamas and all Palestinian militia to renounce the use
of violence in order to create a climate of trust that will
be conducive to the peace process. Extremism should
not be fought solely with weapons. We also need to
provide, with due caution, a space for dialogue and
negotiation.

Only through the establishment of a unified
democratic Palestinian Government committed to the
peace process, the Madrid principles and the Arab
Peace Initiative will it be possible to set the foundation
for a negotiating process that will lead to a lasting
solution to the conflict.

The situation prevailing in East Jerusalem and in
the West Bank continues to be a cause for concern.
While we welcome the lifting of some restrictions on
the movement of individuals in the West Bank, in
particular in the Hawara outpost in the Nablus region,
the population and the Palestinian economy continue to
suffer from numerous restrictions imposed by the Israel
Defense Forces.

The progressive professionalization of the
Palestinian security forces in the West Bank shows that
there is a commitment to peace and to regional
stability. This commitment must be accompanied by
concrete actions that will improve the living conditions
of the Palestinian people. Only in this way can any
serious progress be made towards peace.

Moreover, the commitments established under the
road map on the policy of colonization and settlement,
as well on the practice of the destruction of homes and
expropriation in East Jerusalem, have yet to be
fulfilled. Today, the press has reported that there are
more than 300,000 Israeli settlers in the West Bank, and
that population continues to increase significantly. This
situation cannot continue. It is a negative element in the
negotiating process between Israel and the Palestinian
Authority and in the establishment of lasting peace. We
recall that, in accordance with the principles of the road
map and international law, all Israeli settlement
practices in the occupied territories, including those
that are qualified as natural growth, must be halted as
soon as possible. The International Court of Justice
decision should be followed with regard to the building
of the wall in occupied Palestinian territory, which runs
counter to international law.

It is essential for efforts aimed at achieving
regional peace to be pursued. A few weeks ago, we
welcomed the peaceful and transparent holding of
parliamentary elections in Lebanon on 7 June. The
successful conclusion of this electoral process
demonstrates the commitment of all Lebanese political
actors to the Doha agreements and to the process of
national reconciliation.

We also welcome the normalization of political
and diplomatic relations between Lebanon and Syria,
which will make it possible to enhance the dialogue
between those two neighbouring countries in order to
resolve pending issues and ultimately strengthen the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of Lebanon in accordance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

Despite these important achievements, we note
with concern the events that took place a few days ago
south of the Litani River in the zone of operations of
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL), in particular an explosion in a weapons
depot in the area of Khirbat Salim. The existence of
weapons south of the Litani River that do not belong to
the Lebanese Armed Forces is unacceptable and a
violation of resolution 1701 (2006).

We urge the Government of Lebanon, in
cooperation with UNIFIL, to take the necessary
measures to ensure that these types of incidents do not
recur. Similarly, we reiterate our appeal that Lebanon,
Israel and all other parties involved in this conflict
comply with the provisions of resolution 1701 (2006),
in particular those referring to the arms embargo and
the complete disarmament of all militias in Lebanon,
with the sole objective of strengthening the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of the country.

We attach particular importance to UNIFIL's
ability to carry out its mandate unhindered and
unrestricted in any way. We also reiterate our appeal to
Israel and Syria to resume indirect talks under the
auspices of Turkey, as such talks could be very
beneficial to the population and security of both States.

The remaining challenges to resolving the
conflict in the Middle East in a definitive manner are

numerous. However, we trust that this is the right time
to address those challenges progressively. The support
of the international community is therefore essential
but not sufficient. First and foremost, we need the
resolve and commitment of the actors directly involved
in the peace process. We therefore urge Israel and the
Palestinian Authority to undertake a constructive
dialogue without preconditions and on the basis of
prior international obligations and agreements. Only in
this way will we achieve the peace so hoped for by the
people embroiled for 60 years in this conflict, which
has had an impact not only on regional security but
also, to a great extent, international stability and their
future.

