Mr. Farhfidi: First of all, I wish to warmly
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May. I am confident that, under your able leadership,
the work of the Council will be carried out in a
constructive and efficient manner.

I wish also to take this opportunity to
congratulate your predecessor, Ambassador Lavrov,
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation to
the United Nations, on the exemplary manner in which
he steered the work of the Council during the month of
April.

I am grateful to you, Sir, as well as to the other
members of the Council, for having given me this
opportunity to address the Council in my capacity as
Vice-Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.

The Committee is greatly dismayed by the fact
that the Security Council has been impeded in its
ability to follow up on its own resolutions regarding
the situation in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including Jerusalem. We believe that it is a great
disservice to the effectiveness of the Council and to the
credibility of the United Nations as a whole that the
fact-finding team, set up to establish the facts on recent
events in Jenin, had to be disbanded because of the
refusal of the Government of Israel to cooperate with
the United Nations. It is indeed unacceptable that the
record of Jenin cannot be set straight. The Israeli
Government's decision is an affront to the United
Nations and to this Council. The international
community has every right to know and to be able to
assess all the facts of this humanitarian tragedy. We
also deeply regret the failure of the Council to
discharge its responsibility under the Charter and to
take firm steps in the face of outright contempt for its
positions and decisions.

As the Secretary-General has noted, the "long
shadow cast by recent events in the Jenin refugee camp
will remain" (S/2002/504) and will haunt us all.
Although time works against an investigation and, of
course, the refusal to cooperate on the part of the
Israeli Government makes the exercise particularly
difficult, we believe that an account of the recent
horrible events - as accurate, thorough and credible
an account as possible - should be made, even if the
evidence is not collected directly by a United Nations
fact-finding team. The Security Council or, if the
Council should fail again, the General Assembly
should look into the possibility of that. The sooner it
does so the better. It would be better than going back
years later, as has tragically happened in other parts of
the world.

This is not about assigning blame, but about
justice and fairness. It is about deterring and hopefully
putting an end forthwith to the brutal acts that have
been perpetrated by the Government of Israel in
contravention of international humanitarian law and its
continuing attempts to humiliate, subdue and perhaps
uproot the Palestinian people. Jenin is a glaring, yet by
no means the only, example of this kind of
unacceptable and morally reprehensible behaviour by
the occupying Power. The Bureau of our Committee, in
a statement that was issued on 5 April, expressed its
strong views on recent events in the occupied
Palestinian territory.

Our indignation at and profound concern about
what has happened in Jenin, Ramallah, Bethlehem and
dozens of other Palestinian towns and villages in the
course of the past three months cannot prevent us from
welcoming some of the promising developments of the
last couple of days. The besieging of Chairman
Arafat's compound has at long last been brought to an
end and the President of the Palestinian Authority,
strengthened rather than diminished by his ordeal, is
now free to exercise his leadership.

Yesterday's announcement by the "quartet" of its
intention to work towards convening an international
meeting on the question of Palestine is also
encouraging and has been widely welcomed. Other
ideas concerning the restoration of the political
dialogue are also being floated. In all these new efforts,
we should not lose sight of the fact that Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1397
(2002) and the underlying principle of land for peace
offer a solid foundation for any initiative aimed at
creating a workable framework for the achievement of
a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the region.
Security should not be the only dimension discussed,
but it certainly should go hand in hand with political
and economic arrangements. A clear-cut and
manageable time line for future negotiations and the
implementation of their results should be established.
Extremists on either side should not be given a veto
over the process and their acts should not be used as an
excuse to stall progress. An international presence of
some sort should be established, certainly for the
implementation period, if not before. The universally
upheld vision of a sovereign Palestinian State should
be realized in a just and viable way, with contiguous
territory and internationally recognized and guaranteed
borders.

The Arab countries have already accepted this
framework and have, in a way, extended an olive
branch to Israel through the endorsement of Crown
Prince Abdullah's initiative at their summit in Beirut in
late March. It is the Israeli Government that now has to
reciprocate in good faith and to prove in practice that it
desires peace. The Israeli occupation has to end and the
Palestinian people must be given an opportunity to
exercise its inalienable rights.

We call upon the entire United Nations
membership and on the Council to rally behind this
vision of peace and to take all necessary steps to make
it a reality within the limited window of opportunity
that seems to have emerged once again. Of course, the
United Nations should continue to maintain its
permanent responsibility towards all of the aspects of
the question of Palestine until it is resolved in a
satisfactory manner, in conformity with the relevant
United Nations resolutions, in accordance with
international legitimacy, and until all of the rights of
the Palestinian people are fully realized.

