Mr. Medina Mejias (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome and thank
Judge Theodor Meron, President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals; Judge
Carmel Agius, President of the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia; and Prosecutor Serge
Brammertz for their semiannual briefings. We also
thank the Office of Legal Affairs, in particular to
Mr. Miguel de Serpa Soares and Mr. Stephen Mathias,
for their work and for their timely dialogue.

We take this opportunity also to acknowledge the
leadership of the delegation of Uruguay, Chair of the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela supports
the efforts of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals to bring to justice
the perpetrators of crimes against humanity and war
crimes, in violation of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law. The work carried
out by these bodies has reaffirmed the international
community's commitment to combat impunity for
such heinous crimes, so as to prevent their recurrence.
These efforts help to bolster the rule the law at the
international level by combating impunity and ensuring
thatjustice is done for the victims.

With the finalization of the work of the ICTY and the
transfer of its archives to the Residual Mechanism, we
deem it necessary to enhance cooperation between the
Mechanism and States in order to guarantee compliance
with the mandate conferred upon it in resolution 1966
(2010). This relationship is vital to helping ensure that
we achieve the projected goals, particularly in terms of
the arrest of fugitives and compliance with the relevant

judicial orders.

To that end, we welcome the cooperation between
the Prosecutor's office and the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Serbia and Croatia during the reporting
period, which represents a positive factor in bolstering
the Tribunal's work in this transitional phase. Despite
the various difficulties encountered in this undertaking,
we urge a strengthening of the cooperative relations
between those countries and this judicial forum.

Similarly, we believe that the support of other
States and of international organizations is vital to a
successful outcome in pending cases. To that end, we
deem necessary to ensure access to documents, the
relevant information and witnesses, as well as ensuring
the protection of witnesses and their relocation, so as
to facilitate the consolidation of the rule of law in the
territory of the former Yugoslavia.

Our country also values the contributions of the
Office of the Prosecutor in bolstering the national
juridical institutions of the nations that formed part of
that territory in terms of the prosecution of war crimes
and their perpetrators.

We wish to highlight the efforts and dedication of
the ICTY in working to conclude its functions within
the established time frame, that is, by December
2017, in line with the strategy agreed in that respect.
While the judges should carry out their duties with
independence and impartiality, we are convinced that
they must conduct judicial trials and deliver their
sentences in a timely manner, in accordance with the
universal principle of due process.

In that connection, we support and recognize the
work and efforts of the President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals and his
team for the progress achieved and their effectiveness,
economy and transparency. Moreover, we support the
strategic plan adopted by the Residual Mechanism,
consisting of stepping up efforts to find suitable places
for the relocation of staff, thereby providing them
with appropriate assistance, which will help to reduce
overhead costs. We urge the Mechanism to maintain
its pace of work as set out in its management report in
order to ensure that there is a successful and smooth
transition from the Tribunal.

Finally, we reiterate our support to the Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia to continue taking the necessary
steps to complete its work in an expeditious manner
and ensure that all cases that are still being tried be
concluded without delay in 2017, just as envisaged.
Doing so will allow the international community to
fulfil its commitment to the promote the rule of law
and put an end to impunity.

