Mr. Mukerji (India): At the outset, I would like
to thank you, Sir, for having organized this debate on
the issue of children and armed conflict. I would like
to thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui. Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict; Mr. Herve' Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations; and today's other briefers
for their statements.

Over the past 12 years since the adoption of
resolution 1379 (2001) in 2001, the issue of children
and armed conflict has been a regular item on the
Security Council's agenda. A great deal ofprogress has
been made to implement the provisions of the relevant
resolutions. However, a great deal more remains to
be done, especially as the nature of armed conflict
threatening the maintenance of international peace
and security has metamorphosed significantly during
the past decade. This is evident from the Secretary-
General's reports on this subject, and the comments
made by several delegations during our debate today.

India has been a strong supporter of peacekeeping
operations mandated by the Security Council. Over
160,000 Indian troops have served so far under the blue
flag in all corners of the globe. The experience that we
have acquired during the course of that service makes
us acutely conscious that adequate resources are still not
being made available to fulfil the mandate of Security
Council resolutions on this subject. Specifically, we
call for more child protection advisors to be deployed
in peacekeeping operations.

During such operations, especially in recent times,
United Nations peacekeepers from India have also come
across the outrageous practice of children being used
as combatants in armed conflicts, notably by so-called
militia groups. There is a need for the Security Council
to examine the implications of this phenomenon on the
Council's mandates for peacekeeping operations.

In the wider framework of the subject of our debate
today, we would encourage the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General to continue to work with
national authorities in developing capacities to deal
with children in armed conflict. Support for the efforts
of national authorities to ensure accountability should
be a key focus area. The monitoring and reporting
mechanism of the United Nations envisages the
involvement of and close cooperation with the country
concerned for its effective functioning, and can play a
useful role in this regard.

It is also important that United Nations access
to non-State armed groups be carried under the
cooperation framework between the United Nations
and the Government concerned. It is imperative in this
regard that action plans signed between the concerned
Governments and the United Nations be implemented
rigorously.

United Nations disarmament, demobilization, and
rehabilitation and security sector reform programmes,
among others, must focus on guaranteeing the safe
return of children and their reintegration into society.
We believe that the United Nations Peacebuilding

Fund can be used to formulate projects to focus on the
reintegration of children affected by armed conflict.

There is one issue regarding the report of the
Secretary-General before us today (S/2013/245) on
which my delegation would like to join others in
expressing concern.

Paragraph 16 of resolution 1379 (2001) requests the
Secretary-General to report on situations that are on
the Security Council's agenda or that may be brought to
the attention of the Security Council by the Secretary
General, in accordance with Article 99 of the Charter,
which specifically limit such issues to those that, in
his opinion, "threaten the maintenance of international
peace and security". All subsequent resolutions, which
draw upon paragraph 16 of resolution 1379 (2001), have
reiterated this framework for the Secretary-General's
report. However, we note with concern that despite that
clearly spelt-out mandate, the report of the Secretary-
General includes issues that cannot be considered a
threat to the maintenance of international peace and
security, as laid down in Article 99 of the Charter.

In our view, by going beyond its mandate, the
Secretary-General's report has the potential to divert
our already scarce resources in dealing with the issue
of children and armed conflict to areas beyond the
parameters of Security Council resolutions on the
subject. We request the Council to take note of this
concern while considering the report.

In conclusion, let me reiterate India's strong
support for the objectives set out in Security Council
resolutions on the issue of children and armed conflict,
and our continued commitment to helping achieve these
objectives.

