Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): We would
like to thank Mr. Abou Moussa for presenting the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/671) and, in
that regard, reiterate Togo's support for his work as
Head of the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (UNOCA) in a very difficult situation.

The report before us clearly notes that some
Central African countries have continued their efforts
to strengthen stability, democracy, the rule of law and
the political and economic governance. The holding
of calm legislative, parliamentary and local elections
in Equatorial Guinea and Cameroon are a testimony
to that. The same goes for the military defeat of the
Mouvement du 23 mars in eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo, where that rebel group has committed
many atrocities and seriously violated human rights
and international humanitarian law.

The hope for the unprecedented peace in that part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, marked
by almost two decades of recurring and very bloody
tragic conflict, is clearly the result of the new strategy
of the United Nations and regional countries to
establish lasting peace, security and cooperation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes
Region.

We therefore hope that the talks in Kampala will
bring about the signing of a peace agreement to put
an end to the conflict once and for all by ensuring
accountability for the perpetrators of human rights
violations and international humanitarian law in
line with the 14 November presidential statement
(S/PRST/2013/17).

While there is now a wave of optimism in some
countries of the region, others, such as the Central
African Republic, continue to face tragic situations
and many security and humanitarian challenges.
Indeed, since the forceful seizure of power by the
Seleka rebellion, chaos has reigned in Central African
Republic. The current situation, which is marked by
communal and interreligious clashes, leads us to warn
that if the international community does not intervene
in the most robust possible way, the Central African
Republic risks falling into total anarchy.

Given that situation, we commend the work of
the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS), the African Union, the United Nations
and other actors and partners of the Central African
Republic to enhance security for civilians, howsoever
slightly, and provide the required humanitarian
assistance to hundreds of thousands of refugees and
internally displaced persons. Moreover, we believe that
a return to constitutional order through the holding of
free and democratic elections within a reasonable time
frame is one way for the Central African Republic to
emerge from crisis, and we express our gratitude to all
those working to that end.

Moreover, the decision to deploy the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic (MISCA), and most importantly the adoption
by the Council of resolution 2121 (2013) shed light on
the measures taken by the international community to
face the threat of the destabilization of the entire region
if instability and violence were to take root in Central
African Republic.

However, given the current situation, it goes
without saying that MISCA will not be effective
without the strong financial and logistical support ofthe
United Nations, in particular, and of the international
community. Such support must become a reality. In
this respect, my country aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of France on the situation in
the Central African Republic.

As confirmed by the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2013/671), the efforts ofthe international community
have certainly weakened the Lord's Resistance Army
(LRA), but that armed group still has the capacity to
cause problems, especially in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Central African Republic. In the
Central African Republic in particular, the prevailing
situation has had a negative impact on the fight against
the LRA, which has concentrated most of its fighters
there, posing an even greater threat to the civilian
population, especially women and children. An attack
by that armed group was even witnessed in South
Sudan, although the country had seen no LRA attack
since the second half of 2011.

However, we welcome the fact that progress
has been made in recent months in the fight against
the LRA. Among those advances, we would cite the
operationalization of the Regional Task Force and the
approval granted to the South Sudanese army to track
LRA fighters within the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The results obtained thus far show that if the
various stakeholders involved in this struggle, including
donors and the international community, were to deploy
greater financial and logistic efforts, the LRA would be
totally destroyed.

However, if that struggle is to be successful, the
Chief of the LRA, Joseph Kony, and his principal
lieutenants must be caught and brought to justice. To
that end, it remains essential that all States of the region
enhance their cooperation in executing the international
arrest warrants issued against these criminals. Their
arrest would also allow for a rapid surrender of fighters,
who should thereafter be supported through a properly
managed process of disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation and reintegration.

Despite the efforts made and tangible results
achieved here and there, the Central African region
still faces substantial challenges. Sea piracy is without
a doubt among such challenges. We welcome the efforts
being made by the countries concerned in that respect,
with the support of various partners, and believe that
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
should be afforded the appropriate support to promote
a rapid implementation of the regional strategy against
that phenomenon.

We also express our serious concern about the
poaching and killing of elephants and other wildlife
that are taking place in some countries of the region.
Obviously, the sale of ivory and other products from
such poaching is a primary source of financing for the
activities of criminal groups and rebels. We believe
that the fight against that growing phenomenon must
involve actions upstream and down. In other words,
urgent measures must be taken not only in countries
where poaching is rampant, but also in countries of
transit and destination for the products of poaching.
In this respect, we call upon the States concerned to
strengthen their cooperation in the fight against such
acts and to enhance, without delay and with the support
of partners, security measures in parks and other
protected areas where these animals live.

In that regard, we welcome the decision of the
United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa, at its thirty-sixth
ministerial meeting held in Kigali from 20 to 23 August,
to include the issue of the fight against poaching on
the agenda of its next meeting. We further welcome the
launch, at the high-level meeting co-hosted by Gabon
and Germany, on the sidelines of the General Assembly
at its sixty-eighth session, a three-year fundraising
programme to fight poaching and illegal trafficking
in endangered species. The combination of all those
initiatives will surely curb that phenomenon, which
not only threatens the survival of protected species but
above all feeds conflict in the region.

