Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): First of all, I would
like to congratulate you, Sir, and your team on the
successful completion of your presidency. This month
we welcomed the six newly elected members of the
Security Council, and the important initiative that you
took to organize a flag installation ceremony for the
first time is very much welcomed and appreciated. We
hope the ceremony will be maintained as a tradition in
the years to come.

Substantively speaking, January has indeed been a
very busy month and a great deal has been accomplished.
The effort you, Sir, made in bringing the issue of
Afghanistan and the Central Asia region to the fore is
commendable. We also welcome the adoption of the
press statement on the United Nations Regional Centre
for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia (SC/13179)
for the first time in some time. The visit to Kabul
afforded Council members an opportunity to have a
better appreciation of the situation in Afghanistan. The
high-level briefing on non-proliferation (see S/PV.8160)
also allowed us to have an exchange of views on
practical confidence-building measures to de-escalate
growing tensions and preserve the international
non-proliferation regime.

Today I speak on behalf of three African members
of the Council, and I would like to highlight the
discussion we had over the past month, in particular
with regard to issues of peace and security in Africa.

On 9 January the Security Council discussed the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(see S/PV.8153). One year after the signing of the
Comprehensive and Inclusive Political Agreement of
31 December 2016, the deep divisions that remain on
its implementation and the tense political atmosphere
that prevails in the country are a source of concern.
The deteriorating security and humanitarian situation
is also worrisome. There was broad consensus among
Council members on the importance of accelerating
the full implementation of the 31 December agreement,
which remains the only viable framework for resolving
the current political impasse and for doing everything
possible to ensure that the elections scheduled for
23 December take place in a free, fair, peaceful and
credible manner.

The critical importance of enhanced coordination
among the United Nations, the African Union, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
the Southern African Development Community and
other partners in supporting the implementation of
the 31 December agreement and the electoral process
was underscored. That and other relevant points are
covered in the press statement issued by the Council on
16 in January (SC/13163), which sent a clear message
to the Congolese parties to reject violence and address
their differences peacefully. Resolving problems of
violence in eastern and central Democratic Republic of
the Congo, ensuring the rule of law and accountability
were identified as priorities to facilitate the necessary
conditions for the conduct of the elections.

On 10 January, the Council received a briefing on
the situation in Darfur and the activities of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) (see S/PV.8155). It was noted that the
security situation in Darfur continues to show marked
progress and that the Government is consolidating
State authority across Darfur. The weapons-collection
programme launched by the Government is also said
to have consolidated the prevailing relative peace and
stability in Darfur. However, concern was expressed
about the lack of progress in the peace process.
With regard to UNAMID, the assessment report
presented by the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission and the Secretary-General on phase one
of the reconfiguration of the mission (S/2018/12) was
discussed. We welcome the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2018/4) adopted this morning, which reflects
the consensus of the Council on the situation in Darfur
and the reconfiguration of UNAMID.

On 11 January, the Security Council received a
briefing on the six-month report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel (UNOWAS) (see S/PV.8156). The briefing
allowed the Council to reflect on the political, peace
and security situation and the humanitarian situation in
West Africa and the Sahel. The presidential statement
adopted yesterday (S/PRST/2018/3) reflects the salient
points raised during the Council's discussions and
its recognition of the role of UNOWAS in supporting
efforts by national and local actors to sustain peace.

The Security Council discussed the situation in
Libya on 17 January (see S/PV.8159). Council members
reiterated their support for the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya and his work to facilitate the
implementation of the United Nations action plan. It
was acknowledged that the road ahead would not be
easy. The importance of further galvanizing the support
of the Libyans themselves and of the international
community to bring about a Libyan-led political
solution, under the auspices of the United Nations, was
very much underscored.

On 23 January the Council received a briefing on the
situation in Mali and the activities of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (see S/PV.8163). It was an opportunity for the
Council to welcome the renewed commitment of the
Malian parties to the expeditious implementation of all
of their remaining obligations under the Agreement for
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali by the end of March,
through the adoption of a revised timetable. However,
serious concern was expressed about persistent delays
in the full implementation of key provisions of the
Agreement. Council members underscored the urgent
need to deliver tangible and visible peace dividends to
the population in the north and other parts of Mali in
order to preserve the relevance of the agreement and
prevent the reversal of the gains achieved thus far.
They expressed their intention to follow the situation
closely and to respond with appropriate steps within the
framework of resolution 2374 (2017), should the parties
not implement the commitments made in accordance
with the new timetable. We hope the press statement
issued by the Council on 24 January (SC/13177) will
send the right message to the parties in that regard.

On 24 January the members of the Security
Council deliberated on the situation in Somalia (see S/PV.8165). While progress on the political, security
and economic reforms was welcomed, the importance
of making progress on key issues in 2018, including on
the constitutional review, elections, fiscal federalism
and power- and resource-sharing, was underscored.
However, concern was raised about the ongoing
instability in Somalia, and Council members urged
all parties to resolve political differences through
peaceful dialogue.

With regard to the conditions-based transition plan,
the Council reaffirmed the importance of accelerating
the implementation of the national security architecture
while focusing on the gradual transfer of lead security
responsibility from the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) to the Somali Government. In
that regard, members underlined the importance of
close consultation among the Federal Government,
the federal member states, the African Union and
the troop-contributing countries, the United Nations
and international partners to ensure a coordinated
approach to implementing conditions-based planning
and financing. The joint efforts by the United Nations
and the African Union to explore options for financing
AMISOM. was also noted.

Last but not least, the Council received a briefing
on the situation in South Sudan (see S/PV.8166). The
security situation in South Sudan remains fragile,
and the dire humanitarian situation continues to be of
serious concern. The signing of the Agreement on the
Cessation of Hostilities, Protection of Civilians and
Humanitarian Access was welcomed, but its violation
by the parties is dimming prospects for progress in
ending the conflict. The members of the Council
stressed that all violations must be investigated and
that those responsible held accountable. In that regard,
the role of the Ceasefire and Transitional Security
Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism in verifying
those violations was appreciated. Maintaining the unity
of the Council, as expressed in its latest presidential
statement (S/PRST/2018/4) in urging the parties to
participate in the High-level Revitalization Forum
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) and live up to the commitments they made,
was underscored.

On the margins of the thirtieth African Union
(AU) Summit, a series of meetings were held in Addis
Ababa, including the meeting of the leaders of the
United Nations, AU and IGAD as part of maintaining
unity of purpose among the three organizations in
the search for lasting peace, security and stability in
South Sudan. The hope and expectation is that it would
provide renewed impetus to the second phase of the
High-level Revitalization Forum, which is scheduled to
start early next month. We look forward to receiving a
briefing from the Secretary-General on that and other
related issues under the incoming presidency of the
Kingdom of Kuwait, to which we wish the best of luck
and success.

