Mr. Ayewah (Nigeria): The Secretary-General's
eleventh progress report (S/1995/473) dated 10 June 1995,
on the United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia
(UNOMIL) presents a dismal and fairly depressing picture
of the current situation in Liberia. It underscores in
particular the continuing political, military and
humanitarian difficulties confronting the country and the
necessity to further explore modalities for advancing the
peace process.

None the less, we must place on record the value of
the continuing efforts of States members of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) in
moving forward the peace process in Liberia, including
the recent ECOWAS summit of the Committee of Nine,
which was held in Abuja, Nigeria, from 17 to 20 May
1995. Although the summit was unable to record the
expected breakthrough in all aspects of the Liberian
political crisis, it did, in our view, produce substantial
agreements on a number of contentious issues, including
the composition of the Council of State. Moreover, it
reaffirmed the commitment and determination of the
Heads of State and Government of ECOWAS member
States to assist the Liberian people in bringing peace to
their country.

While it recognizes the limited progress that was
made in Abuja, my delegation cannot but restate its
disappointment at the inability of the Liberian factions
and political leaders to rise above their individual
ambitions, in the higher interest of peace, stability and
national reconciliation, by committing themselves to the
implementation of the agreements they reached and
signed - from Cotonou through Akosombo to Accra. As
we have stated on several occasions, we see it as true and

 

self-evident that the Liberian factions and political leaders
bear the ultimate responsibility for finding a lasting solution
to their political crisis.

The efforts of ECOWAS and of the international
community can only be catalytic and complementary to
those of Liberians themselves. It therefore behoves the
Liberians to take advantage of the window of opportunity
offered by the current positive momentum of the peace
process and the cooperation being extended to them by the
international community and ECOWAS, especially through
its Monitoring Group (ECOMOG).

ECOMOG, we are proud to state, represents a first-
case initiative by a subregional organization within the
ambit of regional arrangements in crisis management and
conflict resolution in respect of a situation that threatened
not only the survival of a country but also regional and
international peace and security. This no doubt gives
practical expression to the cooperation envisaged in Chapter
VIII of the United Nations Charter between regional
organizations and the United Nations in the maintenance of
international peace and security. The initiative of ECOMOG
in Liberia was a pre-emptive bid to avoid chaos,
destabilization and the total destruction of a country. It is
a significant contribution to the peace process in that
country. We are certain that, but for the timely intervention
of ECOMOG, the history of Liberia would today be
significantly different. These efforts therefore deserve to be
acknowledged, encouraged and fully supported, and not
construed or presented in any way to suggest that they
constitute an impediment to the peace process. In this
connection, we see merit in the concertation of efforts and
the harmonization of views of all concerned in the search
for solutions to the Liberian question.

With respect to the mandate of UNOMIL, my
delegation had hoped for a renewal of at least three months,
until 30 September 1995, as recommended by the
Secretary-General in his report. In our view, such a time-
frame is the minimum required for the Liberian parties to
deliver fully on the new commitments they undertook in
Abuja, as well as to enable the consultations that are
currently taking place in the subregion, including the
projected meeting of the Foreign Ministers of the
Committee of Nine, to fructify. We are of the view that any
undue shortening of the period would send a negative
message to the factions in Liberia and could result in a
full-scale resumption of fratricidal warfare.

UNOMIL's presence in Liberia is important not so
much for its force level, which we would have wished to
see at full strength, as for its symbolic and psychological
implication as a demonstration of continued United
Nations interest and involvement in the Liberian peace
process. Any precipitate withdrawal or draw-down of
UNOMIL's force level would send a wrong message to
the Liberian people and the other countries of the
subregion by conveying the impression that the United
Nations was abandoning them in their hour of need. We
are encouraged that, at least for now, there is no such
intention on the part of the United Nations.

Equally important is the fact that the role of
UNOMIL in Liberia can have form and consistency only
if ECOMOG is enabled fully to discharge its obligations
and responsibilities in the territory. There is therefore a
need to assist ECOMOG with logistics and financial
resources so that it can deliver on its commitments.
Without a viable ECOMOG, UNOMIL's role and
effectiveness in Liberia will be seriously constrained. We
need to avoid this possibility.

As we anticipate a continued and reinvigorated
United Nations presence in Liberia, let me state that my
Government stands ready, together with other members of
ECOWAS, to participate in the consultations that the
Secretary-General intends to undertake prior to making
his recommendations to the Security Council on the future
of UNOMIL.

The unresolved political crisis in Liberia remains
worrisome to the subregion. We therefore call on the
Liberian factions and political leaders to make earnest
efforts towards the full and immediate implementation of
the Cotonou, Akosombo and Accra agreements, as a
significant starting-point, as well as the agreements
reached in Abuja, particularly regarding the composition
of the Council of State. We further call on them to make
additional but sustained efforts towards the installation of
the Council of State, the re-establishment of a
comprehensive cease-fire and the demobilization of all
forces. We expect no less from them. They must be
reminded that the patience and resources of the region
and those of the international community are wearing
thin. They must accept the logic of peace.

My Government has spared no efforts in contributing
to the search for peace in Liberia. It will continue to do
so, even within the constraints of its own limited
resources, in the hope that the Liberian people will soon
be able to resume their normal life and embark on a
process of national reconciliation, reconstruction and
rehabilitation.

 

In view of the foregoing, my delegation supports the
intent of this draft resolution and will vote in favour of it.

