Mr. Koncke (spoke in Spanish): I am honoured to
participate in this open debate of the Security Council
on behalf of the Secretary General of the Organization
of American States (OAS). At the outset, I thank the
President of the Security Council for his initiative to
address an issue of such importance as the fight against
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
especially in the context of the review of resolution
1540 (2004).

OAS thanks the Kingdom of Spain for its strong
work as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) to ensure a broad and inclusive
review of the resolution based on consensus - a
critical task to which this open debate will undoubtedly
contribute significantly.

Since the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004) more
than a decade ago, the Organization of American
States, through its Secretariat for Multidimensional
Security and the Inter-American Committee against
Terrorism (CICTE), has directed its efforts towards
a regional framework of cooperation to enable the
effective implementation of the resolution by member
States, taking their needs into account and promoting
the strategic partnership between the OAS and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), its Group of Experts and the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs. The Organization of
American States is endowed with the Inter-American
Convention against Terrorism, which is the basic
legal instrument that ensures the best complement
between universal and regional treaties and other
sources of obligations in force in the matter, such as the
aforementioned resolution.

One of the most prominent aspects of resolution
1540 (2004) is that concerning export controls of
dual-use materials, equipment and technologies. The
Latin American and Caribbean region is dynamic, with
diverse levels of economic growth and activities that
contribute significantly to international trade. Faced
with this reality, the OAS seeks and promotes a good
export control system that also acts as an incentive
for more prosperous and secure trade and investment,
which play a crucial part in the economic growth of its
countries and is relevant to other strategic areas, such
as the financial, tourism and services sectors. Having
appropriate regulatory and institutional frameworks to
promote trade and investment also strengthens border
controls, security and air, land and martime transport
and its critical infrastructure .

OAS is convincedthat there is a shared responsibility
among States, international organizations, the private
sector, the scientific sector and society as a whole
in, first, preventing non-State actors from acquiring
dual-use material for criminal ends; secondly,
promoting greater understanding of the benefits of
promoting secure trade and investment as the engine
of community growth; and thirdly, increasing the
capacities of all stakeholders to achieve these purposes.

Since 2014, OAS has promoted the development and
implementation of national action plans in the Americas
as tools that complement national architectures
to combat the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. CICTE also promotes ongoing awareness
of resolution 1540 (2004) throughout the hemisphere.
Currently, OAS is supporting the efforts of 10 countries
of the region in that field, including Panama, with its
strong commitment to the fight against proliferation,
manifested in its willingness to host the next regional
conference on the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) and to assume the CICTE chairmanship for the
period 2017-2018, in addition to hosting, together with
OAS, a side event on non-proliferation on the margins
of the seventy-first session of the General Assembly.

I conclude by sharing some suggestions based on
our regional experience. The cooperation of regional
organizations should be instrumental in contributing to
the fight against proliferation and terrorism.

The legal dimension, by defining offences related
to the proliferation and financing of weapons of
mass destruction, as well as the enactment of laws
on strategic trade and export control, should become
a key component in the efforts of States parties. The
implementation of the resolution should reconcile the
needs of international security and strategic and safe
trade. The efforts deployed by the CICTE and the
OAS to that end should not be seen as isolated; rather,
they are linked with the four strategic pillars of the
OAS - democracy, human rights, comprehensive
development and multidimensional security - all of
which falls under the established banner of promoting
increasingly expanded rights for a greater number
of people.

Let me conclude my remarks by expressing the full
confidence of the OAS in the idea that today's open
debate will make a vital contribution to the success of
the review ofresolution 1540 (2004) and its future in the
fight against proliferation, to which the organization I
represent remains fully committed.

