Mrs. Grau (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President, for having organized this
important debate.

The proliferation of small arms and light weapons
arising from their illicit trade has devastating effects on
peace, security and development in Central Africa,
both in countries in conflict and in those at peace. In
that region, Switzerland has long cooperated with
Burundi. Our commitment is currently being furthered
through our chairmanship of the country-specific
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission for
that country. My statement will be based on our
experience in the context of our activities in Burundi. I
will address five points.

First, the regulation of the trade in small arms and
light weapons illicit by international instruments at the
global, regional and subregional levels plays an
indispensable role in the fight against the proliferation
of such weapons. We strongly encourage all Member
States to implement and strengthen these instruments.
In this respect, the negotiation of a comprehensive and
legally binding arms trade treaty would represent a
great step forward.

Secondly, among our priorities is the effective
implementation of existing instruments relating to
small arms and light weapons, such as the Programme
of Action and the International Tracing Instrument. The
Fourth Biennial Meeting of States to Consider the
Implementation of the Programme of Action at the
national, regional and global levels will be an excellent
occasion for Member States to step up their efforts.

Thirdly, arms collection campaigns have proven
to be useful. However, buy-back programmes risk
being counterproductive if they do not reduce demand.
They may actually stimulate demand if the reward is
greater than the going price for a weapon. Such
initiatives should also extend to ammunition and
explosives and provide for the immediate destruction
of the equipment retrieved. Finally, all States must
make every possible effort to respect the rule of law,
10-28131

ensure security for all their communities without
discrimination of any kind, and complement civilian
weapons collection programmes with confidence-
building measures.

Fourthly, it will not be enough to address the
supply in light weapons if we want to achieve
sustainable improvements in the security situation in
regions that are particularly affected by armed
violence. We underscore the need to intervene on the
demand side as well - that is, to take a comprehensive
approach to the problem of armed violence.

Finally, in the Secretary-General's recent report
(A/64/228) on promoting development through the
reduction and prevention of armed violence, the
Secretary-General calls for increased international
efforts to prevent and reduce armed violence. He
makes several very useful recommendations. He also
welcomes the efforts undertaken in the framework of
the Geneva Declaration on Armed Violence and
Development, a diplomatic initiative launched jointly
by Switzerland and the United Nations Development
Programme in 2006 and signed by 108 countries to
date. That process supports Governments and civil
society in achieving measurable reductions in armed
violence, both in conflict and non-conflict settings, by
2015. We invite all countries that have not yet done so
to sign that instrument and to participate actively in the
process at the regional and global levels.

I underscore once again the importance of
Member States and international organizations taking a
coherent, coordinated and complementary approach to
the fight against armed violence in Central Africa by
dealing with both the demand and the supply sides of
the issue.

