Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we thank Mr. John Ging for his valuable briefing
and we commend the efforts made by all humanitarian
workers in Syria and elsewhere in the world. On behalf
of the State of Kuwait, I would also like to endorse
statement delivered by the representative of Sweden.
However, I have additional points that I would like to
briefly address.

The province of Idlib, which is inhabited by nearly
3 million people, is in the spotlight as a result ofvarious
reports pointing to a potential military escalation there.
Any escalation would undoubtedly exacerbate the
ongoing humanitarian crisis, and we urge everybody
to abide by the de-escalation agreement. The military
option in Idlib would have disastrous humanitarian
consequences, especially in light of the fact that half
of its population is made up of internally displaced
persons. In addition, millions of people in Idlib and
the neighbouring areas are in need of humanitarian
assistance. Diplomatic efforts must therefore be
stepped up by all actors at the highest level to avoid
bloody battle and further bloodshed, so as to prevent
the recurrence of the disasters that occurred in Aleppo
and eastern Ghouta.

We are convinced that the cross-border assistance
mechanism constitutes a vital part of the humanitarian
assistance in Syria, where millions rely on that
machinery, which was able to deliver humanitarian
assistance to more than 600,000 people in July. That
bears witness to its effectiveness and importance and to
the need to renew its mandate in due time.

Millions of Syrians have been displaced during the
past few years as a result of the war and the deliberate
destruction of residential areas and vital infrastructure
such as roads, hospitals and schools, as well as violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law. All
Syrian refugees have the right to go back to their homes,
and we reiterate what we have said previously and what
the Secretary-General of the United Nations has said in
his monthly report about the need for safe, voluntary
and dignified return of refugees to their homes.

The Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mark
Lowcock, is currently visiting Syria, and we hope to
see more cooperation from the Syrian authorities with
the United Nations and its specialized humanitarian
agencies by allowing unhindered and effective
humanitarian access to help all people in need in
Syria. In that context, we recall that six months ago the
Council unanimously adopted resolution 2401 (2018),
calling for an immediate ceasefire, the delivery of
humanitarian assistance and the evacuation of injured
persons. Unfortunately, however, that resolution has
not been effectively implemented on the ground. It is
frustrating that resolutions that are not implemented
are useless and cannot help innocent civilians. History
will not forget the Security Council's inability to
shoulder its responsibilities for putting an end to
flagrant violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law throughout the Syrian crisis and to
ensure accountability.

In conclusion, we all need to step up our efforts to
make further tangible progress on the issue of Syria.
We hope that the high-level diplomacy which we have
seen recently will lead to a comprehensive settlement,
in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva
communique (S/2012/522, annex). The settlement must
be approved by all components of the Syrian people and
meet their legitimate aspirations, while preserving the
unity, independence and sovereignty of Syria.

