Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania): We
join in welcoming the Foreign Minister of Peru. We
also thank Ms. Hoppe for presenting the report of the
Secretary-General.

The United Republic of Tanzania welcomes the
continuing interest of the Security Council in the
challenges posed by illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. Small arms present one of the severe
problems facing Africa, especially our region - the
Great Lakes region.

Since the start of international efforts to address
small arms problems, Tanzania has been a strong
advocate of developing realistic and practical measures
designed to address the specific needs and capacities of
each situation and region. We see the Security Council
as having a special role in this effort, for conflicts
attract arms, whether legal or illegal. While we must
double our efforts to curb the flow of arms, the
prevention of conflicts would significantly curtail the
demand for small and illicit arms.

On the part of the countries of the Great Lakes
region, the Dar-es-Salaam Declaration on Peace,
Security, Democracy and Development in the Great
Lakes Region places the problem of the proliferation of
illicit arms and light weapons among the most urgent
that need to be tackled. The signatories pledged to
promote common policies and to put an end to the
proliferation of illicit small arms and light weapons
and, in that regard, to harmonize and ensure existing
agreements and mechanisms. As a result, we view the
Programme of Action adopted by United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons, and the various presidential statements
by the Council that have sought to bring greater
international attention to and action on the menace
caused by small arms and light weapons, as crucial
components of our efforts.

These efforts have borne results in the form of the
Nairobi Declaration and the Nairobi Protocol on Small
Arms as clear testimony of the importance that the
Great Lakes countries attach to the problems posed by
the proliferation of small arms and light weapons. In
keeping with the Programme of Action, these efforts
and actions need to be supported.

We recognize that differences exist with regard to
the appropriateness of binding norms and standards for
small arms and lights weapons. In our view, when
States have established international norms on nuclear
non-proliferation and adopted treaties banning
chemical and biological weapons and anti-personnel
mines, it is only right that we should work toward a
negotiated, legally binding instrument that establishes
a stringent and verifiable regime to render illicit trade
much more difficult.

We also recognize that the Security Council
cannot seek a role greater than that prescribed in its
mandate. However, it cannot afford to remain aloof
when its intensive efforts in conflict prevention or in
peacekeeping are undermined by the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons. Presidential statements
that brought little change in the conduct of actors on
the ground require a more determined resolve to act. In
our view, such resolve and action would best be served
by a universal, binding framework on small arms and
light weapons.

In spite of the absence of a stronger global
framework for arresting the destabilizing effects of
small arms and light weapons, much can be achieved if
the recommendations in the Secretary-General's report
are implemented. As it is, it seems that little in that
direction has been achieved. The fact that present
proposals in the report are a reiteration of past
recommendations illustrates a lack of progress in many
aspects. The Council needs to see how it can help
progress in those elements of the proposals that bear on
its mandate.

We are mindful that the Second Summit of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes is due to
take place in Nairobi later this year. It will have an
important dimension in support of our subregional
initiative on small arms and light weapons. It will be a
seminal complement to the United Nations Programme
of Action, as well as to an issue that preoccupies the
Security Council. We should therefore collectively
support the Conference as a vehicle for achieving our
desired goals in combating illicit small arms and light
weapons.

