Mr. Keita (Mali) (spoke in French): In my capacity
as coordinator of the States of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG) and on behalf of my delegation, I should like
to convey our deep appreciation to you, Sir, for having
convened this important meeting of the Security Council
on Sierra Leone. We called for this meeting under the
mandate that the heads of State of our organization,
meeting in Abuja on 9 May, gave the Secretary-General
of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) to convey to
the ambassadors of the Africa Group in New York to do.

We welcome the Secretary-General of the United
Nations here and wish to express our deep condolences to
the families of the Blue Helmets who have given their
lives for the noble cause of peace.

The African continent, its western subregion in
particular, is deeply concerned by recent developments in
the Sierra Leone crisis. In truth, the hostage-taking of
soldiers of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone

 

(UNAMSIL) by the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) is
a defiance of the international community and cannot be
tolerated. ECOWAS and Mali condemn it firmly and
demand the unconditional and immediate release of the
hostages, as well as the restoration of their weapons. The
turn of events not only threatens international peace and
security in that African subregion, but also damages the
United Nations credibility with respect to peacekeeping
operations, particularly in Africa.

In the context of the flagrant violations of the Lome
Agreement, which governs the peace process in Sierra
Leone, I wish to address several issues that my and other
African delegations consider to need the priority attention
of the Security Council.

First, my delegation wishes to emphasize that the RUF
leader is the party primarily responsible for the resumed
civil war in Sierra Leone. Accordingly, we wish to state
that, if the hostages are killed, the RUF and its leader will
forfeit the amnesty benefits granted under the Lome
Agreement and prosecuted for war crimes and crimes
against humanity.

Secondly, by taking UNAMSIL soldiers hostage,
Foday Sankoh and his movement are challenging the
international community that must be met speedily. The
current mandate of the Mission cannot be discharged in
View of the new situation. We therefore call on the Security
Council to revise the current mandate of the peacekeeping
force, which would then become a peace-enforcement
mission with the manpower and armaments appropriate to
its mandate. This new legal framework for intervention
should not imperil the Lome Agreement, which my
delegation considers to be the appropriate context for
settling the civil war that has scourged Sierra Leone for
more than 10 years.

Thirdly, as the Chairman of ECOWAS, Mali wishes
to convey our determination to oppose by every possible
means, including military, any assumption of power by
force in Sierra Leone. We stand ready to make available to
the United Nations veteran forces with experience in the
field to strengthen the peacekeeping Mission and restore
peace in Sierra Leone. Any failure in that country would be
felt deeply throughout the region and damage the credibility
of the Security Council.

Fourthly, my delegation is deeply concerned for the
fate of civilians and displaced persons. We call for
immediate steps to be taken in order to protect them and to
ensure that they can be freely assisted throughout the
territory of Sierra Leone.

We warn the leaders of the RUF not to make any
attempt to invade Freetown; that would be an affront to
the subregion and would be answered by force, whatever
the cost.

In conclusion, I would like to recall that this is a
critical situation. The Security Council must act and act
quickly, because what is involved is the lives of millions
of persons who have placed their trust in the United
Nations. We cannot betray the faith and hope that they
have placed in our Organization. Any failure of the
United Nations would be fraught with consequences for
the continuation of peacekeeping operations in Africa.

