Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): The political,
humanitarian and security situation in Somalia
continues to pose a major threat not just to peace and
development in Somalia but also to regional peace and
global security. The international community has thus
far been dealing with the situation in Somalia in a
piecemeal manner. We therefore welcome the initiative
of the Chinese presidency to convene this timely
debate to discuss a comprehensive strategy for the
realization of peace and security in Somalia.

We thank His Excellency Prime Minister
Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed of Somalia, the
Secretary-General and Ambassador Diarra of the
African Union for their statements. We also thank His
Excellency Mr. Henry Bellingham for his message
today, and we appreciate the participation of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ambassador
Mahiga through video link.

The end of the transition period, on 20 August, is
fast approaching. It is critical that the Transitional
Federal Government (TFG), with the assistance of the
international community, redouble its efforts in
completing the remaining transitional tasks. This
would require the full implementation of the Djibouti
peace process and the road map for the implementation
of the remaining transition tasks announced by Prime
Minister Mohamed. All efforts should be geared
towards the completion of the constitution-building
process, outreach to those outside the Djibouti process
and political reconciliation. This would also require
unity of purpose among the Somali political leadership
as they address these daunting challenges. National
ownership over Somalia's future dispensation remains
critical for ensuring the sustainability of these
processes.

My delegation welcomes and fully supports the
efforts of Special Representative Mahiga in engaging
key stakeholders during the remainder of the
transitional period and on post-transitional
arrangements. We encourage the Special
Representative to engage in broad political
consultations with all stakeholders in Somalia, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and the African Union. The inclusivity of the future
dispensation in Somalia remains critical for ensuring
the sustainability of these processes. In that regard,
rapprochement must be extended to all Somalis who
wish to contribute towards a political solution in
Somalia. Somaliland, Puntland and other local entities

11-2583]
also have an important role to play in the political
process in Somalia.

South Africa welcomes the recent adoption of the
joint regional strategy by the United Nations and IGAD.
This strategy seeks to promote a common approach to
political, security and humanitarian challenges, as well
as to deal with institutional and financial challenges
affecting the Somali peace process and the
management of the TFG's transition. We believe that
this will give further impetus to galvanizing efforts by
key stakeholders in managing the transition.

We are convinced that the success of the
Transitional Federal Government depends on its ability
to deliver political and socio-economic dividends and
provide security for its people. Recent events
elsewhere clearly show that human security is key to
stability and sustainable development in the long run.
Efforts at the political level must therefore be
complemented with the delivery of basic services to
the people of Somalia. We call on the international
community to provide all of the necessary support to
the TFG in that regard. This will not only enhance the
credibility and legitimacy of the TFG but also address
the plight of Somali citizens.

South Africa is deeply concerned about the
deteriorating humanitarian situation in Somalia, where
it is reported that hundreds of civilians are killed and
thousands of casualties are admitted to hospital on a
monthly basis, with the number of internally displaced
people alarmingly high. We encourage the international
community to contribute to the 2011 Somalia
humanitarian appeal, amounting to $529 million, to
alleviate this human suffering.

The efforts of the TFG and the international
community will be in vain if a conducive security
environment is not guaranteed in order to allow the
Government to focus on critical governance and
institution-building tasks in the remaining period
leading to the end of the transitional period.

Despite successes of Government forces and the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), we
regret the loss of the lives of the dozens of troops
killed around Mogadishu and its environs. Given the
severity of the security situation in Somalia, it is Vital
that AMISOM. be strengthened and supported to a level
commensurate with the severe challenges on the
ground. That should include the provision of funding
through assessed contributions for the payment of

11-2583]
troop allowances and reimbursement for contingency-
owned equipment, as well as the provision of air
capabilities and enablers to enhance the effectiveness
of AMISOM. South Africa welcomes the ongoing
support provided by bilateral partners to the Trust Fund
for AMISOM. We encourage partners to provide that
support without caveats.

A comprehensive strategy for Somalia should
take cognizance of the fact that bolstering AMISOM. is
not an end in itself. AMISOM. is undertaking the
important task of supporting the Government, but we
must do more than just keep the Government alive. The
long-term strategy must contribute to building
Government institutions to enable them to survive on
their own. Key in the fight against the armed
opposition will be the strengthening of Somalia's own
security institutions. A strong and effective Somali
Security Force will enable the Government to extend
its area of control and provide a safe environment for
facilitating an expanded United Nations presence in
Mogadishu.

With regard to piracy off the coast of Somalia,
my delegation supports the ongoing efforts to address
this challenge. We are of the view that addressing the
scourge of piracy would require a holistic approach
that addresses the underlying causes of the problem,
promotes economic opportunities and addresses the
political and security dimension of piracy. Developing
coastal income-generating activities and the fishing
industry, as well as investigations into illegal fishing
and toxic dumping allegations, should assist in
reversing the growing trend of piracy. We remain
convinced that piracy is but a symptom of the
insecurity challenges faced on land. For that challenge
to be addressed comprehensively, increased attention to
the insecurity on land must be prioritized.

The months ahead provide the TFG and the
international community a window of opportunity to
ensure that the people of Somalia are afforded the
peace and security that has escaped them for too long.
My delegation believes that renewed vigour on the part
of Somalis and the international community is required
to bring them closer to realizing that goal. The Security
Council, on its part, should continue regularized and
focused attention on all issues pertaining to Somalia, in
line with their comprehensive strategy on dealing with
the issues facing Somalia.
