Mr. McLay (New Zealand): Member States
often thank the Council presidency for convening
an important meeting, but that comment is uniquely
appropriate and uniquely meaningful for today's open
debate. New Zealand compliments the United States
on its initiative in convening this critical discussion
about a crisis that is unprecedented in scale, impact and
potential to threaten international peace and security.
We note with approval the first resolution adopted in
respect of a health emergency (resolution 2177 (2014)),
which New Zealand was pleased to sponsor.

It is not necessary to repeat the obvious, save one
alarming key fact. The Ebola virus continues to have
a devastating impact on West Africa - most notably
in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone - and it requires
a massively scaled and coordinated international
response, 20 times greater than we have at the moment,
as we were told a little earlier. That is required to
support affected and at-risk countries.

Back on 8 July, in this Chamber, we heard the then-
head of the United Nations Office for West Africa,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Said
Djinnit, warn of Ebola's alarming spread, despite some
initial successes in containment (see S/PV.7213). New
Zealand welcomes the continuation of such briefings
from regional offices, which allow for emerging threats
like this to be brought to the Council's attention. We
also welcome the United Nations action on Ebola
over recent weeks, including the Secretary-General's
announced emergency mission and the establishment
of an Operations Crisis Centre. We thank Ms. Chan for
her detailed outline of the World Health Organization's
(WHO) international response plan.

The international response to stop further Ebola
transmission and to prevent a wider spread of the virus
must be swift, it must be action-orientated, and it must
enjoy the highest level of political support. That level
of political support is, I suggest, demonstrated by
the widespread attendance at today's meeting. New
Zealand is grateful to those countries that have already
made significant contributions and to those who have
made further pledges today, including support for the
WHO, UNICEF, Medecins Sans Frontieres and others.

The African Union (AU) Peace and Security
Council has also, of course, authorized the AU's first-
ever humanitarian mission to the affected countries,
which is a commendable act of African solidarity. That
and any other regional responses must be strongly
supported.

New Zealand has heard loud and clear the message
that what is needed is an international mobilization
of significant financial contributions, resources and
expertise. New Zealand is in the midst of a general
election, to take place tomorrow, New Zealand time.
However, one of the first tasks of our new Government
will be the urgent consideration of a range of options of
what we can do to further contribute to the international
response. I should mention that, despite the constraints
of our present constitutional position, while we have
been here, I have received advice that my minister has
approved a further significant financial contribution to
the WHO.

Last month, trained New Zealand nurses deployed
to the affected subregion to contribute to response
efforts, working with the team led by the International
Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
(IFRC). In addition to that deployment of practical
expertise, New Zealand has provided funding to the
IFRC, UNICEF and WHO, including the additional
contribution I have just mentioned.

New Zealand may be geographically far from West
Africa, but we are determined to play our part to ensure
that the Governments and people of the subregion, in
particular Guineans, Liberians and Sierra Leoneans,
have the international support they require - indeed,

the international support they deserve - to control the
outbreak and to prevent the further spread of this latter-
day plague. We will do our bit.

