Mr. Stehelin (France) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank the Prosecutor for presenting her
twenty-first report.

On 31 March 2005, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1593 (2005), which noted that the situation
in the Sudan constituted a threat to international peace
and security and referred the situation in Darfur to the
International Criminal Court (ICC). In the resolution,
the Council took note of the report of the International
Commission of Inquiry on violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law in Darfur
(S/2005/60), which had established the serious and
systematic nature of the crimes in Darfur.

In its 2005 debates, the Council recalled that the
referral had been presented as a way to prevent new
atrocities by fighting against impunity and ensuring
stability in the Sudan, which was a precondition for its
development. It is useful, first of all, to return to the
origins of those debates, and in some way to the spirit
that must guide the interpretation and implementation of
the resolution. Indeed, the Council remains responsible
for the resolutions it adopts and compliance with them
by the parties concerned.

Ten years later, it is clear that the same chain of
cause and effect identified in 2005 is still feeding the
cycle of violence. As highlighted in the report of the
Prosecutor, the situation in Darfur is not improving
and has even deteriorated, the intensity of the violence
having reached one of the most alarming levels recorded
in this conflict. France is deeply concerned about
the intensification of fighting between the Sudanese
Armed Forces and rebel groups in the Jebel Marra
and Northern Darfur, in particular the aerial bombing
campaign, which indiscriminately targets civilians.

Civilians continue to be the primary victims of
a form of collective punishment, as evidenced by the
approximately 121,000 people displaced in the Jebel
Marra since January. Violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law, in particular sexual
violence, are continuing with complete impunity. In
this context, the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) is prevented from
to carrying out its mandate due to the attacks and
restrictions on access to which it is subject.

At the same time, the arrest warrants issued by the
International Criminal Court have yet to be executed.
Five individuals accused of war crimes, crimes against
humanity and, in one case, genocide continue to
evade the Court's jurisdiction. Most of them continue
to occupy the highest offices in the Sudanese State
apparatus. How is it not clear that this impunity
encourages further and renewed abuses?

While 2015 could, in humanitarian terms, be even
worse than 2014, in which 430,000 people were newly
displaced, the solutions are well known to the Council.
They include, first, the conclusion and implementation
of a political solution involving the Government and
rebel groups; secondly, effective protection of civilians
and UNAMID's exercise of its mandate; and thirdly,
unimpeded humanitarian access to civilian populations
and displaced persons.

Finally, identifying the persons responsible for
crimes and an effective fight against impunity remain
essential. We welcome the commitment of the Office of
the Prosecutor during the period covered by the report.
The Office obtained from the Pre-Trial Chamber two
decisions of non-cooperation against the Sudan, in the
Al-Bashir case on 9 March 2015, and in the Hussein
case on 26 June 2015, bringing the total to 10. We recall
the importance of States' duty to cooperate, without
which the prosecution of the most serious crimes by
the ICC will remain dead letter. As recalled by the
Prosecutor, the primary responsibility lies with the
Sudan as the State with the territorial jurisdiction to
execute the arrest warrants and cooperate with the
Court as required by resolution 1593 (2005). However,
the Sudan not only refuses to cooperate at all with the
Court, but also takes no action to allowing victims
access to independent and impartial justice.

Under these circumstances, in order to ensure
compliance with resolution 1593 (2005) and consistency
with the conditions of its adoption in 2005, the arrest
warrants be carried out. The Council must respond
to cases of non-cooperation with the Court, and the
Assembly of States Parties must remain mobilized.
In this regard, France welcomes the efforts by its
President, Mr. Sidiki Kaba. At the same time, contacts
with the persons subject to arrest warrants by the Court
must be limited to those deemed essential, in line with
the Secretary-General's policy. France calls on the
United Nations as a whole to continue to implement
that guidance.

Civilian populations were at the core of the
Security Council's approach in 2005 when resolution
1593 (2005) was adopted. They must remain so today to
bolster the Council in its struggle against impunity and
its support for UNAMID. The Hybrid Mission, which
brings together the United Nations and African Union,
is making every effort to fulfil its mandate in conditions
rendered particularly difficult by the obstacles it
systematically encounters. Some of the interested
parties would wish above all for the Mission to be
purely and simply withdrawn, with no consideration for
the actual situation on the ground. Any such approach
would be counterproductive, since its only effect would
be to make civilians even more vulnerable to the spiral
of violence, which could further destabilize the Sudan
and the region and usher in a dangerous cycle.

UNAMID must pursue clear objectives and develop
long-term planning giving it a strategic view of its
mission. Improving the situation of civilian populations
must remain its lodestar; it must also continue to
support the search for a political solution, the only kind
that will work in the long term. The Council has just
renewed the mandate of UNAMID, which all of us must
now unequivocally support in the accomplishment of
its mission. We owe that to the people of Darfur.

It is not without a sense of failure that we are
obliged to make these observations some 10 years after
the adoption of resolution 1593 (2005). Let that date,
however, remind us of the continuing relevance of the
Security Council's intentions and vision in 2005. Now
more than ever, it behoves us to put into practical effect
our decision and cooperation with the Court, to which
that resolution has fundamentally and indissolubly
linked us in the essential common objective of fighting
impunity.

