Mr. Wlosowicz (Poland): The Polish delegation is
going to vote in favour of the draft resolution authorizing
Member States to conduct the operation of a multinational
force to facilitate the immediate return of humanitarian
organizations and the effective delivery of humanitarian aid
in eastern Zaire, and to facilitate the voluntary, orderly
repatriation of refugees and displaced persons. The
objective of our action today is clear: not to let a great
humanitarian catastrophe occur.

With the state of chaos reigning in eastern Zaire,
urgently needed humanitarian aid cannot be delivered
without assuring basic security. Therefore, we express our
most sincere gratitude to the countries which have taken the
initiative to organize the multinational force on an urgent
basis and to contribute their troops to the operation. Our
special thanks go to the Government of Canada for its
brave and generous decision to lead the operation.

We truly believe that the draft resolution we are about
to adopt will provide these countries and humanitarian
organizations with the necessary framework in which to
perform the tasks they have voluntarily undertaken.

My delegation believes that with the most immediate
problems having been taken care of, the United Nations
will have to step in, and we hope that the appropriate form
for a United Nations presence will be decided soon.

We are fully aware that the operation cannot eliminate
the structural sources of the crisis in the Great Lakes
region. Such a task can be achieved only through the
long-term intensive efforts of the countries concerned,
regional African organizations and the international
community as a whole. Yet we believe that the operation
the Security Council is about to bring into being will
contribute significantly to the achievement of a sustainable
solution based on the principles of sovereignty, territorial
integrity and the inviolability of the borders of all States
concerned, as well as on respect for human rights.

In that context, I would like to stress that the African
countries have a substantial role to play in all phases of the

 

process, beginning with the humanitarian operation
currently under discussion. We welcome the results of the
Nairobi Regional Summit held on 5 November, and of the
extraordinary session of the Central Organ of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) Mechanism for
Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution, held on
11 November, which, in our View, constitute a step in that
direction.

Without losing sight of the much broader picture, at
this particular juncture we must help without delay to
ease the human tragedy in eastern Zaire and to prove our
solidarity with those who are suffering from hunger, thirst
and disease. The draft resolution before us opens the way
for action which is so dramatically called for.

