Ms. Rice (United States of America): Let me start
by thanking Ambassador Mufioz for his dedication to
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) during his tenure
as Chair, and express further appreciation to the Chairs
of the PBC's country-specific configurations for their
committed efforts.

The United States welcomes the third annual
report of the PBC (S/2009/444). We are glad to have
this opportunity to reflect on past achievements and
future challenges as we near the fifth anniversary of
the Commission's establishment.

The United States was an early supporter of the
Peacebuilding Commission. In 2005, we looked at a
15-year track record of international response to armed
conflict and we saw major gaps. We saw peace
processes at risk, not only because of the inherent
fragility of post-conflict transitions, but also because
many of our diplomatic, security, humanitarian and
development tools were not well suited to the task at
hand, or sometimes even worked at cross-purposes. We
saw a rate of relapse into conflict that was
unacceptably high. We saw development jeopardized
across the board. We saw that a third of the people
living in extreme poverty were from conflict-affected
States, and we knew that we must have been doing
something wrong. We saw that as unacceptable.
However, we were also convinced that it was and is
remediable. The Peacebuilding Commission, we
believed, could be a crucial new instrument to help us
collectively change course.
The PBC is still a young institution trying to
deliver on these expectations. The United States very
much appreciates the PBC's growing track record,
including its efforts to institute more flexible methods
of work, its success in mobilizing resources from
traditional and non-traditional donors, its commitment
to nationally driven peacebuilding strategies and its
work facilitating coordination among all stakeholders
in order to have a more concrete impact.

The third annual report documents some of these
notable achievements. In Burundi, the PBC added its
voice to those of regional institutions and others to
help create conditions to resume the political process.
In Sierra Leone, the PBC helped to broaden the donor
base. In Guinea-Bissau, the PBC supported the
organization of legislative elections and helped to
secure crucially needed funding. In the Central African
Republic, the PBC supported the national dialogue and
has helped to enhance prospects for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration. My Government also
welcomes the revised terms of reference of the
Peacebuilding Fund, which will give the Fund the
potential to be much more responsive to urgent needs.

As we approach the PBC's five-year mark, we
have the opportunity to take stock and look to the
Commission's future. We believe that the PBC has the
potential to be an important instrument for mobilizing
our best collective efforts and helping us to focus on
the most pressing requirements to keep conflict from
reigniting: helping Governments restart critical
services, generating jobs and reviving economies,
restoring the rule of law, reforming the security sector,
tackling crime and transborder causes of instability,
and putting an end to sexual and gender-based
violence. Whether in the PBC or not, these issues are
among the highest on the agenda of the United States
and on our shared agenda here at the United Nations.
We urgently need to strengthen our ways of working
together to address them.

We are committed to a serious and ambitious
review. We believe that we need to approach the
process with open minds and a practical commitment
to frank dialogue about the PBC's added value and how
to strengthen its role and impact. That includes looking
candidly at our own performance here in the Security
Council where, as we noted in July, we need to do
more to take earlier account of the peacebuilding
components of peace processes.
The past 20 years have brought tremendous
learning and experience in the peacebuilding field -
expertise that the review will need to tap. The review
should engage key stakeholders, especially regional
organizations and actors, international financial

institutions and development banks, troop- and police-
contributing countries, donors, the private sector,
academics and civil society. Of course, it will also need
to draw on the insights of the PBC's members,
especially its country-specific configurations, and we
will look to the Secretary-General's personal
leadership to mobilize ideas and expertise from across
the United Nations system. Most of all, the review
should be informed by the views and experiences of
post-conflict countries, both on and off the PBC's
agenda. Whether the PBC has something real and
lasting to offer them is the ultimate test of its success.

Let me offer two observations in closing. First,
my Government would like to underscore the
importance of timely follow-up to the Secretary-
General's report on peacebuilding in the immediate
aftermath of conflict (S/2009/304). We look forward to
progress in clarifying key peacebuilding roles and
responsibilities, which will enable the United Nations
system to build centres of excellence in critical areas.
We also welcome steady progress in the effort to meet
the so-called civilian capacity gap, with particular
attention to mobilizing talent and expertise from
developing countries. Deeper reflection on the links
among integrated peacebuilding missions, the civilian
components of peacekeeping operations and the related
activities of United Nations agencies can help to ensure
that core civilian functions are filled in the most
effective way.

Secondly, we would also underscore the value we
see in working to forge greater coherence among
United Nations peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding efforts. Throughout the past year, we
have engaged in a deepening conversation about how
to strengthen peacekeeping. As we look to future
deliberations, both on peacekeeping and the PBC
review, we see an important opportunity to forge a
closer and more dynamic link between these
interrelated efforts.

The PBC was created because of gaps in
international response that left too many countries
vulnerable to violent relapse. The PBC has helped to
shrink some of these gaps, but many remain. The
challenge we all face today is to redouble our efforts to
close those gaps.

