Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Modibo Toure, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
briefing on the evolving political situation in Guinea-
Bissau. We take note of the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2018/110) and the briefing by Mr. Mauro
Vieira, Permanent Representative of Brazil and
Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission. Russia supports the efforts
ofthe United Nations, the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
to normalize the situation in Guinea-Bissau, which is
undergoing a prolonged political, social and economic
domestic crisis.

We are concerned about the lack of tangible
progress in implementing the Conakry Agreement. We
want to emphasize how crucial the Agreement is to
mitigating the political hostility and reducing Guinea-
Bissau's potential for conflict. We urge the country's
executive and legislative representatives to focus on
forming an inclusive Government, introducing reforms,
especially in the security sector and the Constitution,
and increasing their joint efforts to prepare for
parliamentary and presidential elections. It will be
vital to strengthen the constitutional order and the rule
of law and resolve the accumulating socioeconomic
issues. We are pleased that the country's political forces
continue to act with regard for the law and that the
military has remained neutral. We have taken note of
the ECOWAS communique of 4 February on imposing
targeted sanctions on 19 members of Guinea-Bissau's
political elite.

Regarding the possibility of imposing similar
measures based on the provisions of Security Council
resolution 2048 (2012), we would like to point out that
the resolution's main aim was restoring constitutional
order, which in practical terms was achieved several
years ago now. The result is that the resolution's
sanctions measures are very outdated. In our opinion
its listing criteria have little to do with Guinea-Bissau's
current political situation, and in any case would not be
usable against participants in the political process who
are acting within the law.

We are compelled to conclude that the opinions of
the Secretary-General's report on the security sector
situation give the impression that things have been
left unsaid. It would have been more logical to discuss
how the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) is implementing
the provisions of its mandate with regard to building
Guinea-Bissau's capacity to combat transnational crime
and drug trafficking, after describing the actual state of
affairs in those areas.

In general, given the overall situation in Guinea-
Bissau, we are willing to consider the Secretary-
General's proposal to extend UNIOGBIS's mandate.
However, we believe that the Special Representative
should focus not only on helping the people of
Guinea-Bissau emerge from their political deadlock
and preparing for the parliamentary elections in May

but also on effectively addressing the root causes
of the problems in Guinea-Bissau, which lie in its
Constitution's structural contradictions. If the work of
constitutional reform is not completed by the start of the
next electoral cycle, the country risks encountering the
same problems with the new parliament and President.
