Mr. Korneliou (Cyprus): I would like to start
by congratulating the Egyptian presidency of the
Security Council for organizing today's important and
timely debate.

Cyprus aligns itself with the statement made on
behalf of the European Union and would like to add the
following remarks in its national capacity.

For more than 70 years, the United Nations has
responded to evolving peace and security challenges
by developing and adopting a wide range of tools and
instruments. Today it continues to contribute greatly to
the consolidation of peace and conflict prevention.
The 2015 reviews, which were focused on
peacekeeping operations and the peacebuilding
architecture, were all inspired by the urgent need
to strengthen the coherence of the United Nations
system as part of renewed efforts to effectively
address new threats and challenges to international
peace and security. Cyprus agrees with the common
patterns that emerged from the different reviews
and supports the call of the Secretary-General for a
comprehensive, modern and effective operational peace
architecture that encompasses prevention, conflict
resolution, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and long-term
development - the peace continuum, adapted to the
unique circumstances of each conflict or country.

Since the 19605, Cyprus has continuously benefited
from United Nations involvement, with the aim of
achieving peace and the reunification of the island,
through the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in
Cyprus (UNFICYP) and the good offices mission of
the Secretary-General. UNFICYP is an example of an
effective peacekeeping operation. Its continuation is
indispensable for as long as a settlement to the Cyprus
problem has not been found.

First, based on Cyprus' long-standing experience,
the most important priority is to stop the conflict and to
ensure it does not erupt again. However, bringing about
sustainable peace and preventing conflict are equally
important. Secondly, addressing the root causes of the
conflict should serve as the basis for United Nations
involvement. Thirdly, any review of peacekeeping
operations should be guided by the situation on the
ground. Fourthly, objectivity and impartiality are key
principles in ensuring the credibility and efficiency of
the United Nations.

It is certain that the situation in Cyprus and
prospects for peace would now be much worse had it
not been for UNFICYP's continued presence and the
United Nations involvement throughout the years.
As long as Cyprus remains under illegal military
occupation, with the presence of thousands of heavily
armed troops rendering the occupied area one of the
most densely militarized areas of the world, it is clear
that UNFICYP's presence will be absolutely necessary.
At the same time, the United Nations remains the forum
through which a settlement can be achieved, and it
should be at the forefront of all efforts.

Cyprus remains committed to reunification, as
any alternative to that does not serve the interests of
the people of Cyprus, Greek-Cypriots and Turkish-
Cypriots alike. We are ready to do our utmost in
order to overcome the deadlock and pave the way to
a comprehensive settlement that will at last reunify
Cyprus as a viable, functional State, in line with
Security Council resolutions, international law and
the European Union acquis. We are most grateful to
the Secretary-General for his tireless efforts and his
personal involvement, and for the Security Council's
strong signal of unity and support.

Recognizing the need to review peacekeeping
operations on a regular basis in order to optimize their
effectiveness and efficiency, the Government of Cyprus
gave its consent to resolution 2369 (2017), adopted in
July, which provides for a strategic review of UNFICYP
within its existing mandate. Preserving the mandate is
a prerequisite acknowledged by the Security Council
in that resolution, since the situation on the ground
remains unchanged. In that regard, we expect that the
strategic review will take place in close cooperation
with the host country, the Republic of Cyprus.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm Cyprus'
commitment to work with all States Members of the
United Nations for an enhanced peace architecture that
will ensure increased effectiveness with optimal use of
all available tools and resources.

