Mr. Valdes (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
called this public meeting of the Security Council.

Chile reiterates its support for the greatest
undertaking in the area of peace-building in the history
of the United Nations, namely, the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
in which our country is honoured to take part. We
appreciate the professionalism demonstrated by
Mr. Michael Steiner, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Kosovo, as well as by all of
UNMIK's personnel. We also wish to thank Mr. Hedi
Annabi, Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, for his detailed briefing on the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (S/2003/42l).

At the outset, I would like to convey my
Government's condemnation of the assassination of
Mr. Zoran Djindjic, Prime Minister of the Republic of
Serbia. We hope that this repugnant event does not
undermine the dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina,
which is key to this process. We emphasize once again
that resolution 1244 (1999) is the cornerstone of that
process and the legitimate instrument to achieve the
triple objective of the resolution's mandate, namely, to
provide an administration for Kosovo, to create
institutions and to facilitate a political process to
determine Kosovo's final status. With regard to the
latter, we support the principle of "standards before
status". We call on the parties to avoid the provocative
tone contained in recent statements regarding that
policy.

Given that this is a crucial year for the gradual
transfer of executive and legislative powers to the
people of Kosovo in accordance with chapter 5 of the
Constitutional Framework, we believe it is necessary to
recognize the progress that has been made in the first
three months of 2003 as regards the transfer of
additional responsibilities to Kosovo's Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government. In that connection, we
commend the work done by the Transfer Council
created by UNMIK and the Provisional Institutions.
The Provisional Institutions should continue to become
more familiar with their operations and basic
responsibilities. In addition, internal and external
squabbles should come to an end, in order that
significant progress can be made on substantive
matters.

We categorically reject the existence of parallel
structures in the municipalities, as they hinder the
functioning of legitimate institutions and run
completely counter to the provisions of resolution 1244
(1999).

We recognize the significant progress made in the
first three months of 2003, including the strengthening
of the institutional mechanisms that provide support for
the participation of minorities in the central
administration; the support provided for education and
civil participation; the registration of non-
governmental organizations; the creation of five ad hoc
inter-ministerial committees; the hiring of additional
judicial personnel, including members of minority
communities; and, finally, the operation of the
"Freedom of Movement" train. We also recognize the
efforts made by the parties to cooperate with the
International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia. We trust that those efforts will continue.

However, we are concerned about the incident
that took place on 3 April in connection with the law
on higher education. As noted, that incident certainly
does not contribute to establishing a climate conducive
to the understanding and dialogue that must prevail
between UNMIK and the Kosovo Assembly. Similarly,
we are alarmed by the increase in organized crime,
violence, harassment, discrimination, ethnically
motivated crime, restrictions on freedom of movement
and grenade and other attacks against police stations.

