Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to welcome His Excellency the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the State of Palestine,
Mr. Riad Al-Malki, and His Excellency the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of the Hashemite
Kingdom ofJordan, Mr. Ayman Safadi, to our meeting. I
also thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, for his eleventh
briefing on the implementation of resolution 2334
(2016). We commend the efforts that he has undertaken
to implement his mandate, which we fully support.

In paragraph 2 of resolution 2334 (2016), the
Council demands that

"Israel immediately and completely cease all
settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, and that it fully
respect all of its legal obligations in this regard".

It is for this reason that in my intervention I would
like to underscore the main following points.

First, the Israeli occupying Power continues to
build and expand illegal settlements in the occupied
State of Palestine, including in East Jerusalem. This
is a clear message that proves the determination of
Israel to defy the will of the international community,
international law and international resolutions. We
regretfully reiterate that international inaction has
clearly encouraged Israel to persist in its defiance
and obstinacy.

Secondly, as Mr. Mladenov has repeatedly said
in this Hall, most recently today, new settlements are
being built and the annexation of territory in the West
Bank and in East Jerusalem undermines the possibility
of creating a Palestinian State, in conformity with the
relevant Security Council resolutions and the two-
State solution.

Thirdly, Israel, the occupying Power, has
continued to take measures and adopt policies that defy
international public opinion by announcing recently the
construction of more than 2,300 housing units in the
West Bank. This recent measure was followed by the
provocative announcement concerning the annexation
of territories occupied in 1967, in stark violation of
international law, the Charter of the United Nations and
relevant international resolutions, including resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

Fourthly, Israel's illegal plans to annex Palestinian
territories has led to an increase in the number of
settlers and, as a result, in the number of violent
and criminal attacks waged by the settlers against
Palestinian civilians, under the very noses of the Israeli
occupying forces.

Fifthly, more than ever before, the international
community is clearly responsible for upholding
international law and holding Israel accountable for
all its violations, including the seizure of Palestinian
buildings and homes, the arbitrary arrest of Palestinian
civilians and such unilateral decisions as depriving the
Palestinian Authority of part of its tax revenue, putting
pressure on the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and
using live ammunition against demonstrators taking
part in the Great March of Return. Those actions could
constitute war crimes and crimes against humanity.

In conclusion, the absence of serious measures
to ensure accountability, pursuant to resolution 2334
(2016) and other United Nations relevant resolutions
calling on the Israeli occupying authority to abandon
to its illegal policies and measures in the occupied
territories, including East Jerusalem, and end the
occupation, which has lasted more than 50 years, has
unfortunately led to additional flagrant violations by
the occupying Power. Nevertheless, we still believe
that a lasting, comprehensive and fair solution must
end occupation in accordance with agreed terms of
reference, namely, relevant Council resolutions, the
principle of land for peace, the road map and the Arab
Peace Initiative based on the two-State solution - with
a View to the Palestinian people recovering all their
legitimate political rights and establishing their own
independent State on their territory, with East Jerusalem
as its capital.

