Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset, Sir, to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. I am certain that your experience will assist us
in ensuring the success of the Council's work. I should
like also to thank last month's presidency for the
efforts deployed.

My delegation is pleased to be able to participate
in the discussion of the item on the agenda, namely the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. This debate is
most timely. This issue has taken on particular
importance in the past two decades and can no longer
be neglected. In fact, the Council has dedicated several
meetings to this subject.

Most of the time, wars and conflicts erupt when
parties try to impose their authority on certain regions,
leading to many casualties among civilians, who have
nothing to do with these conflicts between armed
forces. The situation is even worse when it involves a
tyrannical force that targets defenceless civilians.
Those who had suffered from the scourge of war and
its tragedies attempted to enact laws preventing such
actions, which led to the adoption of the Fourth Geneva
Convention and its two Protocols.

In several cases, the Security Council shouldered
its responsibility with utmost ease by sending a force to
protect civilians and minorities caught up in the
conflict. However, this has not been the case for the
defenceless Palestinians, who need protection from
Israeli brutality. This is so despite the fact that the
Council has, on several occasions, recognized the
applicability of the Geneva Convention to the situation
of defenceless civilians in the occupied Palestinian
territories today.

The Council is dealing with the report of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, which, we find, does not mention the
situation of the Palestinians. We would ask the
Secretariat the reason for this omission.

Our second question deals with the Council's
failure to shoulder its responsibility in implementing
relevant resolutions aimed at putting an end to the
Israeli occupation of Arab territories and those dealing
with the protection of civilians in armed conflict. This
is due to the Council's inability to put an end to the
occupation and to provide protection for civilians. We
therefore wonder what the Council intends to do, in
particular in the light of the killings that are taking
place on a daily basis in Palestine. It seems that the
Council has no difficulty dispatching protection forces
to other regions of the world.

My third comment deals with the recruitment of
child soldiers in armed conflicts. It is the responsibility
of the international community to enact laws in this
respect and to see to it that restrictions are imposed on
such actions, because we are dealing with children, not
soldiers - civilians who have become involved in
conflicts. The ban on their use aims to protect them.

Fourthly, there is a need to provide adequate
health facilities for displaced civilians who are
removed from areas of conflict. In several cases, when
conflicts have dragged on, the temporary lodging
provided them has become near-permanent, and, as a
result, they have contracted diseases. I would ask the
Secretariat if specialized agencies have undertaken to
provide them with minimum sanitary conditions.

Fifthly, it is crucial to ensure the rehabilitation of
displaced civilians by providing them with protection,
education and employment. Failing this, there is a real
danger that they might be dragged into the conflict. We
should recall that the protection of civilians is not in
any way limited to their transportation to places away
from the conflict, where they can be exiled and
forgotten, falling victim to fresh dangers.

Finally, if we look at the situation of civilians in
various conflict areas throughout the world, we find
that they are living in conditions that can only be
described as inhuman. How can we accept this
situation? There are dozens of international agencies
and non-governmental or civil society organizations,
and none of them can provide the most elementary
services to those civilians? How can we remain silent?
We know that those who are financing those
agencies - that is, States organizations, and at times
individuals- sometimes do not respect their
commitments. But this cannot be tolerated when we are
dealing with providing the basic necessities to civilians
living in horrible conditions. Is the cause of the
problem financial, logistical or political? Regardless, it
is clear that this is a real problem for which we need an
answer and a solution.

