Mrs. Albright (United States of America): I am very
pleased to see the Member of the Council of State here,
Mr. Kromah, having seen him just a few days ago in
Monrovia.

The United States supports the extension of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) mandate
until 31 May. This support, however, is not without
reservations. During my recent visit to Monrovia, I was
impressed by the progress that has been made and by the
stated commitment of the Council of State to implement the
Abuja Agreement. This assurance has been repeated here
today in the Security Council by Member Kromah.

But, unfortunately, today we have also heard the
representative of Liberia offer many different - and often
surprising - explanations for his country's many problems.
As the representative surely knows from my visit, the
United States and the international community can offer a
helping hand, but only Liberians can pull themselves out of
the horror of war. I wish to reiterate here what I made very
clear in speaking with all the parties in Liberia: the United
States and the international community will not tolerate
further delay. Now it is time for action. The forces of peace
and reconciliation must demonstrate that they are more
powerful than those that would wreak further destruction on
the innocent Liberian people. Now is the time to implement
the key operational provision of the Abuja Agreement:
getting the fighters to give up their weapons and rejoin
society, while focusing especially on the four-to-six
thousand child soldiers. As this resolution makes clear,
there must be strict implementation of disarmament and
demobilization, with no delays and no deviations from the
Abuja Agreement.

The United States recognizes the contribution that
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) is now
making to bring stability to Liberia. We call on the
ECOMOG commanders to deploy their forces as quickly
as possible to help create the conditions necessary to
promote the peace process. The United States also calls
upon the Council of State to redouble its efforts to rapidly
move the peace process forward.

I also commend the contributions and sacrifices
being made by UNOMIL personnel in Liberia. The
United States expects UNOMIL to follow through on all
its responsibilities, including investigating and reporting
to the Secretary-General on human rights abuses, major
violations of international humanitarian law and
humanitarian assistance activities. I urge UNOMIL and
ECOMOG to maintain close operational contact to ensure
that they can effectively accomplish their difficult
missions.

Adoption of this resolution extending the UNOMIL
mandate is an important demonstration of the Security
Council's commitment to restoring peace, stability and the
basic conditions for a normal life to the Liberian people.
But this commitment demands equal good will from the
Liberian side. During this period, my Government will
monitor closely the implementation of the Abuja
Agreement, which is Liberia's best chance to achieve
peace and justice and the key to continued international
support. We will view with special interest what the
Secretary-General's interim report will say on progress in
this regard.

Monrovia is a city of startling contrasts. There are
destroyed buildings housing thousands of displaced
persons and laundry hanging from the rafters of a trashed
Foreign Ministry. At the same time, busy people are
trading and trying to make a living and, most
impressively, non-governmental organizations
programmes are providing training, for a new life, in
farming, masonry or plumbing. These contrasts are as
stark as the difference between the past and the future.
My impression from being there is that the people are
ready for the future, and the leaders must not delay in

 

letting them have it. Only then will there be a true
renaissance in Liberia.

In the presence of one of the Members of Liberia's
Council of State, I wish to re-emphasize the crucial role
that Liberia's leaders must play in this process. Their
failure to act will endanger further assistance from the
international community. Their neighbours in West Africa
and the entire international community have created an
opportunity for peace and a return to democracy. They must
seize it now. You must seize it now.

