Mr. Atieh (Syria) (spoke in Arabic): We
appreciate the holding of this meeting devoted to
Central Africa and we highly appreciate the efforts of
Mr. Kalomoh, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, who presided over the United Nations
assessment mission in Central Africa. We are grateful
for the detailed report he has presented to the Council
on this subject.

We fully agree with the comments made by the
mission to the effect that we must face the challenges
arising for the region, which go well beyond the
national borders of the States of the region and which
call for a subregional integrated approach
supplementing national solutions and providing a
sound foundation for such solutions.

My delegation has likewise taken note of the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2003/1077) that
proposes appointing a special envoy to address
political matters with the States of the subregion, who
would cooperate with United Nations agencies and
mechanisms dealing with humanitarian and
development affairs for Central Africa.

A few days ago, the Council reviewed the
importance of holding an international conference on
the Great Lakes region. We would renew our appeal to
all States of the region to participate in that conference,
which could bring about the goal we are pursuing in
the subregion, namely, that of achieving peace,
security, stability, cooperation and development.

My delegation supports all regional, subregional,
national and international efforts to deal with the major
challenges facing Central Africa, to resolve armed
conflicts, to prevent the transfer of weapons across
national borders, to dismantle armed groups, to help
refugees, to supply all necessary humanitarian
assistance to peoples of the region, and to help the
States of the region to combat poverty. Despite the vast
natural resources of that subregion, it is in fact
prevented from drawing any benefit from its resources
to further its development.

We believe that the Security Council's support for
the peace process in the Central African subregion is
an urgent and indispensable task. The States of the
subregion cannot face all these challenges alone. We
have seen this in the case of Burundi, Rwanda, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and other States.
Consequently, it is imperative for the international
community to provide economic assistance to the
States of the subregion to help them deal with their
challenges and overcome obstacles in economic and
development areas.

In conclusion, we highly appreciate the efforts of
the economic community of the States of the region, as
well as the efforts of the United Nations office, towards
overcoming the difficulties faced by the countries of
Central Africa.
