Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, and the Australian
delegation on a successful presidency during the
month of November. Although it has been an unusually
busy month, the work of the Council was efficiently
conducted thanks to your able leadership and the
exemplary work of your team, which I think set a new
standard.

Throughout the month the Council maintained
its vigilance with respect to various regional issues,
including Syria, Iraq and South Sudan. We also explored
how best to use the tools at the Council's disposal,
primarily United Nations peacekeeping operations and
sanctions regimes, in order to better promote a climate
of global peace and security. Particularly noteworthy
was the Council's first meeting with United Nations
police commissioners (see S/PV.7317), which shed new
light on the unique role played by the police component
of peacekeeping operations. We believe that resolution
2185 (2014) will serve as an important reference for
United Nations policing as a crucial part ofpost-conflict
peacebuilding endeavours, including the rule of law,
security sector reform and the protection of civilians.

Also of great importance was the informal
interactive dialogue with the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations. The Panel has an enormous
task before it: to come up with a prescription for
the changing nature of conflicts and the evolving
environments of United Nations peace operations.

Sanctions, in conjunction with other Security
Council tools, remain a vitally useful policy instrument.
Yesterday's briefing (see S/PV.7323) allowed us to take
stock of the evolution of United Nations sanctions and to
discuss ways to further improve their implementation.
We look forward to the adoption of a resolution that
aims to improve the coordination and implementation
of United Nations sanctions.

We believe that the high-level open debate on
counter-terrorism (see S/PV.7316) came at the most
opportune time to build upon the outcome of the
September Security Council summit (see S/PV.7272) and
maintain international momentum to fight terrorism.
Faced with the common threat posed by terrorists,
including the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, the
Al-Nusra Front and other Al-Qaida-associated groups
and foreign fighters, we were able to share national
implementation experiences and compare notes with
a View to further strengthening national counter-
terrorism measures. The Council took a step forward
by adopting a presidential statement (S/PRST/2014/23)
that lays out practical steps to implement counter-
terrorism measures, including those that curb financing
for terrorists.

November was also a significant month for the
work of the subsidiary bodies. The Council received a
90-day report by the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1718 (2006). We appreciated that the
Committee worked diligently and made continued
progress under the Chair's able leadership. However,
given the continued provocative rhetoric from the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, including
the threat of another nuclear test, we reiterate that the
Council and the Committee should remain vigilant.
The Council should continue to send a clear and
united message warning that such provocations will
be squarely dealt with by the Council. Two days ago
I gave the Council my last briefing (see S/PV.7319) on
the activities of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) in my capacity as Chair
of the Committee. Looking back over the work and
accomplishments achieved in this tenth anniversary
year, those accomplishments would not have been
possible without the strong and unwavering support
of Member States. The comments and guidelines of
Council members will be duly reflected in the work of
the Committee to achieve the full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004).

Finally, we would like to wish Chad great success
in its upcoming presidency in December and assure the
Chadian President of our full support.

