Mr. Lowcock: This is my first briefing to the
Security Council on South Sudan, and I would like
to focus on four issues. The first is the humanitarian
outlook for the coming months. The second is
humanitarian access constraints. The third is current
aid delivery, and the fourth is the help we seek from the
Council to guarantee free and consistent access to all
those who need humanitarian assistance and protection.
I agree with and will try not to repeat everything that
Mr. Lacroix has said.

On Tuesday, we released the 2018 South Sudan
Humanitarian Needs Overview. The conclusions of
this comprehensive assessment are bleak. Even though
more than 2 million people have fled South Sudan as
refugees over the past four years of conflict, 7 million
people inside the country - almost two-thirds of
the remaining population - still need humanitarian
assistance. About 1.9 million people are internally
displaced, of whom some 210,000 seek safety in the
protection of civilians sites located on United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) bases.

According to the latest integrated food security
phase classification released by the Government of
South Sudan and food security partners a month ago,
the number of severely food insecure people has steadily
increased with each successive year of the conflict. As
we approach the end of 2017, 1.25 million people are in
the emergency phase of food insecurity; that is almost
twice as many people one step away from famine as
was the case at the same time last year. In early 2018,
half of the population remaining in South Sudan will
be reliant on emergency food aid. The next lean season,
beginning in March, is likely again to see famine
conditions in several locations across the country.

The massive and debilitating needs do not stop with
hunger. Only one in 10 people currently has access to
basic sanitation, which helps prevent deadly diseases.
Only half of the country's schools are functioning, and
2 million children are currently out of school. In one
of every two households, a woman or girl experienced
gender-based violence in the past year, according to
the International Organization for Migration. A study
just released by the International Rescue Committee
underscored the high levels of violence, with many
incidents directly related to a raid, displacement or
abduction. Reported rates of violence against women
and girls in South Sudan are among the highest in
the world.

On access, the suffering faced by civilians in
South Sudan is primarily the result of actions by the
parties in their conduct of the conflict. The alarming
level of food insecurity, for example, is directly linked
to restrictions on people's freedom of movement,
their access to humanitarian assistance and their
ability to plant or to harvest. The impact of conflict
on agricultural production is particularly severe in
the greater Equatorias, which was typically a surplus
food-producing area before the conflict, but is now
seeing production deficits owing to insecurity and
related access challenges. Most farmers from the most
productive area along the border with Uganda are now
in refugee camps inside Uganda.

The recent rainy season did not see the usual lull
in fighting, nor a respite in humanitarian need. Now,
with the beginning of the dry season and ahead of the
anticipated peace talks between parties this month,
military offences have further intensified in recent
days, especially in Jonglei's Ayod county, Unity's
Leer and Mayendit counties, and Western Equatoria's
Greater Mundri, all forcing more civilians to flee these
areas in search of safety and the essentials to survive.

The protection of civilians remains a key concern.
The violations of international humanitarian law and
human rights violations and abuses continue to be
perpetrated by both the Sudan People's Liberation
Army (SPLA) and the Sudan People's Liberation
Movement/Army in Opposition. I remind all parties
that they must take constant care to spare civilians and
the infrastructure civilians rely on.

The suffering is also both a cause and a
consequence of the economic situation, which
continues to deteriorate, as Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix has
said. Many Government workers have not been paid in
months. The brutal reality of the economic situation
puts food out of reach for many people; it reduces
the provision of even the most basic services, such
as health and education; and it increases criminality,
especially in urban areas. Civilians' safety is at risk and
humanitarian organizations face an increasing number
of armed robberies and looting of convoys. Just last
week in Jonglei, around 2.3 metric tons of food were
looted from a humanitarian warehouse. Such actions
are perpetrated both by parties to the conflict and by
criminal groups for economic benefit.

Aid workers are paying with their lives to deliver
assistance. At least 95 humanitarian workers have been
killed in the line of duty since the start of the conflict,
and at least 28 of them have been killed this year alone.
More than 90 per cent ofthose people are national staff,
who form the backbone of the humanitarian response.
Mr. Lacroix mentioned the recent horrific attack
in Jonglei. That is just one example of the violence
aid workers face and five aid workers were killed in
that attack.

Allowing and facilitating rapid and unimpeded
humanitarian access for civilians in need is an
obligation for all parties and essential for humanitarian
relief organizations to effectively save lives. The parties
regularly and flagrantly ignore these obligations. There
are areas of the country where humanitarians have
been unable to deliver assistance and programmes for
extended periods. That compounds the already dire
food security and nutrition situations. One example
is the opposition-held territory of Greater Baggari,
near Wau, which is classified in the emergency phase
of food insecurity - so it is just a step away from
famine - and where agencies have been able to deliver
aid only sporadically owing to access denials and SPLA
roadblocks. The situation will get even worse without
an improvement in access.

In recent weeks, the Government, as well as
opposition forces and non-State armed actors, have
continued to interfere with the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to people in need. Government security
forces have denied humanitarian access in Liwolo in
Kajo-keji county, non-State armed actors continue to
deny access in areas outside Yei and Mundri towns, and
opposition forces have denied access in Torit county's
Gunyoro town. Access blockage to a waste disposal
site in Bentiu also continues, despite assurances from
the Governor that humanitarian agencies would be
provided unhindered access to the site.

Ongoing fighting also prevents us from delivering
aid, including clashes between SPLA and SPLA in
Opposition in Yei and surrounding counties. In 2017,
more than 500 humanitarian workers across the country
have been relocated for extended periods of time owing
to conflict and insecurity. Humanitarian organizations
do not relocate staff lightly - the objective is always to
stay and deliver - so when we do have to relocate, the
situation must be very extreme.

In early November, President Kiir released
a Republican order for the free, unimpeded and
unhindered movement of humanitarian assistance
convoys. I take note of this order, which enshrines
existing international obligations. I urge for it to be
translated into concrete actions and instructions at
all levels to remove roadblocks and bureaucratic and
other types of impediments and for it to be realized in
practice on the ground, because, as I have said, that is
not happening now.

Thirdly, despite these challenges and as Mr. Lacroix
has said, the United Nations and its humanitarian
partners have reached 5 million people with essential
assistance this year and the aim for next year is to
reach more. About 4 million people have received food
assistance and emergency livelihood support this year;
nearly 730,000 children and pregnant and breastfeeding
women have benefited from emergency nutritional
assistance; more than 2.1 million have gained access
to clean water; nearly 780,000 people have been
assisted with vital non-food items, including blankets
and mosquito nets; more than 350,000 children have
a chance to go to school; and nearly 400,000 people
have received gender-based violence services. To ease
aid delivery, an additional humanitarian corridor was
opened from the Sudan last month.

The fact remains that until international
humanitarian law is complied with, until the fighting
ends and until basic services are established, the
humanitarian situation will remain dire. This year,
the United Nations and its humanitarian partners have
halted famine, but that has taken enormous resources
and involved substantial risk to staff, some of whom, as
I have said, have lost their lives in the endeavour. We
must avoid a recurrence of famine next year. UNMISS
has played and will continue to play an important role
in protecting civilians and creating the conditions
conducive to the delivery of humanitarian assistance,
but its efforts cannot replace or in any way substitute
the responsibilities of the host Government.

Fourthly and in conclusion, I call upon Council
members, first, to use their influence to ensure
that the parties comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law to respect and protect
civilians, including humanitarian workers; and,
secondly, to ensure that the parties allow and facilitate
humanitarian relief operations and people's access to
assistance and protection.

