Mr. Moretti (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): It has
been an honour for my delegation to have had the
presence of the Secretary of Foreign Affairs of Mexico,
Her Excellency Patricia Espinosa, in the Council this
morning. I thank you, Sir, and your delegation for the
initiative in convening this important meeting.

(spoke in English)

I thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, for her outstanding work
and her remarks today. We also thank the Deputy
Executive Director of UNICEF and the Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations for
their statements.

I would like to give particular thanks to Manju
for her vivid testimony about her experience as a child
soldier in Nepal. I commend her for her courage and
determination. It is disturbing that such experiences are
repeated day after day for thousands of children around
the world.

The case for the protection of children in armed
conflict is morally compelling. In cases where it
involves a threat to international peace and security,
the Security Council must take action to prevent and
halt violence against children.

The Secretary-General's report (S/20lO/181)
demonstrates the success of the work that
Ms. Coomaraswamy's office has been carrying out in
conjunction with other actors, such as UNICEF. The
release of children associated with armed groups in
several countries, as described in the report, is cause
for genuine celebration. The signing of action plans
with groups in the Philippines, the Sudan and Nepal is
also worthy of recognition. At the same time, the
numerous instances in which violations continue
unabated are a sobering reminder that much remains to
be done.

Monitoring violations and gathering accurate
information remains a challenge. Close coordination
with local authorities and other relevant actors is key.
It is also important to identify and compile best
practices in this field and to consolidate the
methodology for collecting data, particularly with
regard to sexual violence, where the greatest
challenges lie.

Another source of concern is the issue of
accountability relating to crimes against children.
Improvements in this area require strong support by
means of technical assistance and capacity-building. It
may be worth considering ways by which multilateral
organizations and governments can cooperate with
interested States in that regard. That would be
particularly relevant in those cases where shortcomings
are due mostly to lack of funding, expertise or judicial
structures.

The Council and the Working Group should bear
in mind social and economic conditions affecting
children in armed conflict. In many situations poverty
and social injustice, although never a justification for
violations and abuses against children, make them
more likely. The Working Group could make
recommendations regarding specific socio-economic
conditions affecting child protection in the context of
armed conflict.

Where there is a peacekeeping operation on the
ground, child protection should be integrated into the
mission-wide protection strategies called for in
resolution 1894 (2009), as happens in many cases.
Those strategies can include plans to effectively protect
educational facilities and to build capacity so that
community leaders can help identify, as early as
possible, attempts by armed groups to recruit or harass
children.

I would like to make two brief points on the
functioning of the Working Group. First and foremost,
it is imperative that it be provided with sufficient
administrative support by the Secretariat, as has been
repeatedly requested. We are especially concerned with
the preservation of the Group's institutional memory,
which is particularly necessary for the elected members
to adequately participate in its work. Secondly, we
would support efforts to ensure that the Working Group
is able to deal in a timely fashion with the numerous
situations on its agenda.

In closing, I wish to reiterate my Government's
commitment to the protection of children in all
situations, not only through the action of the Security
Council, where violations may affect peace and
security, but also through the United Nations agencies,
funds and programs and through bilateral cooperation.

