The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Kuwait.

At the outset, I would like to join previous speakers
in offering my condolences to the people and the
Government of Mali for the heinous attack that took
place in the village of Sobame-Da in central Mali,
killing some 95 people. We are seriously concerned
about the recent increase in such attacks, including the
attack in March during the Council's visit to Mali in
which 157 people died.

We would like to sincerely thank Mr. Mahamat
Saleh Annadif, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Mali, for his valuable briefing on the latest
developments in the country. I commend his efforts
and those of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
to facilitate the peace process and engage with all
stakeholders with a view to making progress on the
political track. We also welcome the presence and
participation in the Security Council for the first time
of Mr. Tiebile Drame', Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Mali. I congratulate him
on his new post and wish him every success. We would
like to convey our congratulations to the new Prime
Minister, Mr. Boubou Cisse, through him.

I will focus on three main issues. The first
is security, and our serious concern about the
deteriorating security situation in central Mali. The
number of attacks there is on the rise, and we have seen
a significant increase in intercommunal violence. We
stress the importance of containing the situation, which
has deteriorated severely since last year. We welcome
the recommendations of the Secretary-General for
supporting MINUSMA in central Mali and call on
the Government of Mali to undertake the necessary
investigations and hold the perpetrators accountable,
which will help to build confidence between it and the
people. We also urge the Government to intensify its
efforts to implement its plan for securing this region,
where the situation has deteriorated alarmingly.

As we heard in last month's meeting on the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (S/PV.8526),
terrorism is affecting the countries of the Sahel. There
are many regional and international military forces in
the region, and MINUSMA has an important role to
play in coordinating their efforts. We would like to
take this opportunity to once again express our support
and appreciation to the efforts of MINUSMA, which is
operating in a high-risk environment, as well as the role
that the Mission's personnel are playing in ensuring
stability in Mali.

My second point is about the peace process.
Four years have passed since the signing of the 2015
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, and
while the progress made during that time has not been
optimal, in the past six months we have seen things
improve faster than before. We urge all parties to build
on the small gains that have been achieved by completing
the constitutional reform process in consultation with
all stakeholders, and to take the necessary action to
advance the establishment of a northern economic
development zone, following the steps outlined in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2019/454), which will
help to build confidence between the Government and
the people in northern Mali.

One of the major steps for ensuring stability and
security in Mali is the redeployment of the reconstituted
army. We welcome the recent progress in that regard and
encourage all the parties to resolve any disagreements
in order to forge ahead, thereby supporting the peace
process and improving security in northern Mali. I also
want to welcome the positive steps that have been taken
in the past month, particularly the formation of a new
Government that includes all political parties, as well
as the signing of an agreement on holding a national
political dialogue.

With regard to the third issue, the renewal
of the Mission's mandate, Kuwait welcomes the
options laid out in the Secretary-General's report for
adapting MINUSMA in response to the requirements
expressed in the April presidential statement on Mali
(S/PRST/2019/2). The Security Council must examine
all the options and recommendations before it and
take them into consideration in the discussions on the
mandate renewal. We look forward to those discussions
and are ready to cooperate constructively with all
Council members to ensure that MINUSMA receives
an appropriate mandate that enables it to carry out
its responsibilities and support the peace process in
Mali, in addition to providing it with the necessary
resources, especially in the light of its high-risk
operating environment.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation of Mali.

