Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union and the
countries aligning themselves with this statement.

At the outset, I would like to thank the Legal
Counsel of the United Nations, Mr. Nicolas Michel,
and the President of the International Court of Justice,
Judge Rosalyn Higgins, for their statements.

We are very grateful to the Danish presidency of
the Security Council for organizing today's open
debate. We warmly welcome this initiative.

The European Union reaffirms its deep
commitment to an international order based on
international law, including human rights law, and the
rule of law, with the United Nations at its core. We
recall that one of the main founding purposes of the
United Nations is to establish conditions under which
justice and respect for the obligations arising from
treaties and other sources of international law can be
maintained.

The European Union is pleased to note the special
attention given to international law and the rule of law
at the 2005 world summit. We believe that international
law and the rule of law are the foundations of the
international system. Clear and foreseeable rules,
respect for and adherence to the rules, and an effective
multilateral system to prevent or sanction violations of
the rules are preconditions for lasting international
peace and security. It is imperative that we Member
States, the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations join our efforts to strengthen the rule of
law in all its dimensions at the national, international
and institutional levels.

The United Nations, through its various organs,
plays a pivotal role in promoting the rule of law. As we
have heard this morning, the International Court of
Justice, as the principal judicial organ, contributes to
the strengthening of international law through the
peaceful settlement of disputes among States. The
General Assembly, with its Sixth Committee and the
International Law Commission, plays a key role
through the codification and progressive development
of international law. In that context, I would like to
highlight the recent initiative by Liechtenstein and
Mexico to include an item on the rule of law at the
national and international levels on the agenda of the
next session of the General Assembly.

The Secretariat and other United Nations
bodies - the Office of Legal Affairs, the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, the United Nations Development
Programme and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights - contribute to the
strengthening of the rule of law through their various
rule-of-law activities, including programmes of
technical assistance, which the European Union fully
supports.

We recall the Secretary-General's pledge in his
opening address to the General Assembly at its fifty-
ninth session to make the strengthening of the rule of
law a priority of the Organization. In order to
streamline and coordinate all United Nations activities
to promote the rule of law, we look forward to the
establishment of a rule of law assistance unit in the
Secretariat without further delay.

The Security Council, given its unique role and
function of maintaining international peace and
security, is promoting the international legal order
through various measures, such as the establishment of
international criminal tribunals, border and inquiry

commissions, complementing the legal framework for
countering terrorism and the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, and enforcing compliance with
rules through the imposition of sanctions. We welcome
all initiatives that highlight the efforts of the Security
Council in that regard. In that context, I would like to
refer to the series of panel discussions launched by my
own country in October 2004 on the role of the
Security Council in strengthening a rules-based
international system.

During the last open debate on this subject in
October 2004, the promotion of the rule of law in
conflict and post-conflict situations was extensively
discussed. After the debate, the Security Council issued
a presidential statement urging the Secretariat to make
proposals for the implementation of the
recommendations set out in paragraph 65 of the
Secretary-General's 2004 report. The proposals are still
pending to this day, and we call upon the Secretariat to
follow up on the request of the Security Council
without further delay. Adequate resources devoted to
the rule of law need to be secured in order to be able to
quickly and effectively fill the rule of law vacuum in
post-conflict situations.

The European Union welcomes the establishment
of the Peacebuilding Commission, which will have an
important role to play in the promotion of the rule of
law. The European Union believes that respect for
international law and the rule of law is the cornerstone
of peacebuilding. Rule of law aspects should be
incorporated into the Peacebuilding Commission's
country-specific strategies and recommendations in
order to assist countries under consideration to achieve
sustainable peace. In that context, we wish to highlight
the Justice Rapid Response Initiative supported by a
number of European Union countries, which is to
provide, at short notice, cost-effective expertise and
resources in support of genuine efforts to investigate,
prosecute and bring to justice alleged perpetrators of
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes.

Regarding the international efforts to end
impunity for the most serious crimes of international
concern, the European Union supports the full range of
transitional justice mechanisms, such as truth
commissions, international tribunals or mixed
tribunals. Justice is a key element for lasting peace and
reconciliation. The United Nations should continue to
be at the forefront of the fight against impunity. The
European Union strongly believes that the International
Criminal Court (ICC) is one of the most effective tools
for buttressing the rule of law, encouraging respect for
human rights and combating impunity.

The ICC is an essential instrument for the
prevention of genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes. The European Union reaffirms its
determination to obtain the widest possible support for
the ICC, including by promoting universal acceptance
of the Rome Statute. More than half of United Nations
members are now parties. We urge all other States to
accede without delay. We strongly encourage the
Security Council to continue to make use of its
competence to refer situations to the ICC, as it has
done in the case of Darfur.

The European Union remains committed to
supporting the efforts of the International Criminal
Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda to
successfully accomplish their completion strategies.
Yet we note with great concern that several of the key
accused remain at large and urge all States to fully
cooperate with the Tribunals. On the Special Court for
Sierra Leone, the European Union welcomes the recent
adoption of Security Council resolution 1688 (2006),
which approved the transfer of the trial of the former
Liberian President Charles Taylor to The Hague.
Finally, the European Union welcomes the progress
achieved in establishing the Extraordinary Chambers in
the Courts of Cambodia for the prosecution of crimes
committed during the period of Democratic
Kampuchea. We hope that the Extraordinary Chambers
will become fully operational in the near future.
Sanctions play an important role in conflict
resolution and in the promotion of compliance with
international law. They have also become an
indispensable tool in the fight against terrorism.
However, when targeting individuals and entities,
sanctions also raise a number of questions regarding
procedural guarantees. In the current debate, questions
of adequate listing and delisting procedures and
effective review of sanctions play an important role. In
that context, we reiterate the call of the 2005 world
summit on the Security Council to ensure that fair and
clear procedures exist for placing individuals and
entities on sanctions lists and for removing them, as
well as for granting humanitarian exemptions.

The European Union stresses the importance of
upholding certain minimum standards to ensure fair
and clear procedures when designing and implementing
sanctions. We believe that such procedures are
essential to preserve the legitimacy and reinforce the
efficacy of the United Nations sanctions regimes. We
reiterate our call upon the 1267 Committee to continue
its efforts to further improve the Al-Qaida and Taliban
sanctions regime, especially the Committee guidelines
regarding listing and delisting.

The European Union has extensive experience in
designing, implementing, enforcing and monitoring
restrictive measures in the framework of its Common
Foreign and Security Policy and has elaborated specific
guidelines and a best-practices paper. In that regard, we
note the contributions of some Member States to the
discussions in the Security Council, including
initiatives by Council members such as Denmark and
France to establish mechanisms which would ensure
that individuals' requests for delisting or exemptions
are systematically forwarded to the sanctions
committees for review and an academic study on
strengthening targeted sanctions through clear and fair
procedures, co-sponsored by Germany, Sweden and
Switzerland. We also note the recent publication of a
study commissioned by the Office of Legal Affairs and
posted on the United Nations website
(http://www.un.org/law/counsel/Fassbender_study.pdf).

In conclusion, we would like to stress that our
efforts to strengthen international law and the rule of
law serve not only the abstract goal of a rules-based
international order but, ultimately, the protection of the
rights and interests of individuals at both the national
and international levels. Given the importance of that
objective, we are confident that the international
community will not lose interest in the subject. The
European Union will continue to make its contribution.

