Mr. Sc'epanovic' (Montenegro): At the outset, I
congratulate you, Madam President, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May. I would like to thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Korea for organizing and
chairing this important meeting. We appreciate the
concept note you prepared for the debate (S/2014/3l3, annex). I also thank the Deputy Secretary-General for
his briefing. Montenegro welcomes the adoption of the
presidential statement (S/PRST/2014/7).

Montenegro fully associates itself with the
statement delivered on behalf of the European Union.
I would, however, like to add some remarks in my
national capacity.

Today's debate on the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1540 (2004) offers a timely
opportunity to take stock of the progress achieved so
far, as well as to look at the challenges ahead in terms
of compliance and fulfilment of the letter and spirit of
the resolution. Many positive developments were made
possible over the past decade towards the realization
of universal implementation of resolution 1540 (2004)
and its subsequent resolutions. These have included
awareness-raising about the principles and objectives
of resolution 1540 (2004) and about the complexity of
the terrorist threat, increased commitment of Member
States to submit reports and develop national action
plans, match-making of assistance requests and
offers, and numerous initiatives of Member States and
regional and international organizations contributing
to strengthened international cooperation, capacity-
building and assistance. I would like in particular
to single out the role and contribution of Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and its
Group of Experts to these efforts and advancements.

Despite these achievements, challenges still remain
in the global fight against the proliferation of weapons
of mass destructions. Numerous crises, the globalized
and interconnected world, and constant improvements
in science and technology serve as serious reminders
that our common mission is far from finished. Increased
potential access to weapons of mass destruction and
related materials and technology demonstrates the
growing need to remain on constant alert against the
dangerous nexus between weapons of mass destruction
and global terrorism.
To address these issues comprehensively and
successfully, we have to commit to continuous and long-
term efforts and actions, while at the same time finding
innovative ways and means to engage all stakeholders,
first and foremost Member States. By doing so, we will
ensure that our global campaign truly provides for the
minimizing of risks associated with the acquisition and
use of weapons of mass destruction by terrorists.

Here, I would like to raise one question that, in our
opinion, is particularly relevant and deserves careful
consideration going forward. With respect to countries
that are, on the one hand, willing and ready to contribute
to actions related to resolution 1540 (2004), yet on
the other hand have limited capacity to deal with the
challenges and threats of the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction and do not recognize that as the
most pressing priority area of security concern - as is
the case of my country - how can they be encouraged
to buy in and show the requisite determination and
leadership at the national and regional levels regarding
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004)?

In that vein, we note with satisfaction the progress
made in the understanding of the multiple benefits
of the full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004)
that are not related or limited to preventing terrorists
from acquiring weapons of mass destruction. While
that remains a primary objective, measures taken in
accordance with the resolution will generate various
other benefits to bolster national, regional and global
security well beyond the core purpose of discovering
weapons of mass destruction and related materials.
Those include in the domain of border control, the
prevention of illicit trafficking of various sorts,
among others. That is why synergies related to the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) should be
further promoted.

My country's strategic orientation is to contribute to
regional and international peace and security, including
through active participation in combating terrorism
and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
Montenegro would like to state its full commitment and
firm support for the robust and effective implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) and subsequent resolutions
1673 (2006) and 1810 (2008).

As a reflection of its resolve, Montenegro has
finalized its national action plan for the period 2014-
2018 and its latest report on the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), both of which are expected to
be adopted by our Government in the coming days.
The national action plan, as a guiding document with
concrete steps and measures prescribed for all actors,
will contribute to more effective and comprehensive
compliance with the provisions of resolution 1540
(2004) through enhanced national capacities for the
control and prevention of the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, and through the harmonization of our
legislation with international standards. In accordance
with the national action plan, the Government of
Montenegro will soon establish a coordinating body,
comprised of representatives of relevant institutions,
that will be tasked with monitoring and reviewing
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

In closing, let me convey Montenegro's unwavering
intention to continue to work diligently to aid in
improving the prospect ofweapons ofmass destructions
never falling into the hands of terrorists in any location.

