Ms. Lintonen (Finland): I have the honour to
address the Security Council on behalf of the European
Union (EU).

The following countries - Bulgaria, Romania,
Turkey, Croatia, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Norway, Ukraine and the Republic of
Moldova - align themselves with this statement.
I would like to thank the High Representative and
the EU Special Representative, Mr. Christian Schwarz-
Schilling, for his comprehensive presentation on
developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as
for his first periodic report to the Security Council. The
European Union welcomes the approach taken by Mr.
Schwarz-Schilling's Office of offering advice and
support to the national authorities rather than acting on
their behalf. Strengthening local ownership is essential
in the transition from stabilization to EU integration.

This year has been crucial for Bosnia and
Herzegovina in many ways. The EU is pleased with the
peaceful and orderly conduct of the October general
elections and looks forward to the timely formation of
the new Government. The EU is ready to work with
any coalition genuinely engaged in advancing the
reforms that Bosnia and Herzegovina needs for its EU
rapprochement.

The first negotiation round of the Stabilization
and Association Agreement was held in January. At
that time, we anticipated that the negotiations could be
concluded by the end of the year. Unfortunately, the
situation now seems different. While we are glad to
note that Bosnia and Herzegovina has made progress
on the negotiations at the technical level, we regret that
many key reforms - in particular police reform -
have been delayed in 2006.

The EU has made it clear that the implementation
of police reform, based on the Agreement on Police
Restructuring of October 2005, is an indispensable
condition for concluding negotiations on the
Stabilization and Association Agreement. We expect
that the European perspective will encourage all parties
in Bosnia and Herzegovina to work together in order to
overcome this obstacle as soon as possible.

The conclusion of negotiations will also depend
on Bosnia and Herzegovina's cooperation with the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. More decisive action, notably by the
authorities in Republika Srpska, and cooperation with
neighbouring countries, are needed in order to arrest
and transfer to The Hague those indictees still at large.

The European Commission is publishing its
regular progress report on Bosnia and Herzegovina
today, 8 November. The report will give a
comprehensive assessment of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's pace on its European path. The EU will
continue to provide financial assistance to Bosnia and
Herzegovina on its European course through the
Instrument for Pre-accession Assistance, which enters
into force at the beginning of 2007 and will provide
almost €11.5 billion for the western Balkan countries
and Turkey over the next seven years.

In spring, Bosnia and Herzegovina was
proceeding well in its constitutional reform process.
Regrettably, the progress has stalled. While reform is
not a precondition for a Stabilization and Association
Agreement, it is clear that Bosnia and Herzegovina
needs more functional and sustainable State structures
that are better prepared for EU integration.
Constitutional reform is therefore essential for the
future of the country. The European Union is ready to
assist Bosnia and Herzegovina in this important effort.

The EU, which is already providing a framework
of stability to the country with two European security
and defence policy missions - EUFOR-Althea and the
European Union Police Mission - indicated in May its
readiness in principle to reinforce the Union's
engagement in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the context
of the envisaged closure of the Office of the High
Representative. The EU Secretary-General and High
Representative, Javier Solana, and the EU
Commissioner for Enlargement, Mr. Olli Rehn,
prepared in early October a joint report on the
reinforced role of the European Union in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. That report was welcomed by EU
Foreign Ministers on 17 October and serves as the
basis for further work within the EU.

The Peace Implementation Council's June
decision to close down the Office of the High
Representative by 30 June 2007, and the forthcoming
review and confirmation of this decision in February
2007, will be taken into account in the EU's planning
process and action on this matter.

The EU fully supports Bosnia and Herzegovina's
EU perspective. It is important that it is also visible in
the lives of the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina. To
that end, the EU will soon start negotiations on visa
facilitation with Bosnia and Herzegovina in order to
facilitate travel to European Union member States.
Negotiations on the readmission agreement will be
conducted in parallel. It is important that Bosnia and
Herzegovina does its utmost to implement reforms in
the field of justice and home affairs, which are
necessary for the success of negotiations.

