Mr. Al Musharakh (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in French): On behalf of the United Arab Emirates, I
thank the French presidency of the Security Council.
I would also like to thank Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia
Gamba, and Mr. Mubin Shaikh for their briefings.

(spoke in Arabic)

The United Arab Emirates believes that our
collective priority must be to promote peace and
stability and ensure a better future for our younger
generations. That is why today's open debate is critical.
It is our children who suffer the most from the crises in
our region, which are caused by extremism, terrorism
and the continued interference by States in each other's
internal affairs.

We welcome the focus of today's open debate
on violations committed by non-State actors. We
are extremely troubled by the gravity of the abuse of
children by extremist and terrorist groups that are
supported by rogue States across our region in Syria,
Iraq, Afghanistan, Somalia, Libya and Yemen. For such
groups, especially Da'esh, the killing, recruitment,
abduction and sexual abuse of children, as well as their
use as human shields, are deliberate tactics that are at
the core of their modus operandi. Violations against
children also extend to the longest, most entrenched
crisis in our region, namely, the crisis in the occupied
Palestinian territories. Palestinian children continue to
be affected by the occupation and are being detained,
killed and maimed, particularly in the West Bank. All
of the crises in our region could be resolved, we firmly
believe, through comprehensive political solutions. We
support the efforts of the United Nations in that regard.

With regard to the situation in Yemen, I would like
to note that the United Arab Emirates is a member of
the coalition seeking to restore legitimacy in Yemen
at the legitimate request of the Yemeni Government to
protect civilians, including children, from the Houthi
coup. Since its inception, the coalition has consistently
worked to implement and reinforce a framework for a
political solution in Yemen, based on resolution 2216
(2015), the Gulf Cooperation Council initiative and the
outcomes of the National Dialogue Conference.

The United Arab Emirates condemns the egregious
Violations committed by the Iran-supported Houthis,
including the recruitment and use of children as child
soldiers and as human shields, as well as the use of
civilian hospitals and schools for military purposes,
the laying of landmines and attacks on the border
of Saudi Arabia, which have resulted in civilian
casualties, internal displacement and the destruction
of civilian infrastructure. The coalition has sustained
its efforts to minimize the impact of the conflict on
children, as we believe that every child casualty is one
too many. To that end and in addition to developing
general protective measures, the coalition has taken
specific measures to address child recruitment by the
Houthis, including the rehabilitation of child soldiers
and securing their safe and expedited return to the
custody of the Government of Yemen, so that they can
be reunited with their families. That is being done in
coordination with UNICEF.

In that respect, the commitment of the United Arab
Emirate to the protection of children is comprehensive.
Our efforts to address the immediate medical needs and
ensure the long-term well-being of children affected by
conflict have included the establishment of dedicated
hospitals and medical centres for women and children,
as well as a shelter for orphans and children separated
from their parents because of the war in Iraq. We have
also provided education and occupational training for
displaced children in shelters in Iraq and Jordan.

Any discussion of Violations against children
by non-State actors must address the subjugation
and exploitation of girls by terrorists and Violent
extremist groups, which use sexual and gender-based
Violence, including human trafficking, sexual slavery,
forced marriage and forced pregnancy, to terrorize
communities and generate revenue. The international
community must remain steadfast in ensuring that
the full implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda, with its emphasis on conflict
prevention and the meaningful participation of women,
is integral to its response.

To conclude, the United Arab Emirates would like
to offer a few suggestions on how to strengthen the
impact of future reports on the protection of children
in armed conflict.

First, we should ensure that the reports and their
monitoring mechanisms are based on independent
and reliable sources that address, in a balanced
manner, Violations committed throughout the entirety
of an armed conflict. Secondly, we should guarantee
continuous and full consultations with States, as
mandated in resolution 1612 (2005), so as to avoid
misinformation and enable accurate and comprehensive
assessments. In that regard, the United Arab Emirates
welcomes the cooperation and consultations with
Member States that Special Representative Gamba
and her Office have undertaken. We welcome their
visits to the coalition's headquarters. We reiterate our
support and deep appreciation for her just, necessary
and universal mandate.

