The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council is gravely concerned at
the resumption of fighting in Mogadishu, where the
latest clashes are taking an increasingly heavy toll in
human lives. It is deeply concerned, in particular, at
the plight of the civilian population, whose suffering
is increased even further by the fighting.

"The Security Council calls on all Somali
factions to cease immediately all hostilities and to
restore an effective ceasefire.

"The Security Council fully supports the efforts
of the countries of the region, as well as of
international and regional organizations, in particular
the Organization of African Unity and the League of
Arab States, to facilitate a political settlement of the
crisis in Somalia. It appeals to all Somali factions to
join in such efforts and to start a process of national
reconciliation aimed at the establishment of a
broad-based national Government.

"The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to a lasting solution to the crisis in
Somalia and encourages the Secretary-General to
continue to monitor closely the situation and to
report to the Council on any further development.

"The Security Council reminds once again all
States of their obligations to implement fully the
general and complete embargo imposed by
resolution 733 (1992) on all deliveries of weapons
and military equipment to Somalia.

"The Security Council reaffirms its appreciation
to all the organizations and individuals who carry
out humanitarian activities in Somalia and calls upon
all Somali factions to ensure the safety of all the
personnel involved."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1996/47.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda. The

Security Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 12.50 pm.
