Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank you, Sir, for convening this briefing on United
Nations cooperation with the European Union (EU).
China listened attentively to the briefing given by
Ms. Mogherini, High Representative of the European
Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy.

As the largest organization of regional integration
in the world, the EU has achieved significant results in
economic and political integration and made important
contributions to the promotion of a multipolar world.
As an important cooperation partner of the United
Nations and the Security Council, the EU has actively
participated in efforts to resolve regional hotspot issues,
such as the Iranian nuclear issue and the situations in
the Middle East and Africa. It has played an important
role in maintaining regional stability in some regions,
which China welcomes.

The countries of the world are interconnected and
interdependent. Humankind has a shared destiny. The
United Nations is the most universal and authoritative
intergovernmental international organization. The EU
has a wealth of experience in conflict prevention and
peacekeeping and is an important force for peace in the
world. The United Nations and the EU should strengthen
cooperation and make even more positive contributions
to world peace, stability and development.

First, they should vigorously promote
multilateralism. The international situation is
undergoing profound, multiple and complex changes.
Anti-globalization and conservative thinking are on the
rise. Parties should jointly safeguard the international
order and the collective security mechanism, with the
United Nations at its centre. They should strengthen the
United Nations central role and status in international
affairs. The United Nations and the EU should jointly
champion a concept of global governance featuring
consultations, collaboration and benefit-sharing so as
to jointly promote international peace, regional stability
and global development.

Secondly, they should cultivate a harmonious and
stable international security environment. In view of
the complex and grave international security challenges
they face, the United Nations and the EU should
strengthen their cooperation, establish a concept of
common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable
security, and jointly push parties to abandon zero-sum
thinking so as to achieve win-win results for both sides,
multiple sides and everyone. Parties should abide by the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, respect the sovereign equality of countries and
the development paths chosen independently by them,
resolve disputes peacefully through such diplomatic
means as mediation, good offices and dialogue,
and jointly promote global security governance in a
coordinated manner.

Thirdly, it is important to vigorously promote
sustainable international economic and social
development. Countries face the common task of
implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. Developing countries are faced with
unique difficulties and challenges. With its economic
development advantages, the European Union should,
in view ofthe developing needs of developing countries,
provide more funding and technical support in key
fields so as to help those countries achieve the 2030
Sustainable Development Goals at an early date.

China attaches great importance to its
relationship with the EU and has all along supported
the integration process of Europe. We welcome a
united, stable and prosperous Europe. China stands
ready - through the One Belt, One Road initiative,
the China-EU Cooperation Mechanism and other
platforms - to deepen the China-EU comprehensive
strategic partnership for mutual benefit and win-win
cooperation and, along with Europe, jointly push
for new results in the four partnerships - for peace,
growth, reform and civilization - so as to jointly make
a new and even greater contribution to the promotion of
world peace, stability and prosperity.

