Mr. Kovanda (Czech Republic): Today we meet on
a happy occasion by any standards - except that the name
of Dayton, having become a part of history, will cause
difficulties to future generations of schoolchildren.

We have, indeed, had precious few occasions to
celebrate anything concerning Bosnia and Herzegovina in
the Council in recent years. We may not have the end of
the war, but we do have the beginning of peace. The next
weeks and months will show how this beginning will
unfold. It will show which of all the complex
arrangements of Dayton will live, even flourish, and
whether any will die on the vine.

The Security Council has been sidelined for several
months when it comes to the former Yugoslavia, at least
since the Contact Group assumed the initiative in dealing
with that part of the world. It was, of course, the
formidable resources of United States diplomacy and
military might which brought about and pulled off
Dayton. We sincerely congratulate all concerned. Our
own role here in the Council is one of a supporting actor:
to undo, now that peace is looming, measures which we
adopted in very different circumstances.

My country is pleased to have co-sponsored the draft
resolution providing for the suspension and eventual
termination of economic sanctions against the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and, in due course, Bosnian Serb
territories of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The casing of
sanctions is deliberate and leaves open ways for reversing
the suspension should the subjects of the sanctions fail in
taking the steps anticipated of them in Dayton.

Our sanctions draft mentions compliance with the
requests and orders of the International Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia as constituting an essential aspect of
implementing the Peace Agreement. This mention appears
in the preamble, but not in the operative section of the
draft. My delegation would warn, however, against
interpreting this fact as diminishing its importance. In
resolution after resolution the Council has insisted on
individual responsibility of perpetrators of "ethnic
cleansing". We have never abandoned this insistence.
Individual responsibility, established by and punished by
the International Tribunal, is necessary not only for
justice to be done, but also to prevent the emergence in
Bosnia and Herzegovina of a culture of impunity, a
culture which leaves victims and their children with a
feeling that if any justice is to be done they have to seek
it themselves, thus sowing the wind which will possibly
yield another whirlwind of war.

One of the difficult open issues among the south
Slav States is the matter of succession. The draft rightly
stresses the need for successors to the former Socialist
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to reach necessary
agreements on the distribution of funds and assets. The
Czech Republic has some experience of peaceably

 

dividing countries and their assets and would, I am sure,
gladly provide advice about how to go about it.

The phased lifting of the arms embargo may be
viewed as the obverse of the removal of sanctions. My
Government, however, is uncertain whether lifting the
embargo three months into a peace, a peace which will be
so new an experience for all citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, is absolutely indispensable - and this, at a
time when tens of thousands of defenders of peace, namely,
the implementation force, will be pouring into the country.
Serious discussions are under way even as I speak which
should lead to a serious and substantive contribution of
Czech soldiers to the implementation force. We would hate
to suffer any casualties resulting from a freshly legal inflow
of arms into the cauldron of killing that is Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

In all, though, my delegation will vote in favour of
both draft resolutions before us.

