Mr. Park In-Kook (Republic of Korea): I thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this meeting today
and for giving my delegation the opportunity to
participate in the debate. I would like to express my
appreciation to Under-Secretary-General Alain Le Roy
and the force commanders here with us today for their
comprehensive and informative briefings.

For the last six decades, United Nations
peacekeeping operations have evolved to successfully
address diverse challenges arising from various
conflicts in a rapidly changing political landscape. The
overall number of United Nations peacekeeping
personnel in the field has increased nine-fold over the
last eleven years. Last year, the Fifth Committee
approved a record high budget of $7.7 billion for 2009-
2010 for peacekeeping missions. United Nations
peacekeeping has already reached a level that
transcends what the Brahimi report (S/2000/809) had
envisaged 10 years ago.

My delegation notes the report of the Secretary-
General dated 22 December 2009 (A/64/573) and
supports the four interlinked building blocks to focus
on.

At the outset, I would like to recall the words that
Under-Secretary-General Alain Le Roy delivered to the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations this
past February when he said that

"To develop the required capabilities to
implement all mandated tasks, including through
training of personnel, we need further clarity and
practical guidance regarding the roles and
expectations on peacekeeping operations."

Moving forward, we should consider those words
carefully.

In this regard, partnerships with regional
organizations, civilian partners and the private sector
need to be further developed. Regional and subregional
organizations, such as the African Union and the
European Union, have become crucial partners of the
United Nations, especially in sharing the burden of
peacekeeping operations. A concrete and
comprehensive model or modality of cooperation with
such organizations should be developed.

In order to ensure that operations are effective
and efficient, a global and responsive rapid deployment
system is key. The support system should also
correspond to the nature of the peacekeeping operation.
In this regard, I am glad to announce that the
Government of the Republic of Korea has recently
adopted domestic legislation that enables the
deployment of standby forces on short notice. I hope
our efforts will help to further enhance the readiness
and responsiveness of the United Nations.

On the support side, the creation of the
Department of Field Support (DFS) is one of the major
successes of the reform driven by Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon and was instrumental in providing
integrated field support. We anticipate that the strategic
support plan that DFS is deploying will take United
Nations field support capability to another level.

But deploying quickly must not be the only
planning factor during the early stages of a mission.
United Nations peacekeeping operations have become
increasingly multidimensional, involving situations
that are aptly termed complex emergencies and varying
greatly in scope and mandate. Hence, peacekeeping
should be pursued on a two-track parallel approach,
alongside peacebuilding efforts. In fact, peacebuilding
efforts have now become an important feature of many
peacekeeping missions. That relationship underscores
the need for clear planning among the various
stakeholders, with a view towards exit and transition
strategies.

To ensure sustainability and ultimate success,
peacekeeping must extend beyond meeting more
immediate needs, such as overseeing ceasefires, to
laying the foundations necessary to maintain lasting
peace. Only when such basic structures for sustainable
peace are put in place can a peacekeeping operation
disengage successfully, resulting in a smooth transition
and a timely exit. To achieve that, peacekeeping
operations today must not involve just the military
dimension. They must also encompass intertwined
strategies rooted in development, human rights, and
disarmament - in particular with regard to
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes.

Similarly, preventive actions or alternatives to
heavy peacekeeping operations need to be actively
pursued. Although a peacekeeping operation might be
less costly than other military options, mediation,
civilian and military observers, police observation and
preventive deployments are more cost-effective. In that
regard, we welcome the setting up of the Mediation
Support Unit in the Department of Political Affairs.
Mediation and other preventive measures should not be
considered separately from a peacekeeping operation.
They should be seen as a complementary and integral
part of everyday peacekeeping operations.

Close coordination with various actors such as
the World Bank, the United Nations Development
Programme, UNICEF and others involved in
peacekeeping missions will be crucial in creating the
conditions that allow for gradual phase-out and exit,
with a view towards lasting peace. Those actors can
remain on the ground after the drawdown or
withdrawal of peacekeeping forces and continue to
provide the necessary assistance to ensure mission
success.

More than six months ago, DPKO and the United
Nations suffered tragic loss of lives and injury after the
earthquake struck in Haiti. The Republic of Korea
remains steadfast in our efforts to help reconstruct
Haiti following the earthquake. Beyond humanitarian
contributions, Korea has also dispatched a 240-strong
engineering company to the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti. The company is
currently active in the area of responsibility in
Leogane, one of the hardest hit areas of the country.
Our troops have focused on providing targeted relief in
the areas of electricity restoration, public health
infrastructure expansion and water supply
reinstatement in the country.

The Republic of Korea is also encouraged by the
strengthening of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) after the war in the summer of
2006. We take note of the mention in the report of the
Secretary General issued on 1 July (S/2010/352) that
the Governments of Lebanon and Israel are showing
their commitment to the implementation of resolution
1701 (2006). However, as the recent violence has
shown, we are concerned that stability in the region
continues to be threatened. UNIFIL must therefore
remain vigilant and promote communication and
coordination with both Lebanon and Israel to ensure
that the border remains calm.

Finally, my delegation welcomes the remarkable
increase in the number of women serving in the field,
in particular in leadership positions. In the past few
years, there has been a drastic increase in the number
of women serving in senior civilian positions in field
missions. Furthermore, women now make up 30 per
cent of those deployed as civilians in peacekeeping
operations. My delegation hopes that such progress
will continue.

