Mr. Linkevicius (Lithuania): I thank the President
for organizing this highly pertinent open debate. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General, the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission and the
representative of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations for their briefings.

Since the inception of the United Nations,
peacekeeping - a concept that was not even mentioned
in the Charter of the United Nations - has developed
into an indispensable tool for the maintenance of
national peace and security. Over time it has become a
flagship activity of the United Nations.

Today peacekeepers operate in much more
challenging environments than at any time in history.
They serve in areas where there is no peace to keep. The
multidimensional character of today's peacekeeping
and the new, demanding realities on the ground point to
the urgency of peacekeeping reform.

As a troop-contributing country, Lithuania has a
great interest in making United Nations peacekeeping
more efficient and correspondent to the needs of
the twenty-first century. In October, an additional
34 troops from Lithuania will join the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali, making a total of 39 service members - a
contribution to be maintained through the next year.

More than two years ago, the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations published
its recommendations on peacekeeping reform (see S/2015/446). It is true that the implementation and
follow-up of those recommendations has been far too
slow. Recent peace and security reform initiatives
of the Secretary-General provide us with a unique
chance to build the momentum and keep the spirit
of the High-level Panel alive over the next year and
beyond. The reform proposals and determination of the
Secretary-General give us a genuine hope that the full
implementation of his reform agenda might reshape
peacekeeping and bring the prevention potential of the
United Nations to its full realization.

"We the peoples" are the first words of the 1945
Charter of the United Nations. However, today United
Nations peace operations are rightly criticized for
neglecting the very people that the United Nations is
entrusted to protect. The protection of civilians under
imminent threat must remain a key priority in all
peacekeeping missions. In that context, I am proud to
announce that, on 13 September, Lithuania endorsed
and recognized the Kigali Principles on the Protection
of Civilians.

We are deeply concerned that, despite the long-
declared zero-tolerance policy towards all forms of
sexual exploitation and abuse by the United Nations
and related personnel, sexual abuse continues to take
place. Lithuania strongly supports Secretary-General's
efforts to act with determination and bring sexual
exploitation to an end. A few days ago, Lithuania signed
a compact on the elimination of sexual exploitation and
abuse, and the President of Lithuania joined the Circle
of Leadership.

Much too often, mediation and peace processes remain
male-dominated. While women are disproportionately
affected by conflict, the critical role of women in
negotiating, keeping and building peace in their
communities is often overlooked. The deployment
of women's protection advisers and human rights
and gender-awareness training are useful tools in
peacekeeping and should be further expanded.

The safety and security of United Nations
personnel and peacekeepers in the field must remain
a high priority. Clear steps are needed to ensure that
our peacekeepers have the capabilities they need to
protect themselves first of all and, of course, fulfil their
mandate. Continuous attacks against the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali and many other peacekeeping missions indicate
the urgent need for our collective reform action. The use
of technologies in peacekeeping should improve early-
warning capabilities and enhance the ability to detect,
mitigate, deter and respond to all types of threats.
That is especially pertinent where peacekeepers face
asymmetrical threats.

In conclusion, we believe that both the Secretary-
General and Member States could build on the
emerging consensus to better integrate prevention and
sustaining peace into the work of United Nations peace
operations. Let us unite around the proposed peace and
security reform initiative of the Secretary-General and
fully utilize such unique momentum to reform United
Nations peacekeeping.

The meeting rose at 1.35 pm.
