Mr. Lekota (South Africa): Allow me to begin by
thanking the delegation of the United Kingdom for
organizing today's debate. South Africa aligns itself
with the statement to be made later by the
representative of Jamaica on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM).

In December 2005, the General Assembly and the
Security Council concurrently established the
Peacebuilding Commission as a new intergovernmental
advisory body of the United Nations to support peace
efforts in countries emerging from conflict.

Today's debate should be seen as another
opportunity to support and enhance existing
mechanism of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture, thus re-energizing peacebuilding efforts in
post-conflict countries. It is important that the
Peacebuilding Commission be strengthened and remain
the focal point of peacebuilding activities. Right now,
the main challenge facing the Commission is to
maximize its impact on the ground in full alignment,
cooperation and accord with national Governments'
policies and strategies.

The priorities in the post-conflict environment
should centre around the four basic pillars of post-
conflict reconstruction, namely, security, social and
economic well-being, justice and reconciliation, good
governance and participation. Post-conflict societies
are confronted with various problems, including the
absence of, or weak, institutions, and limited or no
capacity necessary for the long-term sustainability of
peace and socio-economic development.

Even more important is ensuring national and
local ownership in the identification, development and
recommendation of national priorities and strategies.
Without national ownership of peacebuilding, any
intervention will likely be regarded as an imposition.
And, as history has taught us, imposed solutions are
soon disregarded by their very beneficiaries and are
bound to fail dismally.

The issue of deploying civilian experts with a
view to addressing these capacity gaps in a country's
post-conflict and stabilization periods is worth
scrutinizing closely. South Africa's experience in
African peace missions, such as in Burundi, show that
some of the civilian expertise is invaluable. In
principle, we therefore support the concept of
integrated peace missions, within the confines of
various mandates. We hope there will be ongoing and
detailed discussions on how this concept could be
applied, including on the role of the United Nations,
regional organizations and member States.

Our limited experience since we joined in the
efforts of the international community in seeking to
stabilize parts of the continent and other places
indicates to us that regional buy-in is critical for the
success of any peace mission. We realize now from
what we have experienced that merged or balanced
participation by countries of the region in which the
conflict is taking place is vital, because those countries
have partial but direct interest in the success or
otherwise of the peace mission. It is no exaggeration to
say that sometimes human commitment to a process
could indeed be more important than billions of dollars
being thrown at a problem. Human beings can make
things happen even, at times, without money.

It is our View that for post-conflict reconstruction
to succeed its processes should be seen as reinforcing
the attainment of peace, stability and security. In effect,
both national and regional participation must be part of
the effort right from the beginning, so that those in the
country and in the region feel that they own the entire
process. Sustainability beyond settlement requires the
will power of the country and of the countries
surrounding it.

On a practical level, this would mean that post-
conflict reconstruction practitioners and resources are
deployed alongside peacekeepers. However, we are
cognizant of the challenges associated with the
deployment of civilian capacities, including issues of
security.

Among other challenges the United Kingdom
delegation raised in its concept paper is the financing
gap in the aftermath of conflict. One of the pillars of
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture is the
Peacebuilding Fund. The Fund was created for the
specific purpose of assisting in the facilitation of
peacebuilding activities and is understood to be a
catalyst for attracting much-needed financial resource
injections, particularly at a time when there may be
little hope of success towards recovery. The role of the
Fund is critical, because for peace to have a chance, the
material conditions of a society must change and
people's hopes for a better life must be sustained.
Quick-impact projects must be implemented so as to
demonstrate peace dividends to fragile populations and
communities.

The resources of the United Nations and other
multinational organizations often move much slower
than required, as a consequence of which golden
opportunities for success are sometimes missed. We
have found ourselves compelled at times to approach
some partners to ask them for direct bilateral assistance
so that we do not lose opportunities that are there. In
that regard, I must mention the Netherlands, Belgium
and the United Kingdom, which have sometimes
assisted and have made it possible for us to sustain the
processes in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The African Union continues to play its role in
the peacebuilding field, including through its post-
conflict reconstruction and development policy. South
Africa is privileged to have been selected to chair the
first African Union ministerial committee focusing on
post-conflict reconstruction and development in the
Sudan.

In conclusion, we appreciate the efforts of the
United Kingdom presidency to lead us on these cross-
cutting issues of peace, security and development, and
we support the draft presidential statement to be
adopted later.

