Mr. Moreno-Ocampo: I welcome this
opportunity to brief the Council on the activities of my
Office since my last report in June.

My Office is currently completing an
investigation and the collection of sufficient evidence
to identify those who bear the greatest responsibility
for some of the worst crimes in Darfur. The evidence
provides reasonable grounds to believe that the
individuals identified have committed crimes against
humanity and war crimes, including the crimes of
persecution, torture, murder and rape, during a period
in which the gravest crimes occurred in Darfur.

Throughout the process, I have devoted
considerable resources and given careful attention to
the issue of admissibility. In November this year, I
requested an update from the Government of the Sudan
relating to its national proceedings. Since the
submission of my report to the Council, I have
received a formal response from the Government of the
Sudan reporting that 14 individuals have been arrested
for violations of international humanitarian law and
human rights abuses. Those indications do not appear
2

to render the current case inadmissible, and I am
therefore planning to finalize the submission for the
Judges by February 2007. In its response, the
Government notes its previous cooperation concerning
the investigation of crimes against humanity in Darfur
and reaffirms its commitment to the principle of
continuing cooperation with the International Criminal
Court. I will therefore request its cooperation to
facilitate a visit by representatives of my Office to the
Sudan in January to gather information on those
developments.

By making those advances, I am fulfilling my
responsibilities under the Rome Statute, as well as the
task set by this Council in resolution 1593 (2005).
Since the adoption of the resolution, the violence in
Darfur has continued and the suffering of the people of
Darfur, including the millions of displaced persons, has
grown worse. There are also worrying reports of a
spillover of violence into Chad and the Central African
Republic.

This Council has recognized that justice for the
victims will contribute to enhancing security and send
an important warning beyond the borders of Darfur to
those individuals who might otherwise resort to
violence and the commission of crimes to achieve their
aims.

My Office cannot investigate all of the hundreds
of alleged criminal incidents and prosecute all the
alleged perpetrators of crimes in Darfur. I have
therefore focused on the most serious incidents and the
individuals with the greatest responsibility for those
incidents. Following an analysis of the universe of
crimes alleged to have been committed in Darfur, I
focused the collection of evidence on a series of
incidents that occurred in 2003 and 2004, during a
period when and in a location where the highest
numbers of crimes were recorded.

The Office has collected evidence from a wide
range of sources, thoroughly investigating
incriminating and exonerating facts in an equal,
independent and impartial manner. Those sources
include statements from victims as well as Sudanese
officials, thousands of documents collected by the
International Commission of Inquiry for Darfur and
information provided by the National Commission of
Inquiry, as well as documents and materials generated
by this Council, States and other international
organizations.
06-66000
The Government of the Sudan has participated in
the process. I would like to recall that, in May 2006,
the Sudanese authorities provided a written report
responding to questions submitted by my Office. That
report outlined the various phases of the conflict from
the Government's perspective, offered information
relating to the activities of the military and security
structures operating in Darfur, as well as of the other
parties to the conflict, and the legal system governing
the conduct of military operations. The report was
supplemented by a meeting between representatives of
my Office and military officers in Khartoum in June
2006. In August 2006, representatives of my Office
again travelled to the Sudan and interviewed two high-
ranking civilian and military officials. Those
individuals, due to their positions and functions, had
knowledge and information relating to the activities of
the security forces in Darfur and the conduct of the
other parties to the conflict.

Reaching the victims was at all times a priority
for my Office. Since the start of the investigation, the
Darfur team has conducted more than 70 missions to
17 countries, screening hundreds of potential witnesses
and taking more than 100 formal witness statements,
many of which were with victims.

On the basis of careful evaluation of that
evidence, my Office has identified some of the gravest
criminal incidents and some of the individuals who
could be considered to bear the greatest responsibility.
The evidence proves that numerous crimes falling
within the jurisdiction of the Court were committed,
including such crimes against humanity as persecution,
murder and wilful killing, rape and other forms of
sexual violence, inhumane acts, cruel treatment,
outrages upon personal dignity and pillaging, as well as
war crimes such as wilful killing, extrajudicial killing,
rape and intentional attacks against civilians.

In previous reports to the Council, I highlighted
the fact that the International Criminal Court is a court
of last resort. Cases will be prosecuted before the
International Criminal Court in situations where there
has not been a national investigation or prosecution of
the case being brought to the Court by my Office, or
where there is, or has been, such an investigation or
prosecution but where it was vitiated by an
unwillingness or inability to genuinely carry out that
investigation or prosecution.
06-66000

During each of the four missions to the Sudan,
my Office met with judicial and legal officers,
representatives of the Darfur special courts and
officials from the Ministry of Justice and other relevant
Government departments. In June this year, the Office
had information indicating that the special courts had
tried six cases, involving less than 30 suspects. Those
suspects included 18 low-ranking military officers,
with the remainder being civilians. The Judicial
Investigation Committee had not completed any
investigations or prosecutions, and the Special
Prosecutions Commission was continuing
investigations into one incident and had acquitted
individuals charged with war crimes in relation to
another incident. In November 2006, the Government
of the Sudan provided additional information to the
Office relating to reported prosecutions of rape cases
involving members of the police forces and regular
armed forces.

It is important to reiterate that the admissibility
assessment is not a judgement on the Sudanese justice
system as a whole, but an assessment as to whether or
not the Government of the Sudan has undertaken
genuine proceedings in relation to the cases selected by
my Office for prosecution. In this context, a case
involves the specific incidents in which crimes were
committed by identified perpetrators.

My Office has assessed whether or not the
Sudanese authorities are conducting, or have
conducted, genuine national proceedings in relation to
the same incidents and individuals identified in the
current case. As I indicated earlier, since I submitted
my report the Government of the Sudan has written to
formally indicate that there are developments in the
work of the "Judicial Investigation Commission for
Investigation and Inquiry [into] Crimes Violating
Human Rights and International Humanitarian Law in
Darfur", including the arrest of 14 individuals
suspected of violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights abuses. Those indications do not
appear to render the current case inadmissible.
Therefore, by February 2007, I plan to finalize the
submission to the judges and enhance the necessary
security measures.

I will request the cooperation of the Government
of the Sudan in facilitating a visit by members of my
Office in January to gather further information on
those developments. It will be important during that
visit to have access to relevant documents, as well as to
3
the individuals in custody for the purposes of carrying
out interviews.

I share the grave concerns expressed by the
Secretary-General and the Council in relation to the
ongoing violence in Darfur and the reports of a
spillover of Violence into Chad and the Central African
Republic. The perpetrators of those crimes are standing
in the way of progress towards peace and security in
Darfur, as well as in neighbouring countries.

Despite the signing of the Darfur Peace
Agreement by some of the parties to the conflict, there
continue to be almost daily allegations of serious
crimes, some of which may fall within the jurisdiction
of the Court. Violent clashes between factions within
the movements, as well as between the different
movements, have led to significant numbers of
civilians being killed. There are also disturbing reports
of a repetition of similar patterns associated with
earlier crimes, including reports of attacks on civilian
locations by armed militias supported by elements of
the Sudanese security forces. Incidents of rape and
sexual assault continue to be reported at very high
levels.

Attacks on humanitarian personnel and
peacekeepers are another prominent feature of the
current situation in Darfur. Between July and
September alone, there were reports of the hijacking of
21 humanitarian transports and the ambushing and
looting of more than 31 convoys, leading to the deaths
of six humanitarian workers and two military
observers. Those and other such attacks have caused
some organizations to withdraw from Darfur, further
entrenching the plight, and endangering the lives, of
millions of displaced persons. Attacks on humanitarian
personnel are prohibited under international
humanitarian law and constitute war crimes falling
within the jurisdiction of the Court. The Office
continues to collect information relating to those
attacks and to those responsible, and may take further
action before the Court or provide the information to
other relevant authorities where appropriate.

The persistent lack of security in Darfur is also
reported to have spilled over into Chad and the Central
African Republic, leading to allegations of crimes
having been committed on the territory of those States.
On 1 November, the Government of Chad acceded to
the Rome Statute. The Statute will therefore enter into
force on 1 January 2007. The Central African Republic
is also a State party to the International Criminal Court.
The Office is therefore closely following the situation
in Chad and the Central African Republic, as well as
possible links to the situation in Darfur.

The cooperation of the African Union remains
important to progress in current and future
investigations. Following my briefing to the Council in
June, I travelled to Addis Ababa with the President of
the Court to brief the African Union Peace and Security
Council on the activities of the Court, including in
relation to Darfur. I also met with Mr. Konare,
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, and
Ambassador Djinnit, Commissioner for Peace and
Security. That visit provided a valuable opportunity to
exchange views on the situation in Darfur and enhance
understanding as to the procedures and work of the
Court. I am discussing a visit to Brazzaville, to have a
meeting with the President of the African Union, and I
intend to hold further briefings with the African Union
as well as the Arab League in 2007.

There has also been progress in relation to the
requests for assistance transmitted by my Office in
February 2006 to the African Union Mission in the
Sudan (AMIS). The first batch of information from
AMIS was delivered in June, and we are working to
collect the remaining information requested, as well as
preparing additional requests for assistance.

I have repeated, on a number of occasions, that
the participation of the Government of the Sudan in the
process is important to ensure an impartial
investigation and a view of the events in Darfur that is
as balanced as possible. Various requests for assistance
have been made in 2005 and 2006 to the Government
of the Sudan. A detailed request was submitted to the
Sudanese authorities in June 2006, including a request
for specified documentation and access to civilian and
military officials for interview purposes.

As I indicated earlier, in August 2006,
representatives from my Office travelled to the Sudan
and conducted formal witness interviews with two
senior Government officials, who because of their
positions could provide information relating to the
conflict in Darfur and to the activities of the security
forces and other groups. Meetings also took place with
other officials who provided an update on national
proceedings. A limited amount of documentation was
also provided.
06-66000

There are a number of outstanding requests for

documents and interviews that remain an important

feature of the fact-finding process. I will continue to

seek that information from the Government of the

Sudan, and I will keep the Council informed of
progress in that regard.

By referring the situation in Darfur to the Court,
the Security Council has reaffirmed that peace and
security require justice. That relates not only to past
crimes, but also to the current crimes that are
protracting the suffering of millions of those who are
most vulnerable, including those in the camps for the
displaced, and threatening stability beyond the borders
of Darfur.

As my Office moves towards the completion of
the investigation and the presentation of evidence in
06-66000
relation to the first case, it sends a signal to those who
are considering committing further crimes that they
cannot do so with impunity. The strength and impact of
that signal depends on the support and cooperation of
the Council, the Government of the Sudan and other
relevant States.

