Mr. Raytchev (Bulgaria): We appreciate the
holding of this open Security Council debate on an
issue of particular importance for the entire
international community.

We have listened carefully to the statements made
before the Council. As a country associated with the
European Union, Bulgaria endorses the statement
earlier delivered by the representative of Greece on
behalf of the Union.

On a number of occasions, Bulgaria has
expressed its adherence to the efforts for strengthening
international law. In that regard, I would like to point
out that Bulgaria fully recognizes and adheres to its
international obligations as a State party to the Rome
Statute and supports the European Union position on
the need to strengthen the regime established under the
Rome Statute. In our consideration of this important
matter, we are respecting both the International
Criminal Court (ICC), which we View as the most
ambitious achievement in current international law, to
which we are strongly committed, and the Council,
which is responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

While sensitive to the legitimate concerns of the
various countries involved in peacekeeping operations,
Bulgaria among them, we continue to support the
effective functioning of the ICC as a court with
universal jurisdiction to combat and prevent crimes
against humanity, genocide and war crimes. We believe
that support for resolution 1422 (2002) and for the
resolution adopted today allows the Council to
continue efforts to arrive at a solution that will not
undermine the credibility of the ICC and will not affect
in any way United Nations peacekeeping operations.

For Bulgaria, it was particularly important to
reach consensus on this resolution. While we are
convinced that the search for compromise should not
be linked to the weakening of important international
treaties such as the Rome Statute, we remain of the
View that Council members must act in the spirit of
compromise and understanding and actively work to
find a solution that is acceptable to all.

