Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation thanks the delegation of Rwanda for
its initiative in convening this open Security Council
meeting on the theme "Prevention ofconflicts in Africa:
addressing the root causes". I welcome Her Excellency
Minister Mushikiwabo in presiding over today's
meeting. I also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon
for his briefing and thank His Excellency Ambassador
Tekeda Alemu, Permanent Representative of Ethiopia,
for his statement on behalf of the Chairperson of the
African Union.

In recent years, the overall situation of peace and
security in Africa has remained stable. The aspirations
of the African peoples for peace and stability have
been growing. The capabilities of African countries
and regional organizations in responding to their
own peace and security issues have been reinforced.
Nonetheless, Africa remains the continent with the
highest concentration of conflicts and the most fragile
security situation. Taking effective measures to prevent
African conflicts, in particular by addressing the root
causes of African conflicts, is of great importance for
the maintenance of peace and security in the world.

The root causes of conflict in Africa are
complicated. There are territorial, religious and ethnic
problems left over by history's legacy. There are also
practical problems faced by African countries, such
as poverty, underdevelopment and weak capacities.
Addressing the root causes of conflicts in Africa calls
for integrated measures that address both the symptoms
and the root causes. I wish to underscore the following
points.

First, effectively helping Africa to achieve
economic growth and social progress is the fundamental
means to address the root causes of African conflicts.
In the light of the priority areas identified by African
countries themselves, China calls upon the international
community to further increase investment in Africa and
comprehensively honour its commitments of assistance
and debt relief. Walking the talk is essential. Africa is
by no means the private domain of any single country.
Developed countries should be positive and open-
minded in viewing the mutually beneficial cooperation
among emerging countries and Africa and should work
together with them for the rejuvenation and development
of Africa.

Secondly, the will of African countries should be
fully respected. African countries' exploration of their
development paths in line with national conditions is
conducive to eliminating the root causes of conflicts
and to realizing long-term stability. The international
community should fully respect African choices and
refrain from arbitrary interventions or the imposition
of ideas on others. The vast African continent is a big
family with a shared destiny. African countries and
regional organizations have the deepest understanding
of their own regional issues.

This year marks the fiftieth anniversary of the
establishment of the Organization of African Unity, a
milestone in the African peoples' aspirations in pursuit
of alliance and self-renewal.

The international community should uphold the
principles of objectivity and impartiality. It should
comprehensively and actively support African people
in addressing African problems with African means
and the efforts and the constructive role of the African
Union and regional and subregional organizations
in addressing African conflicts. The international
judicial system should also play a constructive role
in promoting the realization of peace and security
in Africa. The International Criminal Court should
uphold the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, while respecting the judicial traditions
and realistic needs of African countries and avoiding
double standards.

Thirdly, to effectively help Africa mobilize
resources, capacity-building in Africa should be stepped
up. Resource and capacity constraints represent the
biggest bottleneck for African countries and regional
organizations in seeking to address the root causes of
conflicts. In the light of the needs of Africa, we call
on the international community to actively provide
assistance in such areas as politics, capital, technology
and capacity-building. We hope that the United Nations
will further enhance coordination and cooperation with
Africa and actively respond to Africa's requests for the
deployment of United Nations peacekeeping operations
and the provision of financial and technical support.

Fourthly, to enhance international coordination
and collaboration, various United Nations agencies,
the relevant peacekeeping operations, special political
missions and the relevant countries and regional
organizations should further enhance communication
and pool resources so as to maximize synergy and
help Africa to eradicate the root causes of conflicts. It
is essential to leverage the role of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Commission in helping post-conflict
countries consolidate peace.

China attaches great importance to preventing
conflict and addressing the root causes of conflicts
in Africa. For a long time we have been providing
substantial assistance to Africa through various
channels and platforms, including the Forum on China-
Africa Cooperation. Not long ago, Chinese President Xi
Jinping, during his visit to Africa, reiterated the solemn
position of China to unswervingly enhance solidarity
with and mutual assistance for African countries and
to continue increasing assistance to Africa within its
capabilities.

China has always constructively participated in
peace and security issues in Africa. It has continued to
support the efforts of African countries and the African
Union and other regional organizations to safeguard
their national sovereignty and address their own
problems. During the fifth ministerial meeting of the
Forum on China-Africa Cooperation, in 2012, China
launched the China-Africa Cooperative Partnership
initiative, which will continue to provide financial and
technical assistance to Africa for maintenance ofpeace
and security.

China will continue to work with the international
community to make its due contributions to the
realization of sustainable peace in Africa.

