Mr. Okuda (Japan): First of all, my Mission
would like to express to the President of the Security
Council, Ambassador Ilkin, and his Mission, its
appreciation for their decision to convene this meeting
on peacekeeping operations. Our appreciation also
goes to the United Kingdom and France for their
initiative on peacekeeping operations.

United Nations peacekeeping operations have

been one of the most important tools available to the

Security Council to address situations in countries

emerging from conflict. As conflict situations have

become more diverse, United Nations peacekeeping
has been faced with greater challenges.

Currently, United Nations peacekeeping operations
are tasked with a broad range of mandates.
Overstretched operations are faced with challenges in
logistics, finance and force generation, which give rise
to significant gaps between mandates and their
implementation. We welcome the New Horizon
initiative presented to the Council today by Under-
Secretaries-General Le Roy and Malcorra to address
these challenges. We look forward to a constructive
and useful dialogue on this initiative between Member
States and the Secretariat.

Allow me to contribute the following three
observations to address the issue of mandate
implementation.

First, while the mandates are given by the
Council, there should also be a common and clear
understanding among all stakeholders, including major
troop- and police-contributing countries, countries in
the region and host nations, as to which tasks are to be
given to the mission and to what extent they are
expected to be accomplished.

Allow me to offer a useful example. Since the
Council established the United Nations mission in
Timor-Leste, the Timor-Leste core group, comprised of
countries having strong relationships with the country,
has been facilitating consideration of the issue by the
Council. The views of the countries that have direct
and broad contact with the respective host nations are
extremely valuable in enabling the Council to
formulate clear, achievable and effective mandates.
Taking them into account lends the Council's work
greater legitimacy and authority. It is also
indispensable to hear the views of the major troop- and
police-contributing countries, whose personnel can
provide direct information on conditions in the field.
Realistic evaluation of the situation in the field is key
to the formulation of a realistic mandate. In this regard,
tripartite cooperation among the Council, troop-
contributing countries and the Secretariat, through
more intensive information sharing and efforts to reach
common understanding on the nature of operations,
should be enhanced.

Secondly, complex and robust peacekeeping
mandates require troops that are more capable and well
trained. The quality of the personnel is more important
than the numbers. For this reason, we concur with the
Secretariat on the necessity of broadening the
contributor base. To the same end, it is necessary that
the international community further develop training
programmes for the troops in a coordinated manner.

Japan is working with peacekeeping operation
training centres in Africa to build the capacity of
African troops. Japan is also working with countries of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
as shown in the third meeting of the ASEAN Regional
Forum's peacekeeping experts in Cambodia. That
meeting was held from 24 to 26 June under the
co-chairmanship of Cambodia and Japan, and the
participants had a very fruitful discussion on ways and
means for enhancing the regional capacity to
participate in United Nations peacekeeping operations.

Lastly, it is quite understandable that people in
distress expect much from a United Nations mission
tasked with mandates such as protection of civilians.
However, gaps between expectations and implementation
can quickly lead to disappointment and undermine the
credibility of the United Nations. That in turn makes it
more difficult to implement the assigned mandates.

To avoid this spiral, it would be useful to
establish a common understanding among relevant
partners, including the local population, about the role
of the peacekeepers on the ground through proactive
communication and by establishing standard operating
procedures governing the protection of civilians and
how the United Nations mission coordinates
with other humanitarian agencies and non-governmental
organizations. We should also pay sufficient attention
to achieving a return to normal life for the local
populace through the early recovery of socio-economic
stability and thus alleviate any frustration that may be
building among them. At the same time, the
international community should strive to make accurate
assessments of the developments on the ground and the
work of the mission without exerting any pressure, in
order to avoid arriving at premature decisions
regarding the mandate and work of the mission. We
should try to find realistic and practical ways to
operate missions in spite of the complicated situation
surrounding them.

Today's timely debate contributes to our
understanding of the challenges confronting peacekeeping
activities. Japan, in its capacity as Chair of the Security
Council's Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations,
will spare no effort to facilitate exchanges of views
among all stakeholders in order to find workable
solutions for current challenges. The Working Group
has had four fruitful meetings so far this year, with the
participation of troop- and police-contributing countries,
countries contributing financially and other stakeholders,
to discuss how to address gaps between the mandate
and its implementation. In that connection, we sought
firsthand feedback on conditions on the ground from
the troop-contributing countries and the Secretariat.
Based on that fruitful discussion, we plan to prepare an
interim report on the work of the Working Group for
submission to the Council next month with the aim of
contributing to improvements in operational aspects. I
ask for the constructive engagement of the members of
the Working Group in this regard.

The various ongoing initiatives, including the
Working Group, should be mutually reinforcing and
should contribute to setting a new direction for
improved United Nations peacekeeping and the
accumulation of practical and realistic solutions. Japan
will continue to be actively engaged in this endeavour
as Chair of the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations as well as in its activities as a Member State.

