Mr. Serry: The Middle East continues to undergo a
period of grave turmoil, with tragic human consequences
and an uncertain outcome. We have seen regional
tensions mounting dangerously as the brutal bloodshed
in Syria continued while the fighting also crossed
boundaries, and United Nations peacekeepers in the
Golan area of separation found themselves increasingly
in harm's way. Ending the conflict in Syria is a matter
of great urgency and must be the top priority of the
international community. At the same time, it would be
mistaken and dangerous to assume that a resolution of
the Palestinian-Israeli conflict is less important. Now is
not the time to relent in our commitments to advancing
the prospects for the resumption of meaningful talks
towards the realization of a two-State solution. Now is
the time for concerted action in support of a substantive
initiative, lest we miss the slight opening that has been
offered in recent months.

While diplomatic efforts to break the political
deadlock and bring the parties back to the negotiating
table have remained quiet, they are no less serious
in determination. The renewed United States effort
and sustained personal engagement of the United
States Secretary of State is cause for encouragement.
Secretary Kerry is currently on his fourth trip to the
region, underscoring his commitment. We have also
noted the renewed interest of regional stakeholders,
particularly the important visit to Washington, DC, on
29 April of a delegation of Arab Ministers and leaders,
including the Prime Minister of Qatar, Sheikh Hamad
bin Jassim bin Jabr Al-Thani, and Secretary General of
the League of Arab States Nabil El Araby. Their visit
reaffirmed the importance of the Arab Peace Initiative,
first proposed in 2002, and, we hope, revived prospects
that its promise of regional stability can become an
important part of developing peace efforts. We note,
in that regard, the positive comments about the visit
by President Peres and Israeli Minister of Justice and
chief negotiator Tzipi Livni. We encourage the Israeli
Government to respond to that opening for a revitalized
Arab Peace Initiative.

The Secretary-General has also remained in
close contact with the parties on the issues. In recent
conversations with the two leaders, he strongly
encouraged the ongoing efforts towards the resumption
of Israeli-Palestinian peace talks, and expressed his
hope that they would soon lead to a substantial peace
initiative with a defined political horizon. He further
stressed the importance for the parties of creating the
conditions conducive to a resumption of meaningful
negotiations and avoid actions that would risk
undermining such prospects.

The risk to both sides is clear. As we have said
before, it is crucial that both sides reverse negative
trends on the ground to restore confidence in each
other and in the possibility of a solution. We take note
that both parties are exercising some restraint and
care not to upset the fragile situation on the ground in
order to support the ongoing diplomatic effort. On the
Israeli side, we have noted that there have been no new
approvals or tenders issued for settlements in the West
Bank or in East Jerusalem since March. However, there
was a disconcerting exception, involving approximately
300 units preapproved in Beit El - a settlement deep
inside the West Bank - based on a decision from last
year. Settlements are illegal under international law,
and Israel must abide by its commitments under the
road map to freeze all settlement activity and dismantle
outposts erected after 2001. We are also concerned
about reports that the Israeli Government intends to
legalize four West Bank settlement outposts.

Palestinians have shown countenance in diplomatic
forums, and Palestinian security forces have maintained
their robust performance in maintaining law and order,
including in dealing with tensions on the ground.
Several moments of friction illustrate the importance
of both sides continuing to work responsibly to defuse
tensions and avoid escalation.

Recent tensions around the sensitive issue of
Jerusalem, particularly when it came to restrictions
of access to holy sites, were troubling.CIashes
occurred on 7 and 8 May in and around the Old City
in East Jerusalem, in the context of what Israelis
call "Jerusalem Day". Restrictions on access for
Palestinians were imposed in connection to visits in the
esplanade of the Haram Al-Sharif/Temple Mount - by
right-wing Israeli activists. That was coupled with the
temporary detention of the Grand Mufti of Jerusalem
for interrogation owing to reported incitement. While
his detention was short, the incident added to existing
friction and drew wide criticism from Palestinian, Arab
and Muslim leaders. It also led to an emergency meeting
of the League of Arab States in Cairo on 12 May.

Notwithstanding the increased tensions, events on
the ground were relatively contained, and authorities
acted with restraint. Clashes resulted in 15 Palestinian
being lightly injured and 23 arrested, as well as one
Israeli being injured and 13 arrested. Preceding those
events, on 4 May, during Orthodox Easter, an 85-year-
old Coptic Egyptian cleric and two Egyptian diplomats
were held by Israeli police in the Old City while they
were on their way to the Church of the Holy Sepulchre.
Following the incident, Israel reportedly apologized to
Egypt via diplomatic channels for the excessive use of
force.

The Secretary-General has reiterated the
importance of respect for the religious freedom of all
and for worshippers of all faiths to have access to their
holy sites, while noting that religious and other leaders
should also refrain from inflammatory statements. We
also note the statement by President Peres on 8 May
that Israel, as per its agreement with the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan, will work to ensure the protection
of the Muslim and Christian holy sites in the Old City
and the safety of the worshippers. Those events once
again underscore the importance of addressing the
underlying issues regarding Jerusalem, which are still
unresolved. It remains the view of the Secretary-General
that Jerusalem - a final status issue - should emerge
through negotiations as the capital of two States living
side by side in peace and security, with arrangements
for the holy sites that are acceptable to all.

On 15 May, Palestinians marked what they call
"Al-Nakba Day" -to commemorate the 1948 events
leading to their displacement - by holding large
marches and festivals in urban centres across the West
Bank and Gaza. In East Jerusalem, dozens ofIsraeli right
wing extremists entered the Haram Al-Sharif/Temple
Mount and clashed with Palestinians, resulting in some
injuries and arrests. Overall events were relatively
contained, with clashes between Palestinian protesters
and Israeli forces resulting in some 50 Palestinians and
six Israeli security officers being lightly injured.

Clashes between Palestinians and settlers in the
occupied West Bank intensified during the reporting
period. In a deplorable event, one settler was stabbed
to death by a Palestinian on 30 April at the Tapuach
junction, in the northern West Bank. He was the first
Israeli to be killed by Palestinians in the West Bank
since September 2011. The killing triggered numerous
incidents of settler violence against Palestinians and
their property, primarily in the Nablus governorate.
Overall during the reporting period, a total of 46
Palestinians, including 12 children and one woman,
were injured by settlers, while 11 settlers were injured
by Palestinians. Clashes between Palestinians and
settlers also resulted in extensive material damage,
including to vehicles and Palestinian orchards, with
some 1,400 Palestinian trees vandalized.

Israeli security forces carried out a total of 368
search-and-arrest operations in the occupied West
Bank, including in Area A, resulting in 439 Palestinians
being injured and 454 Palestinians being arrested.
Eighteen members of Israel security forces were also
injured. The large majority of the casualties resulted
from clashes during Palestinian demonstrations,
including against the barrier, which deviates from the
Green Line in contravention of the advisory opinion of
the International Court of Justice (see A/ES-10/273).

The reporting period also witnessed continued
demolitions of Palestinian homes and property in
Area C and East Jerusalem. In total, 57 structures
were demolished, leading to the displacement of
75 Palestinians, including 41 children. The ongoing
demolition of homes, livelihood-related structures
and essential infrastructure is of serious humanitarian
concern and should stop.

The United Nations continues to monitor with
concern the condition of Palestinian prisoners. Despite
the release of two hunger strikers, four other Palestinians
restarted their hunger strikes. Five Jordanian prisoners
in Israeli jails are also reportedly on hunger strike. On
14 May, Israel renewed the administrative detention
of four Palestinian Legislative Council members for
another six months. We reiterate our position that
the use of administrative detention must be on an
exceptional basis only. Those detained must be charged
and face trial with judicial guarantees, or be released
without delay. The most recent visit by families of Gaza
prisoners took place on 20 May and included some

80 relatives, among them children.

Six months ago yesterday, the parties agreed to a
ceasefire understanding in the Gaza Strip, which makes
today a good opportunity to take stock and look ahead.
The understanding brought about marked improvement
during the first three months of its implementation.
No rockets from Gaza landed in Israel, and there was
some relaxation of remaining closures, notably the
extension of the fishing limit from three to six nautical
miles. However, three months of hopeful trends were
followed by a reversal, as subsequent developments
have threatened the improvements made. According
to Israeli authorities, 33 rockets and five mortar shells
landed in Israel from Gaza during the past three months.
Eleven Palestinian civilians were injured in the buffer
zone over the same period.

On 30 April, for the first time since 21 November
2012, an Israeli air strike killed a Palestinian, who was
a militant allegedly involved in firing rockets. Starting
on 21 March, the fishing limit was scaled back to three
nautical miles, leading to shooting in the vicinity and
arrests of Palestinian fishermen trying to go beyond
the limit. Since 27 February, Kerem Shalom, the only
functioning crossing for goods from Israel into Gaza,
has periodically been closed for 13 days in response to
rockets, resulting in shortages of some basic food stuffs
and cooking gas and in losses in export cash crops.

In our view, the ceasefire understanding reached
in November 2012 continues to represent the best
opportunity to start changing the negative dynamics
in Gaza. All must exert maximal effort to preserve
the ceasefire and its basic tenets, namely, adhering to
full calm and lifting the remaining closure on Gaza.
We continue to support Egyptian efforts in that regard.
Following the worrisome developments to which I
have referred, uneasy calm has returned. Yesterday's
announcement by Israeli authorities that the fishing
limit had been re-extended to six nautical miles is an
encouraging step.

Among the many long-term challenges facing the
people of Gaza, as identified by the United Nations in
our 2012 report Gaza 2020: a liveable place?, the lack
of safe drinking water and the decline of the aquifer
are perhaps the most pressing. Desalination will be
necessary to improve the situation. The United Nations,

with funding from Japan, has installed a desalination
plant with a capacity of 50 cubic metres per hour - the
thirteenth desalination plant installed by the United
Nations in Gaza. That example illustrates how United
Nations programming in Gaza continues apace and
makes a difference.

The first phase of United Nations reconstruction
projects totals approximately $450 million worth of
projects approved by the Government of Israel. The
United Nations continues to work in concert with other
members of the international community to scale up
reconstruction efforts while also pursuing the policy
changes that will be required if a sustainable Gazan
economy is to be re-established. We also continue
to call on Israel to permit the unrestricted entry of
construction material into Gaza, particularly aggregate,
iron bar and cement. Restrictions on trade should also
be lifted, including transfers to and from the West
Bank and imports from and exports to Israel and other
countries.

In a separate development, we welcome the release
today of the seven Egyptian servicemen captured in the
Sinai, as well as the subsequent reopening of the Rafah
crossing.

On 14 May, Fatah and Hamas delegations met
in Cairo to make progress on the implementation
of existing reconciliation agreements. The factions
reportedly recommitted to consultations on the
formation of a national consensus Government,
headed by President Abbas, as laid down in previous
agreements. Those consultations should start within
a month and lead to a Government in the next three
months, after which elections, including those for the
Palestinian National Council, are to take place within
another 90 days. On 16 May, President Abbas visited
Cairo, where he met with President Morsi to discuss
Palestinian reconciliation as well as the Middle East
peace process.

The Secretary-General remains deeply alarmed
about the escalating violence in Syria. The humanitarian
crisis continues to worsen, with every third Syrian
now in need of urgent assistance. One in four have
been uprooted from their homes. Syria's neighbours,
as generous and hospitable as ever, are reaching their
limits, now hosting more than 1.5 million registered
refugees. While we recognize the impact on host
countries, we stress the importance of keeping borders
open for refugees fleeing violence, consistent with
international humanitarian obligations. Communities
in Syria, including the Palestinian refugee population,
who are among the most vulnerable, are under immense
stress.

Despite the best efforts of the staff of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) to keep schools
and health clinics open, often at great personal risk,
half of Syria's Palestinian refugees registered with
UNRWA are now internally displaced. Some have
fled to neighbouring countries, an estimated 54,000 to
Lebanon in particular. UNRWA's emergency operation
has reached many, but much more needs to be done. It
is the responsibility of the warring parties to ensure the
protection of the civilian population.

Amid that growing tragedy and spreading chaos,
United Nations priorities are clear. We will continue
to ensure that the millions of Syrians in need receive
life-saving help. The Secretary-General is grateful to
the donor community for its generosity, and we urge
it to do even more. Humanitarian workers also need
access; we must think of better and more practical ways
to deliver assistance. However, humanitarian relief is
not a long-term answer. That is why the Secretary-
General welcomed the initiative of the United States
and the Russian Federation to bring the Syrian parties
to the negotiating table, and is fully devoted to helping
Syrians find a political solution. The weeks ahead will
be critical, and we urge everyone to cooperate.

Finally, the Secretary-General also remains gravely
concerned about the allegations of the use of chemical
weapons. The mission he established to investigate the
claims has been doing what it can to gather and analyse
the available information. Amid mounting reports
on the use of chemical weapons, we once again urge
the Government of Syria to allow the investigation to
proceed without further delay.

Lebanon is increasingly under pressure. The war
in Syria, including the unprecedented refugee crisis,
is putting a growing strain on its economy, political
dynamics and security. The humanitarian emergency,
and its long-term implications, as well as the continuing
political deadlock, require close international attention
and support. The past month has seen repeated incidents
of shelling from Syria into Lebanese territory that have
caused casualties. On 19 May, as many as eight rockets
were fired from Syria in the town of Al-Hermel,
prompting President Sleiman to once more call on the
parties in Syria to respect Lebanon's sovereignty and
avoid military acts against Lebanese border areas. A
new incursion by Syrian forces into Lebanese territory
was reported around Ras Baalbek. There has also been
an increasing focus on Lebanese fighters' involvement
in Syria, notably from Hizbullah, in the battle between
the Syrian Government and opposition forces in the
town of Al-Qusayr.

President Sleiman had earlier called on all Lebanese
to abide by the policy of disassociation and the Baabda
declaration. The Secretary-General strongly supports
President Sleiman's leadership and reiterates his call
to all Lebanese to act responsibly and refrain from
involvement in the conflict in Syria. Following the
fighting in Al-Qusayr, violence broke out on 19 May
between Sunni and Alawite neighbourhoods in Tripoli
and spread to other areas of the town. At least nine
people are reported to have been killed, including two
members of the Lebanese security forces; more than 70
were injured. The Lebanese army has been deployed to
contain the fighting.

Given the scale of the challenges facing Lebanon,
it is vital that a new Government be agreed on
without delay. We encourage all parties to continue
to engage positively with Prime Minister-designate
Salam in order to reach early agreement, which is also
essential to ensure timely parliamentary elections.
The consideration of arrangements for the elections
due next month resumed in Parliament on 15 May.
The temporary suspension of the current electoral law
expired on 19 May. Now is the time to intensify efforts
to agree to a way forward and avoid an institutional
vacuum.

The situation in the area of operations of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and along the Blue
Line remained quiet. However, tensions were markedly
increased by air strikes around Damascus on 3 and
5 May and Israeli violations of Lebanese airspace in
that period. On 5 May, Lebanon lodged a complaint
with the Security Council about intensified incursions
by the Israeli Air Force.

On 9 May, Hizbullah, which had denied
responsibility for a drone that was shot down on
25 April by the Israeli Air Force over Israeli waters,
announced its readiness to receive new weaponry from
Syria. It also offered support for opening a new front
on the Syrian Golan, occupied by Israel since 1967.
The Secretary-General has remained actively engaged
with international and regional leaders in calling on
all parties to exercise maximum restraint and prevent
escalation, respect the national sovereignty and
territorial integrity of all countries in the region and
adhere to all the relevant Security Council resolutions.
In conclusion, the events set out in this month's
briefing again attest to the mounting risks posed to
regional stability. It is imperative that everyone work
collectively to avert those risks, preserve stability and
help to lay peaceful foundations for a better future in
the Middle East, to which so many of its peoples aspire.
Since the efforts being made to develop a meaningful
initiative aimed at achieving a negotiated two-State
solution are likely to reach a critical point in the next
few weeks, we sincerely hope that this time the leaders
on both sides will demonstrate their commitment and
realize that this is a moment of opportunity they cannot
afford to lose. That also applies to regional stakeholders,
who can play an important role in achieving peace
through a revitalized Arab Peace Initiative. Let
me affirm that the United Nations stands ready to
contribute to a return to meaningful negotiations in
the period ahead, including through the Quartet and
broader engagement with all parties.

