Mr. Haysom: On behalfofthe United Nations family
in Afghanistan, I would like to begin by expressing my
most sincere condolences to the people of Pakistan,
who two days ago suffered a cruel national tragedy. An
attack on school children is an attack that can never be
justified.

At the last Security Council briefing (see S/PV.7267), the results of the elections had yet to
be announced and the country was in the midst of a
protracted political crisis. I am pleased to report that
significant progress has since been made. A political
agreement has been signed, the winning candidates of
the presidential and Provincial Council elections have
been announced and the Government has committed to
an ambitious programme of governance reforms.

The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) has been greatly encouraged
by the peaceful political transition. While the electoral
process was prolonged and challenging, the result
is a leadership that is legitimate, freshly mandated
and broadly supported. President Ghani and Chief
Executive Officer Abdullah are to be commended for
their ongoing commitment to make the national unity
arrangement work. In their stated commitment to the
partnership they have created, they have indicated that
the partnership is one of their own choosing and not an
imposition. Their sense of common purpose and clear
commitment to reform, to combat corruption and to
promote sustainable economic growth has given rise
to renewed hope and a palpable sense of expectation
among the Afghan people.

The political agreement was brokered following
an unprecedented 100 per cent audit of a paper-
based election. That difficult exercise, not without its
flaws, was designed to be comprehensive, thorough,
independent and transparent. Conducted in conformity
with available international best practices, the process,
however imperfect, was neither biased nor arbitrary and
laid the foundation for the negotiations of the political
agreement that followed.

UNAMA remains convinced that there was no
better way forward than a National Unity Government.
The agreement between the two candidates ended a
political crisis that would at best, if unresolved, have
left the country divided and that could at worst have
reignited past cycles of conflicts. President Ghani and
Chief Executive Officer Abdullah recognized that the
moment called for statesmanship over gamesmanship.
They themselves suggested that the choice they faced
was to swim together or to sink separately. I would
nonetheless now urge the political leaders to conclude
the process for the appointment and approval of senior
Government officials. A politically representative yet
merit-based Cabinet can strengthen the population's
confidence that the Government intends to deliver on its
election promises. It will demonstrate the workability
of the National Unity Government arrangements and
signal that the new Government is ready to govern.

Prior to the London Conference on Afghanistan,
many in the international community asked themselves
how its success would be measured. The broad
consensus was that it would need to deliver a clear
pledge to critical reforms by the Government as well as
a reaffirmation by the international community of its
enduring commitment to Afghanistan. I am pleased to
report that both those objectives were met.

The Government's paper entitled "Realizing Self-
Reliance Commitments to Reform and Renewed
Partnership" sets forth a thoughtful, bold and much-
needed programme of reforms. The paper's emphasis
on public accountability, transparency and human
rights mirrors many of the issues for which Afghan
civil society has long advocated. To maintain the
momentum created by the London Conference, the
Afghan Government will need to take action to
overcome its current budgetary difficulties. Due to a
further drop in revenue collection, the fiscal situation
seems to be graver than that portrayed in policy
discussions in London. The receipt of emergency donor
support in November has helped the Government cover
key expenses up until December. The fundamental
problem, however, has not been resolved. Significant
arrears will need to be carried into the next budget. That
is not sustainable, and risks derailing the Government's
development agenda and the country's path to stability.

 

The international community needs to work with
the Government of Afghanistan on concrete measures
to implement the Government's reform agenda in
time for the forthcoming post-London meeting of
senior officials. The new Administration has pledged
to make the legal, institutional and policy reforms
needed to sustain hard-won gains made in regard to
women's rights during the last 12 years. UNAMA will
continue to emphasize that upholding and advancing
women's rights is an essential step on the road to peace
and development. To that effect, I welcome President
Ghani's commitment to appointing a substantial number
of women to senior positions in the Government.

Initial steps taken by the Government to combat
corruption must also be acknowledged. They have
signalled the National Unity Government's will to put
an end to impunity for those who have appropriated
the nation's resources for themselves. Those efforts
will need to be combined with measures to diminish
the corrosive social and political impact of the growing
illicit economy and the narcotics trade. I leave further
comments on that to the Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yury
Fedotov.

As evidenced by the President's recent regional
engagements, the new Government recognizes
the importance of strengthening relations with its
neighbours. Afghanistan, by virtue of its geographical
location, has an important role to play in the region's
growth and stability. The country can serve as a
potential land bridge between Central Asia and South
Asia. UNAMA will advocate with Afghanistan's
northern neighbours that their security concerns are
best promoted through connectivity and trade with
Afghanistan rather than by hardening their borders.

We are confident that recent agreements with
Azerbaijan, China, Pakistan and Turkey and an
expanding regional energy and transportation network
can lead to increased trade and cooperation between
Afghanistan and its neighbours. That in turn will
bolster employment and Government revenues, and
ultimately lead to greater stability. Creating such
opportunities is not charity; it is in the self-interest of
all of Afghanistan's neighbours.

The recent Beijing Declaration put on record the
region's support for timely Afghan-led reconciliation. It
is a recognition that the support of regional stakeholders
is essential to any peace process. China's renewed
engagement in that regard is to be welcomed. President
Ghani's visit to Pakistan, followed by an exchange
of visits by senior officials to and from Kabul and
Islamabad, has paved the way for a more productive and
forward-looking dialogue, and may lay the groundwork
for closer cooperation between the two countries.

Stability and prosperity can simply not be achieved
in the absence of a durable peace. Ultimately, the
solution to the conflict in Afghanistan is political
rather than military. President Ghani himself has made
that clear, and has extended an invitation to those who
oppose the Government to enter into an inter-Afghan
dialogue to resolve the conflict. That commitment to
direct dialogue between the Government and the armed
opposition through an Afghan-led peace process is to be
welcomed. UNAMA stands ready to support Afghan-
led and owned reconciliation and political processes,
and will engage all parties in support of that, in full
consultation with the Government.

The necessity for a peaceful resolution to the
conflict is underscored by the appalling human cost
borne by ordinary Afghans. As of 30 November,
UNAMA had recorded more civilian deaths and
injuries this year more than in any other year since
2008. Civilian casualties increased 19 per cent overall
from last year, with a figure of 33 per cent in respect
of children. Those casualties resulted mostly from
ground engagements between parties to the conflict,
improvised explosive devices, and suicide and complex
attacks carried out by anti-Government forces.

The increased targeting of marketplaces, deminers
clearing unexploded ordnance, and various sporting
and cultural events suggests a shift in approach by
anti-Government elements. By way of example, the
23 November suicide attack on a large crowd watching
a volleyball match in Paktika killed at least 53 civilians,
including 21 children. As Afghan security forces
assume the lead in protecting the civilian population,
international forces must remain engaged with the
Afghan National Security Forces in mitigating the
devastating effects of conflict on civilians. I can report
that UNAMA continues to engage with the Taliban on
the critical issue of responsibility for and avoidance of
civilian casualties.

With the conclusion of the International Security
Assistance Force mission, I would want to recognize
the contribution of all contributing Member States and
honour those who have made the ultimate sacrifice in
the pursuit of a peaceful and sovereign Afghanistan.
The Government has now taken full responsibility
for the security of the country. The Afghan National
Security Forces are meeting the challenges of the
insurgency with determination and courage, but at
great cost. In that regard, the joint decision taken by
NATO and the Government of Afghanistan to launch
the Resolute Support Mission as of 1 January 2015,
and resolution 2189 (2014) in support of the Mission,
are vitally important. Sustained and predictable
international security assistance is vital. The recent
surge in security incidents is cause for concern. It is too
early to assess whether the surge is timed to coincide
with the withdrawal of international military forces,
or is the new normal. UNAMA itself is reassessing its
security measures, but is not curtailing its activities.

When they voted in such large numbers in the
presidential and provincial elections, Afghans acted on
their belief that elections would deliver a better future
The ensuing political stalemate, however, has left
many questioning the value of the democratic process
It is therefore the responsibility of the Government
to convince the Afghan electorate that duly adopted
reforms will deliver less fraudulent elections. One ofthe
first steps will be for the Government to bring certainty
to the electoral calendar by announcing realistic dates
for the holding of parliamentary and District Council
elections. We note that the political agreement signed
between the two parties provides for comprehensive
electoral reform prior to the Wolesi Jirga and District
Council elections envisaged for 2015. We strongly
encourage the Government to use the opportunity
offered by the reform process to engage the Afghan
people in a transparent and consultative manner as a way
to improve their confidence in electoral institutions.
I would like to thank my predecessor, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Jan Kubis, for
his leadership of UNAMA during a most challenging
period of transition. He has left a mission held in
high regard by the Afghan population. For the past
13 years the international community has rendered
unprecedented support - military, financial and
political - to Afghanistan. With the conclusion of the
political and security transitions, the means and form
of support will necessarily evolve and change - more
specifically as the Council reconsiders the UNAMA
mandate next year. What will not change, however, is
the shared goal ofa peaceful, sovereign and increasingly
prosperous Afghanistan.

