Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we reiterate
our congratulations to Spain on the extraordinary job it
did during its presidency last month, and we offer our
full support to the incoming United Kingdom presidency
so that it can complete its mandate successfully.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela thanks
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her introduction of the
tenth report on the investigation into the situation in
Libya, submitted pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011),
and we wish to acknowledge and commend her on her
outstanding work in Libya despite the constraints she
faces.

Venezuela reaffirms its support for the role of the
International Criminal Court in strengthening the rule of
law at the international level in order to prosecute those
responsible for flagrant violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law, in accordance with the
provisions of the Rome Statute. As a State party to the
International Criminal Court since 2002, my country
supports strengthening its institutional stature and its
effective functioning. In that regard, we call on those
countries that are not parties to the Rome Statute to
accede to that instrument in order to make it universal.

For Venezuela, cooperation is essential to attaining
the objectives of the Court, and requires the commitment
of States to implementing its decisions and supporting
its work. Strengthening the international criminal
justice system established under the International
Criminal Court requires State parties to refrain
from actions that undermine its important functions
in the fight against impunity. While reaffirming
the importance of the ICC, we are concerned by the
procedural expedition of several past cases, owing to
political reasons, and the involvement of the Security
Council in the referral of cases the jurisdiction over
which falls to the International Criminal Court. Such
was the case with Libya, which highlights the partiality
of certain decisions that should be the purview of the
international community.

Politicization has a negative effect on the role
of the International Criminal Court and could
unbermine its autonomy, independence, objectivity and
impartiality 4 principles that must govern the exercise
of its responsibilities. There can be no double standards
in those cases; cases tried by the International Criminal
Court must be resolved within the institutional structure
of the Court, with the participation of members of the
Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute, and not
outside of it.

The situation of political instability resulting from
the institutional collapse of the Libyan State, triggered
by the military intervention of NATO countries in
2011, has severely affected the rule of law in that Arab
nation and, in particular, its legal system. The lack
of institutions and the confrontations among factions
vying for control of the country hinder the functioning
of the State. In that situation, we cannot speak of the
existence ofa legal system in Libya that guarantees due
process for and the human rights of persons who have
allegedly committed crimes.

Libya is a country that has sunk into deep chaos
and widespread violence, which have been exploited by
terrorists from the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham,
Al-Qaida and Ansar Al- Sharia to expand their criminal
agenda throughout the country and neighbouring
nations. Summary executions, the evidence of torture
of members of the Al-Qadhafi family - as in the case
of Saadi Al-Qadhafi - and former members of the
Government of President Muammar Al-Qadhafi are
part of a policy of cruel retaliation, in clear violation
of the rule of law. The disappearance and persecution
of human rights activists are glaring reminders of the
ongoing violations of human rights that are recorded
daily in Libya, to the detriment of its citizens - which
would be hard to imagine if there were the rule of law
to ensure due process to those tried for various crimes.

Venezuela therefore rejects the decision of the
Tripoli Court of Assize last July, condemning Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi, Abdullah Al-Senussi and other
Libyan citizens to death in absentia, because there are
no procedural safeguards to ensure a fair trial. That
verdict has been rejected at the international level by
various organizations, including the Human Rights
Council. We therefore call on the Libyan authorities to
cooperate with the International Criminal Court in order
to transfer Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to The Hague, so
that he can be brought to trial with due process and
full respect for his human rights. Libya must ensure the
implementation of resolution 1970 (2011), facilitating
the transfer of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to the ICC.

Paragraph 5 of resolution 1970 (2011) urges
Libya and all States and concerned regional and other
international organizations to cooperate fully with the
Court and the Prosecutor, as ratified by resolutions 2174
(2014) and 2213 (2015), reiterating Libya's obligation
to comply in full cooperation with the Court and to
surrender Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to the immediate
custody of the International Criminal Code, in order for
him to be tried.

Although Mr. Bernardino Leon, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Libya, has made significant
efforts to promote an agreement, to date the institutional
structure of the country has not yet recovered, nor have
new institutions been established. Therefore, we cannot
speak of the implementation of justice where existing
standards do not ensure citizens the equal protection
under the law.

Venezuela reiterates that inclusive political
dialogue and the establishment of a Government of
national unity are the bases for building a rule of law
with solid legal institutions, through which we can
ensure the promotion of and respect for human rights,
including international standards of due process, the
right to defence and the presumption of innocence as
fundamental procedural guarantees.

In conclusion, we reiterate our full support for the
efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary
General, Mr. Bernardino Leon - which we will extend
to his successor Mr. Kobler - to attain a political
solution and thereby ensure the restoration of peace to
that brother African country, which is indispensable to
rebuilding the institutional foundations destroyed by
the war and foreign intervention in 2011, the aftermath
of which continues to be felt today with the deplorable
scenario of a fractured country fallen prey to terrorist
groups, and of a population thirsting for peace and
tranquillity.

