Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): On behalf
of the Group of Arab States, I wish to congratulate you,
Madam President, on your country's presidency of the
Security Council this month. I also wish to note the
initiative led by your country to deepen the concept and
meaning of pluralism and to defend peace in its various
aspects around the world. I thank today's briefers, the
President of Nauru, the Minister of Water Resources
of Iraq, Ms. Hindou Ibrahim and the Deputy Foreign
Minister of Kazakhstan.

I have the honour to make this statement today
on behalf of the States members of the Arab Group to
clarify its position on the topic under consideration in
the Security Council with regard to the maintenance
of international peace and security in connection with
the impact of climate change. While we recognize
the primary responsibility of the Council for the
maintenance of international peace and security, we
also believe that it is important to not overlook the
role of the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council in that regard so as to avoid duplication
and overlap in the roles of those organs - without
prejudice, of course, to their complementary mandates,
in accordance with the principles and purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations. At the same time, we
stress the need to address the threat of climate change
to our planet and its existence. Understanding that
threat is the first step towards reaching effective and
collective solutions.

Of course, armed conflict and international
terrorist activities are no longer the only key threats
to international peace and security in today's
world 4 a world that is grappling with climate change
and environmental degradation that exacerbate the
threats to international peace and security due to their
negative impact on livelihoods, human security and
the ability of Governments to meet the basic needs of
their citizens.

Vulnerable communities and States that have
limited resources are the most susceptible to the
negative impact of climate change, which amplifies
their inability to appropriately address emergencies and
the unexpected complexities that impact security and
stability in those regions and have a direct bearing on
civilian populations. Many people have been forced to
migrate from their homes as a result ofthe consequences
of climate change, such as flooding, torrential rain,
desertification, drought, rising sea levels, dust storms
and famine, among other negative effects that also
cause migration and displacement.

The Arab region is rich and diverse in climate
and environment, but it is not immune to the negative
security effects of climate change, which affect all of
the countries of the Arab region alike. A number of
Arab countries are suffering significantly from the
manifestations of climate change that have exacerbated
drivers of political and armed conflicts, with obvious
effects on international and regional peace and
security. Those include heat waves, rising sea levels,
drought and desertification, which have diminished
arable and pasture lands, and have also contributed to
the disappearance of agricultural lands due to water
shortages, leading to land salinity and affecting crop
productivity. Those negative developments have had
security and social consequences that have given rise to
conflicts between different populations, such as herders
and farmers, and led to strained relations between
groups and communities, and in some cases to armed
conflict resulting in displacement and migration.

We draw the attention of the Council to the
potential present and future negative consequences of
severe climate change on the Arab region, including
its socioeconomic effects. In that regard, the Arab
Group cites the success of the international community,
through complex negotiations, in defining international
frameworks that identify the responsibilities and
obligations of States, while taking into account the
historical responsibility of developed and industrial
States for the current negative impact of climate change.
A recent case in point is the fact that the international
community has concluded the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change 4 aroad map in support ofinternational
cooperation against climate change via the leading role
of developed countries in supporting implementation
through financing, technology transfer and building
the capacities of developing States in order to support
their national efforts and to contribute to international
efforts to address climate change, promote national
programmes and mitigate negative effects.

In that respect, it is important to point out that the
multilateral international framework has managed to
set up international mechanisms to provide funding
for developing countries, including the Global
Environment Facility and the Green Climate Fund. One
of the most serious challenges facing the Arab region
with regard to the effects of climate change on security
and peace is the poor cooperation and coordination
at the regional and international levels in addressing
the problems of climate change and environmental
degradation, as well as their impact on Arab security
and peace. All parties must mobilize their efforts to
reach a positive outcome and to prevent conflicts. The
imbalance in the exploitation of natural resources,
combined with the inability to manage environmental
programmes is a driver of conflicts and is responsible
for the deterioration of humanitarian situations causing
migration and displacement. Ofcourse, this calls for the
enhanced cooperation and support of developed States
for regional and national Arab efforts, in particular with
respect to technology transfer and capacity-building.
Developed States must work in parallel with many
initiatives to promote Arab synergies and coordination.

Another case in point is reaching a consensus on a
number of recommendations that were concluded at the
ninth Arab Forum for Development and Environment,
held in Beirut in 2016 under the theme "Sustainable
development in a changing Arab climate". There,
Arab Governments agreed to shift towards a green
economy and to integrate the principles of sustainable
development into their conflict resolution and peace
initiatives, alongside plans for the reconstruction of
Arab countries emerging from conflict in a manner
that would help them to achieve the United Nations
Sustainable Development Goals by 2030.

The meeting rose at 1.10 pm.
