Mr. Omer (Somalia): I want to also join you,
Mr. President, and Mr. Michael Keating and Ambassador
Madeira in sending our sincere condolences to the
Kenyan and Somali families and the military staff and
civilians who perished last night in the Juba Valley in a
senseless, barbaric and un-Islamic attack. Moreover, it
is wrong to use of our children as human bombs. This
has happened too often, so let us all condemn it and
make sure that it does not happen again.

At the outset, on behalf of the Somali Government,
I wish to congratulate the new members of this organ
on their election. I commend in particular the Swedish
Government on its stewardship and leadership of the
Security Council this month.

It is a great honour for me to address the Security
Council on the important matter of Somalia's progress
and the remaining challenges today. The members of
the Security Council, with many other partner nations
within the United Nations, continue to play a vital role
in our national progress alongside our people and the
Government, both multilaterally and bilaterally.

It is important to remember that, since I last
addressed the Security Council, in September 2016 (see S/PV.7778), all members have taken the opportunity to
visit Somalia and witness our national progress. The
members of Security Council met with the President
in Mogadishu. That was followed by further high-
level visits from many Security Council membes and
Members of the United Nations, which serve as the best
evidence of constructive engagement, strengthening
partnerships and Somalia and Somalis determinedly
overcoming the difficult nightmare of the past.

I must stress and reiterate that, in many ways,
Somalia has some key remaining challenges to overcome
going forward, as Mr. Keating, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Somalia, made clear in
his briefing. But, as he also acknowledged, the overall
progress our country is making is tangible, sustainable
and historic. The progress I am referring to, and which
I will discuss in greater detail, is political, social,
economic and security related. In Somalia's case, as in
most post-conflict States, those components must go
hand in hand for there to be sustainable development.
Furthermore, while the term "progress" can be easily
open to interpretation according to individual and
group expectations, we can safely say that, by all
measurements, progress in Somalia is clear and self-
evident. Somalis cannot hide from or wish away their
difficult past, as it clearly has impacted on all of us
heavily. But there is also no denying our collective
ambition to never return to it.

The Federal Government of Somalia and the
Somali people, through sacrifice, self-assessment
and tough negotiations, have finally set sail in the
direction of peace and progress. Somalia is among
Africa's first democracies and we are once again in
the process of completing our first successful national
elections in decades. So far, all parliamentarians from
both the Upper and Lower House have been elected by
constituents they represent. In turn, they have elected
speakers for both institutions, paving the way for the
presidential election scheduled for 8 February.

For the first time in history, a transformation has
taken place in female political representation, as was
underlined by my siste Asha Gelle Dirie. When it comes
to participation, an important precedent has been set
for women's political mobilization. We are proud to
say that we have achieved almost 26 per cent women
representation in our Parliament, which is an increase
of more than 70 per cent and a substantial improvement
from what it was in 2012.

In addition to the increase in female lawmakers,
a larger number of young and talented Members of
Parliament have been elected, including from the
diaspora. While the election was not yet one person,
one vote, it is a remarkable improvement over 2012,
when 135 elders selected the entire Parliament. The
current process of indirect elections allowed a total
of 14,025 delegates, selected by traditional elders and
representing all groups within society, to vote for
competing candidates. More impressive, the voting was
not Mogadishu-centered, like in 2012, but took place
all over the newly formed regional member states,
including Hir-Shabelle, which was finally established.

Following on from the voting, what is most
symbolic is how peacefully and quickly titles were
transferred and how the Somali people and politicians
embraced the spirit and rules of democracy. Where in
2012, the entire process of elections was in the hands
of 135 tribal elders guided by an electoral commission,
today it is overseenoverseen by a Federal Indirect
Electoral Implementation Team at the national level
and six state-level indirect electoral implementation
teams in the regions, which have been vocal throughout
the elections.

Despite the mentioned successes in the electoral
process, there were challenges too, which provided
us with many valuable lessons for the future. Those
challenges, flowing from the very ambition of holding
elections in a recovering post-conflict State that has
only had an internationally recognized Government
since 2012, led to a delay in the electoral process,
which will be concluded by 8 February. Among the key
reasons for the delay was the process of understanding
and implementing an electoral system that was adopted
by the Somali Government on the part of the Federal
member states and candidates.

Going forward, the process of planning and
executing one person, one vote in 2020 must begin
immediately. Furthermore, to guide the entire process,
we will partner with all stakeholders and complete
the constitutional review process, strengthen enabling
democratic institutions and ratify and implement the
laws that underpin it all, such as the political party laws.
It is a fact of history and process that democratization
is not easy. It is a marathon in tough terrain rather
than a race in a perfectly designed stadium with
guiding tracks, perfect lighting and enthusiastic fans.
However, we in Somalia are committed to our national
development - and hence to governing ourselves fairly
and democratically.

Since our previous meeting at the Security Council
(see S/PV.7778), security has continued to improve.
As I informed members then, I can confidently repeat
that, due to the courage and sacrifices of the Somali
National Army and the troops of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), Al-Shabaab has
been defeated militarily. Despite the headlines and
the - at times - irresponsible discussions in some
quarters of the international media of its resurgence,
Al-Shabaab has been reduced to carrying out primarily
opportunistic attacks against soft targets and innocent
civilians. The most recent example of this was the attack
on Wednesday on the Dayah Hotel in Mogadishu, in
which innocent people lost their lives and many more
were injured because of pointless and cruel violence.
While our thoughts and prayers are with all the victims
ofthis and other evil attacks, both in Somalia and across
the world, we are winning the war against Al-Shabaab.
Many of their leaders either have been killed or have
defected to the Government, and their desperate tactics
are the best evidence of their diminishing capabilities
and moral bankruptcy.
Permanently defeating Al-Shabaab is pertinent to
the progress of Somalia and the overall fight against
international terrorism. No one is insulated from
terrorism, and the violent ending of last year as well
as the beginning of this year, in as diverse places as
Berlin, Istanbul and Mogadishu, are clear illustrations
of this. We are therefore proud and privileged to be
working with valued partners, including members of
the Security Council, in diverse and effective ways to
destroy the last remaining pockets of terror on our soil.

The Somali Government is proud of the collective
efforts of the Somali security forces and their partners
in AMISOM, which allow the Somali people to live
peacefully. I pay my respects and convey the gratitude of
my country for their sterling efforts and success, which
has come at a deadly price on many occasions. Their
sacrifices will never be forgotten, and their memory
will spur on our national and regional progress.

Despite the courage of AMISOM. soldiers in
Somalia, our national ambition is to nurture and develop
a well-trained, -equipped and -funded Somali National
Army and police force that protects its citizens and
safeguards the progress of the nation for the betterment
of our people, our neighbours and the world. We are
thankful to all partners that are actively assisting us to
work towards and realize this fundamental goal.

The fight against international terrorism is difficult
and long. This is simply because we are dealing
with new phenomena, which include greater use of
technology to radicalize people and new techniques
of terror, such as misleading young children to blow
themselves up. For those present who wish to know
about the latest such incident, two young people aged
16 years old blew themselves up in Mogadishu. There is
no textbook that teaches us how to deal with this, and
therefore we must share knowledge, adapt and devise
sustainable and diverse solutions to overcome this evil.
In the case of Somalia, we have completed our national
countering violent extremism strategy, and we look
forward to continuing our partnership with all Member
States on this critical issue.

Despite our solid political and socioeconomic
ambitions and gains, I would like to reiterate, as I did
in my September 2016 presentation to this organ, the
importance of the remaining challenges to development
in Somalia, such as investment, education, jobs and
skills. These critical components of development must
accompany the physical security we seek, otherwise
it will prove difficult to overcome the challenges of
radicalization, illegal migration and the tragedy of
wasted talent and lives on the high seas. The Somali
Government has adopted a national development plan,
which was completed last year, in line with the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. We kindly ask
all partners to support the clearly specified Somali
priorities set out within it.

I would like to turn your attention, Mr. President, to
the deteriorating humanitarian situation in my Somalia,
which is poised to worsen as drought conditions extend
beyond Puntland and Somaliland to areas in the south.
The drought is expected to deepen, as the current rainy
season sharply underperformed and it will be another
four months before the next rainy season. According
to the United Nations, as previously stated, there are
now 5 million people facing acute food shortages,
including more than 50,000 children who are severely
malnourished. We appeal to the Council, the donor
community and the public and private sectors to
urgently heed the multiple urgent warnings by United
Nations specialized agencies and to help us address the
pressing lifesaving and livelihood-support needs facing
many Somali people, in particular women, children,
the internally displaced persons and other vulnerable
people. This appeal goes for the entire Horn of Africa,
in particular parts of Ethiopia and of Kenya.

In conclusion, this is my third opportunity to
address this important organ in my current role. Our
Government has achieved many of the goals we set for
ourselves in the past two years, but many challenges
remain. It has been an honour to work with Council
members' Governments on the key issues concerning
both Somalia and the wider world, and I would like to
thank everyone for their valuable support.

I would also like to stress the fact that the progress of
Somalia is more than rhetorical; it is a reality evidenced
by every member of the diaspora - and I include myself
in this - and their desire to return, in the undefeatable
spirit of the Somali people, to achieve progress and
prosperity for themselves, their families and their
nation. In looking at Somalia, therefore, please continue
to see our courageous progress against great odds,
our country's wonderful opportunities and untapped
potential resources, as well as our determination to
never return to the past, but to accelerate - peaceably
and purposefully - to a better future.
