Mr. Goledzinowski (Australia): In my personal
capacity and on behalf of my Government, I should
like to add our tribute to the memory of the 22 United
Nations staff members, including Sergio Vieira de
Mello, who were murdered five years ago in the tragic
and vile terrorist attack against the United Nations
compound in Baghdad. I first met Sergio in Dili,
Timor-Leste, many years ago, and I worked for him
briefly as his Chief of Staff when he first assumed the
position of High Commissioner for Human Rights. I
was in Baghdad in those dreadful days when the attack
happened.

Some bear the ultimate sacrifice in the service of
peace. The rest of us must dedicate ourselves to
completing their unfinished business. It is therefore
appropriate that the Council should return to the
situation in Timor-Leste on this anniversary. Australia
welcomes the opportunity to participate again in the
Council's deliberations.
I should like to go on record endorsing the
remarks I have heard today from the Foreign Minister
of Timor-Leste and Mr. Khare.

During the most recent deliberations in February,
Australia and others called on Timor-Leste to take
greater responsibility for its future through political
and economic reform, the development of the private
sector and the provision of health care, education and
housing. We have been heartened by Timor-Leste's
efforts over the past six months and by the progress
made on a number of long-standing challenges,
including the issues of internally displaced persons and
petitioners, which have been mentioned by others. The
Government of Timor-Leste responded quickly,
positively and effectively to the shocking shooting
attacks on President Ramos-Horta and Prime Minister
Gusmao that took place on 11 February. Its civil and
military institutions worked together and took primary
responsibility for responding. The citizens of Timor-
Leste should also be commended for their unity in the
wake of the attacks.

Australia would also like to praise the efforts of
Timor-Leste's partners, in particular the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) under the
very able leadership of Mr. Atul Khare. It is UNMIT's
ongoing support to the Timor-Leste Government which
provides the enabling environment and the stability to
allow the Government to move forward, as it is doing.

While Timor-Leste has made good progress, the
Secretary-General's report (S/2008/501) makes clear
that Timor-Leste will require continued strong support
from the United Nations and bilateral partners. In
Australia's view, nowhere is this more apparent than in
the security sector; all previous speakers have referred
to this. We note that the United Nations is working
with the Government of Timor-Leste to ensure a
smooth handover of policing responsibilities, and we
welcome the criteria developed by Timor-Leste and
UNMIT to gauge the readiness of the national police to
assume responsibility. However, we strongly encourage
UNMIT and Timor-Leste to ensure that the handover is
undertaken in accordance with achievement of those
criteria rather than with any fixed timetable. The
challenges facing the police should not be
underestimated and will take many years to address.
Until the police force has been significantly
strengthened, it will be vital to retain an ongoing
strong United Nations presence to underpin security.
Without that, other gains will be jeopardized.

08-4651]

I can assure the Council that Australia will
remain engaged and will play a substantial role in
assisting Timor-Leste: first, through our leadership of
the International Stabilization Force, with the strong
support of New Zealand; secondly, through our role as
a leading development partner of Timor-Leste; and
finally, through Australia's enhanced engagement over
the coming years in terms of providing assistance to
Timor-Leste's police and military forces.

As Timor-Leste turns its mind increasingly to
longer-term security and development challenges, the
international community must remain fully engaged
and must remain fully coordinated.

