The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.

I now invite His Excellency Shaikh Khalid Bin
Ahmed Al-Khalifa, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Bahrain, to take the floor.

Shaikh Al-Khalifa (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic):
May I, at the outset, Madam, warmly congratulate you
and your friendly country, Greece, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month. I thank you for your efforts that culminated in
holding this meeting. I would also like to commend
your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of
Ghana, for his efficiency, dedicated efforts and
successful work during his tenure as President.

This historic meeting of the Security Council
constitutes an important precedent in the annals of the
Arab-Israeli conflict, a conflict that must be
terminated. The Council is meeting today at a high
level and upon a collective Arab initiative to consider
the situation in the Middle East at a time when the
peace process threatens to come to a halt.

I have the honour to address the Council, on
behalf of all members of the League of Arab States,
concerning a very serious and dangerous situation
which affects not only the Middle East region but the
entire world: the Arab-Israeli conflict. The Ministerial
Council of the League of Arab States sought to come to
the Security Council to discuss the peace process and
present its case in order to shoulder its responsibilities
3
and play its role in contributing to the attainment of a
just, comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle
East region and the world as a whole.

This new position by the Ministerial Council of
the League of Arab States was initiated for the sake of
future generations in the region. Our aim is to have a
stable and secure Middle East in which hostility is
replaced with friendship and prosperity for its people.
Such friendship and prosperity will not be exclusive to
the region, but would also benefit the entire world.

In the past, we have witnessed the horrors and
repercussions of war. However, our peoples are
determined today not to see the continuation of such
horrors. They are determined to build peace and
confidence among all the peoples of the Middle East.
In his statement to the General Assembly on Tuesday,
19 September, the Secretary-General referred to the
situation in the Middle East in the following terms,
which he echoed again today.

(spoke in English)

"This climate of fear and suspicion is constantly
refuelled by the violence in the Middle East. We
might like to think of the Arab-Israeli conflict as
just one regional conflict amongst many. But it is
not. No other conflict carries such a powerful
symbolic and emotional charge among people far
removed from the battlefield."

(spoke in Arabic)

The persistence of the Arab-Israeli conflict has
had dire consequences and is exhausting the resources
of the region. It is creating instability. It is also
allowing extremist forces to flourish. The Arab States
are therefore deeply concerned over the continuation of
this conflict which creates serious consequences for
regional peace and security. Therefore, the Arab world
firmly believes in the urgent need to bring the conflict
to a peaceful resolution.

It is important to create an environment
conducive to peace in the region. That would require
open-mindedness on all sides so as to encourage
negotiation and discussions among them. Our objective
is peace and stability for the region, not conflict and
turmoil. We ought to work for reconciliation and
conciliation. We should act to heal the wounds which
have accumulated for over 50 years.
At the most recent ministerial-level session of the
League of Arab States, the 126th session, we reached
an agreement to undertake this demarche before this
body at the ministerial level in order to end the current
stalemate in the peace process due to the lack of
progress, with its adverse consequences for regional
stability and security.

Our objective in calling for this meeting is not to
apportion blame or to exchange accusations. It is rather
to address the situation in the Middle East in a
constructive spirit and in a forward-looking manner,
with the aim of reviving the peace process through
direct negotiations between the parties to the conflict.
The Ministerial Council of the League of Arab States is
convinced that now is the appropriate time to relaunch
the peace process. It is an important opportunity to end
the current stalemate.

In our view, reviving the peace process could
mean reinvigorating the road map, which contains the
elements of a lasting peace, and restoring it to its right
track, implementing relevant Security Council
resolutions, namely, resolution 242 (1967) up to
resolution 1515 (2003) and the principle of land for
peace, as well as implementing the Arab initiative,
while, at the same time, devising a new and carefully
developed mechanism to implement the road map and
put the peace process back on track.

Allow me to emphasize that the main elements of
the Arab initiative are as follows: the Arab States are
prepared to consider that it is possible to bring an end
to the Arab-Israeli conflict; they are prepared to enter
into a peace agreement between themselves and Israel;
they are prepared to establish normal and full relations
with Israel in the context of a comprehensive peace
which requires: full Israeli withdrawal from the
occupied Arab territories; arriving at a just and agreed
solution to the Palestinian refugee problem in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 194
(III); and acceptance of the establishment of an
independent sovereign Palestinian State with holy
Jerusalem as its capital.

Meanwhile, the Ministerial Council of the League
of Arab States proposes that the Security Council agree
on the following elements in order to revive the peace
process: initiate negotiations between the parties, based
on the agreed terms of reference, with a set time frame,
assisted by the international community and under the
auspices of the Security Council; request the Secretary-
General, in close consultation with all parties
concerned, including the parties to the conflict, the
States of the region and the Quartet, to prepare a report
on appropriate mechanisms for resuming direct
negotiations between the parties, including, inter alia,
options for format, guarantees, time limits, parameters
and the role of the Security Council and other third
parties, and to submit this report to the Security
Council; request that the Security Council remain
actively seized of the matter and reconvene upon
submission of the aforementioned report at the
ministerial level in order to consider further measures.

The determination of all the parties to end the
conflict, with the necessary assistance from the
Security Council, would help in building genuine and
just peace in the region. We have a good chance now to
obtain peace and should not allow it to slip away. If we
lose this chance, we will all be losers. We sincerely
hope that the Council, within its mandate to maintain
international peace and security, will pave the way for
peace negotiations. We welcome the assistance of third
parties in this endeavour. We wish those efforts every
success in bringing peace, which is the precondition for
stability, prosperity and development in the Middle
East, and the world.

The President: I give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Dan Gillerman, Permanent Representative of
Israel.


