Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Cote
d'Ivoire welcomes the holding of this briefing on
the issue of persons who are victims of enforced
disappearance or who are detained in conditions that
do not comply with international standards in this
regard, particularly in the Syrian Arab Republic. We
congratulate Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-
General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, Dr.
Hala and Ms. Amina Khoulani, members of civil
society, for their thorough briefings.

In my country's view, this issue is all the more
important given that formulating adequate responses
to the plight of detained or missing persons is an
integral part of the crisis resolution and peacebuilding
processes. In the absence of appropriate responses, in
accordance with international humanitarian law and
human rights law, the situation of detained or missing
persons contributes to fuelling resentment, and is
therefore an obstacle to the conduct of any post-crisis
and peacebuilding process. It thereby carries the seeds
of the resurgence of conflicts. Accordingly, it seems
necessary that this important dimension be taken into
account in the ongoing peace efforts to resolve the
crisis in Syria.

Even if, according to Ms. Reena Ghelani, Director for
Operations and Advocacy of the United Nations Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, there
are no reliable statistics, the International Committee
of the Red Cross has received about 10,000 requests
for information on missing persons. These figures
challenge the Council to consider the seriousness of the
problem and take action to provide appropriate answers
to this question, which comes in addition to the already
worrisome humanitarian situation. In that regard, my
delegation urges the Council to contribute further to the
implementation of the relevant provisions of resolution
2474 (2019), on missing persons in armed conflict.
The resolution represents a significant step forward
in the normative framework and concrete measures,
taking into account the issue of persons detained or
disappeared during conflicts. It aims to

"contribute to the process of confidence building
between parties to armed conflict, expediting
peace negotiations and settlement, transitional
justice processes, reconciliation, peacebuilding
and sustaining peace" (resolution 2474 (2019),
para. 16).

My country also believes that international law
relating to the fate of persons detained and disappeared
during conflicts should apply to all warring parties
in Syria. It is therefore incumbent upon the Syrian
Government and the rebel groups to take all the
necessary measures to ensure the protection of
civilians, but also to ensure that detained persons are
treated with dignity and in strict compliance with
international standards in this regard. Similarly, it is
their responsibility to fully contribute to investigations
to identify and locate missing persons. Accordingly, my
delegation believes that the registration of detainees, the
appropriate training of the armed forces, the production
and distribution of adequate means of identification,
including to members of the armed forces and the
establishment of grave-registration services and death
registers will contribute to better management of the
situation of detained or missing persons.

My country welcomes the reciprocal release of
detainees in Syria on 31 July, under the fourth project
of the working group on the release of detainees/
abductees, handover of bodies and identification of
missing persons, as provided for by the Astana process.
This operation, designed to strengthen trust between the
conflicting parties, is in addition to the first exchanges
of detainees on 24 November 2018 and 12 February and
22 April 2019. My delegation therefore encourages the
parties concerned to pursue these initiatives, which will
enable families in particular to mourn and contribute to
the return of peace and stability in Syria.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire urges the warring
parties in Syria to respect international humanitarian
law, particularly with regard to the fate of detainees
and missing persons. We also call on them to cease
hostilities and give priority to a political solution, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of resolution
2254 (2015).

