I would like to congratulate the Dominican Republic on assuming the presidency of the Security Council this month. I would like to thank China for its leadership and hard work as the presidency of the Security Council in March. I also welcome His Excellency Mr. Tiebile Drame, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mali, to this meeting. I would like to thank Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Mali and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) for his insightful briefing. Viet Nam would like to join other members of the Security Council in welcoming the significant progress made by the Government of Mali and concerned parties in the implementation of the 2015 Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. The visits of the Prime Minister of Mali to provinces in the north and centre of Mali present a good opportunity for a political settlement and reconciliation in Mali. We take note that the first round of legislative election was conducted peacefully on 29 March 2020. Viet Nam welcomes the implementation of the adaptation plan. The increased presence of the United Nations peacekeeping forces of MINUSMA in central Mali will meet the challenges to security and protect civilians in the region. Moreover, the redeployment of the reconstituted units of the Malian armed forces in Kidal, Gao and Timbuktu represents an essential step towards the restoration of State authority in northern Mali and paves the way for a more significant deployment of State administration and judicial processes. However, the instability and deteriorating security situation remain of concern to us. There have been more attacks against civilians, Malian security forces, international forces and peacekeeping forces in the north and centre of Mali. Children are still the target of armed group attacks and that must be stopped. We also condemn recent terrorist attacks against the Malian security forces leaving 29 soldiers dead. The current situation, coupled with the rising threat of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, poses a huge threat to the safety and livelihood of the Malian people. Against that backdrop, my delegation wishes to make the following observations. First, the implementation of the 2015 agreement is the key to and viable strategy for sustaining peace and security in Mali. Therefore, we encourage the Government of Mali and concerned parties to continue to work closely and bridge their differences through dialogue. Peaceful and credible legislative elections are part of the political process and essential to the stability of the country. We also call on all relevant parties in Mali to heed the call of the Secretary-General to reach a permanent ceasefire, thereby allowing adequate preparation and humanitarian access to combat the COVID-19 pandemic. Secondly, we urge concerned parties to uphold their responsibilities to protect civilians, especially women and children. The participation of women should be increased in public and political life in Mali in order to ensure that women represent 30 per cent of elected officials in the upcoming second round of legislative elections. Thirdly, we support the implementation of the MINUSMA adaptation plan to enhance the Mission's ability to project force throughout Mali. We also support the call of the Secretary-General on all Member States to contribute the required capabilities and to match MINUSMA's mandate with adequate resources in keeping with their commitments under the Action for Peacekeeping initiative. Fourthly, we call on regional and international partners to speed up the implementation of the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and its support plan. We also welcome the cooperation among the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel and the United Nations, the African Union, the Economic Community of West African States, France and the European Union in the fight against terrorism and extremism, in accordance with the relevant Security Council resolutions. In conclusion, we welcome closer cooperation among the United Nations, regional organizations, international partners and the Government of Mali in the fight against COVID-19. More than ever before, the protection of people in Mali and the Sahel from the pandemic and violence must be our first priority now.
