Mr. De Aguiar Patriota: I wish to thank you,
Madam President, for the invitation to address the

Security Council this morning in my capacity as
the Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). Let me also thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Miguel Trovoada for his detailed briefing and update
on the political crisis that Guinea-Bissau is facing
today. I am particularly grateful for his ongoing efforts
to help end the crisis and for his cooperation with the
Peacebuilding Commission in this matter and in the
broader peacebuilding agenda in Guinea-Bissau.

Last week on 17 August 2015, I chaired a meeting
of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the PBC to
discuss the situation in Guinea-Bissau and ways for the
PBC to respond to the escalation of a crisis that had
begun as tension between President Vaz and former
Prime Minister Simoes Pereira. At that meeting, I
reported a telephone conversation I had with Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Trovoada
on Friday, 14 August. The configuration also heard
a comprehensive briefing by Mr. Joao Honwana,
Director of the Africa II Division of the Department of
Political Affairs (DPA). Their insightful input enabled
members of the PBC to have a useful discussion. A
statement was issued on 18 August in which the PBC
expressed concern that recent political developments
might undermine the progress achieved so far and
risk destabilizing the fragile political situation in the
country and compromise economic progress. In the
statement, the PBC regretted that national, regional and
international efforts to help resolve the political crisis, in
particular the Security Council statement of 12 August
(SC/12007) calling for the resumption of dialogue and
the statement of the representatives of the international
community in Bissau issued on 10 August, as well as
the engagement of the African Union, the Community
of Portuguese-speaking Countries and the European
Union, had not prevented an escalation of the crisis.

The PBC called for the resumption of political
dialogue in order to address the current tensions,
with full respect for the national Constitution and the
rule of law, and for the national stakeholders to find
a concerted way out of the current political crisis. To
complement the briefing and suggestions of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Trovoada, let
me offer three main comments.

First, the current crisis carries the risk of having
a negative impact on the already fragile economic
situation, the stability of the country and its democratic
gains. The PBC believes that Guinea-Bissau was making
good progress towards stabilization and development
since the elections of 2014 and the round table held
in Brussels in March 2015. Our main goal should be
to prevent possible escalation of the political crisis to
undermine the progress achieved so far. The PBC and
the international community as a whole have invested
in those processes and in the overall peacebuilding
agenda in Guinea-Bissau. The efforts undertaken by
the PBC have greatly contributed to the holding of free,
fair and transparent elections, resulting in a legitimate,
competent and inclusive Government for the first time
in the history of the country.

For its part, since September 2013, the
Peacebuilding Fund has allocated approximately
$4.8 million to contribute to establishing the
constitutional order, filling crucial gaps through a
package of immediate-response-facility projects,
which include support for the Electoral Commission,
peace dividends through employment for youth and
women, joint work of the DPA and the High-level
Commission for Planning, electoral security, the media
during and after the elections, women's participation
in the elections and the Transnational Crime Unit in
Bissau as part of the West Africa Coast Initiative. More
recently, the Peacebuilding Fund has approved a new
peacebuilding priority plan, amounting to $10 million
to help the Government implement crucial reforms.

Secondly, the nature of the crisis illustrates that
there may be space for debates on better delineating
the spheres of competence of the President and the
Prime Minister so as to avoid it becoming a source
of instability and fragility in an otherwise promising
environment. In that regard, should Bissau-Guineans
eventually decide to go forward with a political reform
and request for support, the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau and the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries are well
positioned to provide the expertise that may be required
for a revision of the Constitution.

Thirdly, it is worth noting that the various partners
of Guinea-Bissau have been consistent, speaking
with one voice, in their engagement on the crisis. The
role played by the region as well as the coherence
demonstrated by international partners will remain
a key element to achieve any sustainable solution. In
that vein, one cannot overemphasize that the current
political deadlock can be overcome only by Bissau-
Guineans themselves, through a constructive dialogue
based on full respect for the constitutional provisions
and the rule of law. The success of Guinea-Bissau is in
the hands of its Government and people.
To conclude, allow me to point out that the PBC
will continue to complement the work of the Security
Council in providing support and advice to the
authorities of Guinea-Bissau to address the current
crisis and to implement the broader peacebuilding
agenda in the country.

