Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): Allow me to begin by
expressing my delegation's gratitude to the delegation
of Viet Nam for convening today's meeting on children
and armed conflict. This meeting provides an
opportunity to renew our strong commitment to
ensuring the protection and rights of children in armed
conflict, as well as to review progress made in that
regard.

We would also like to express our appreciation to
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, for her visit to Afghanistan and her
comprehensive statement.

All children have the same needs and share the
same dreams. They represent the future of our societies
and mirror the State they live in. The Government of
Afghanistan is still making efforts to rebuild its
country devastated by 30 years of war that dramatically
affected the lives of our children, particularly girls. The
major victims of the war in Afghanistan are our
children. Years of conflict in our country have
destroyed the basic necessities of life, such as schools,
health care, adequate shelter, water and food, and
disrupted family relationships. They have also created
stigma and post-traumatic distress and generated a
pessimistic outlook on the future.

Afghanistan is strongly committed to reversing
the impact of war on children and fulfilling its
obligation to protect children. The improvement of the
situation of Afghan children and the comprehensive
protection of their rights is an essential precondition
for the sustainable development of our State. It will
also lay a solid foundation for our next generation to
live in peace and prosperity and enjoy its human rights.
Our vision for ensuring the protection and well-being
of our children is to develop an environment that
provides security, guarantees economic and social
opportunities and respects the rule of law.

We have achieved considerable progress in
improving the status of children since 2001.
Nevertheless, today we are facing critical security
challenges that jeopardize the gains made in the past
seven years and undermine our collective efforts to
improve the living conditions of our children and give
them a promising and bright future.

Terrorism continues to be a major threat and
drastically affects the daily lives of our people,
particularly our children. The deterioration of the

security situation in Afghanistan is the product of the
surge of terrorist activities carried out by Al-Qaida, the
Taliban and other associated armed groups in the
region. Terrorists have increased attacks in our
territory, using barbaric acts and methods including car
bombs, suicide attacks and improvised explosive
devices directed at national and international forces.
Such attacks deliberately target densely populated
areas where children are the prime victims.

The Taliban is using the most atrocious practices
conceivable to conduct its subversive operations.
Terrorists are recruiting, training and exploiting
children as combatants and sending them to operate as
suicide bombers. As Afghan and international security
forces become more astute at recognizing suicide
attackers, the use of children is increasing because
children are not generally objects of suspicion. Child
suicide bombers also constitute an effective instrument
of psychological warfare because the spectre of the
child attacker is as terrifying as it is incomprehensible.

The intensification of the Taliban intimidation
campaign through the burning of schools and clinics,
the night-time dissemination of threatening notes and
attacks against teachers and schoolchildren has created
an atmosphere of terror and traumatizes children,
which prevents them from going to school and ruins
their future. Furthermore, it undermines our efforts at
achieving development goals aimed at improving the
living conditions of our citizens, including children,
and ensures a gloomy future for our people.

The state of hopelessness resulting from years of
living in conflict and from poor socio-economic
conditions, supported by the brainwashing
indoctrination provided in madrasas across our borders
are creating favourable conditions for recruiting and
training innocent children to target a wide spectrum of
Afghan and international civilian and military
personnel. We are deeply concerned about the rising
number of children killed and injured by the Taliban
and other foreign terrorist groups.

We would also like to express our grave concern
about the loss of lives and injuries of children during
counter-terrorism operations. In that regard, we call on
our international partners to exercise maximum caution
and to enhance coordination with Afghan security
forces during operations in order to avoid the loss of
civilian life and ensure the safety and physical integrity
of children.

The protection of children in armed conflict is
one of the most daunting humanitarian and security
challenges that the international community faces
today. Addressing the socio-economic needs of
children in armed conflict and ensuring their rights
requires an integrated strategy with a special focus on
poverty alleviation, especially among the most
vulnerable segments of our society, including widows
and orphans.

The successful implementation of such a strategy
requires full cooperation and coordination among the
Government of Afghanistan, development partners and
the United Nations agencies. We would like to call on
donor countries and development agencies to assist us
in achieving sustainable development, poverty
eradication and good governance.

