Mr. Lambertini (Italy): First, let me thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting.
I also thank Under Secretary-General Feltman for
his comprehensive briefing to the Security Council
this afternoon. Of course, I would also like to thank
Ms. Fatima Shehu Imam for her insightful perspective.
Just like Mr. Rycroft, I have fond memories of the
meeting with her and her colleagues on a very hot,
dusty morning in the internally displaced persons
camp in Maiduguri. That was an important visit by the
Security Council - its first in many years to a region
that has been affected by a crisis for many years. But
the news that we receive weekly, if not daily, from
Maiduguri shows that the crisis is far from ending, and
we therefore need to maintain our focus on the region.

In that regard, over the past several months the
Council has devoted considerable attention to the Lake
Chad basin region and, as proof of that, the situation
was most recently discussed during the annual United
Nations-African Union joint consultative meeting.
The crisis involving the Lake Chad basin and the
territory of four countries is one of the world's largest
humanitarian emergencies, with several million people
in need of assistance. During our visit to the region,
we became directly aware of just how urgently we
need to act to strengthen our response in confronting
the challenges in the region. While catalysed by the
Boko Haram insurgency, the crisis is multidimensional.
Its root causes include climate change, poverty and
underdevelopment - issues that people in the region
have been tackling for many years, if not decades.

As the international community came together
in Oslo to provide the humanitarian relief that was
desperately needed, it is essential that the underlying
causes of vulnerability in the Lake Chad basin region
also be urgently addressed, lest dependence upon
external assistance will be prolonged for many years to
come. As a result of the commitments made at the Oslo
Humanitarian Conference, Italy continues to contribute
bilaterally through United Nations agencies, by funding
projects aimed at promoting and strengthening the
resilience of the local population while reducing the
risk of internal displacement and migration.

While the Niger remains among the priority
countries of our cooperation, we are about to launch a
programme that will extend our priority on a regional
basis. The project will have a longer duration, with
the specific aim of sustaining youth using a wide
range of tools - cash for work, microloans and
on-the-job training. I would also like to mention Italy's
commitment to sustaining a national development
programme, recently presented in Paris by the President
of Chad, Idriss Deby Itno, with a financial contribution
of between 620 to €30 million. Furthermore, in the
framework of the Secretary-General's famine response
strategy in the Lake Chad basin region, we have already
disbursed our financial pledge.

As highlighted comprehensively in the report by
the United Nations Development Programme launched
last week, a lack of resources, marginalization and
weak governance are the primary forces driving young
Africans to Violent extremism. The situation in the
Lake Chad basin region serves as a powerful reminder
of the relationship between climate change, insecurity,
population growth, unmet humanitarian needs and the
risk of radicalization. A crisis of this magnitude affects
all of us, because it forces the mass displacement of
people and fosters conditions for illicit activities such
as human trafficking and smuggling. It also underlines
our responsibility in the framework of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, which was also created
to prevent and mitigate the impact of these kinds
of emergencies.

In that context, respect for human rights must be
guaranteed by any means. Abuse against women or
children or carrying out attacks against schools or
hospitals cannot be tolerated wherever, whenever or
by Whomsoever it is committed. In that regard, we
would like to reiterate the fundamental role of women
in preventing potential conflicts and strengthening the
process of national conciliation by ensuring a gender-
inclusive perspective on issues of security, justice and
governance. We commend the United Nations and the
African Union for having devoted to a country of the
Lake Chad region the first-everjoint high-level mission
focused on womens' meaningul participation in peace,
security and development. We support a regional,
integrated and comprehensive approach to effectively
address the security, economic, social and judicial
dimensions of the crisis. We welcome the announcement
of the October conference to be held in N'Djamena.

We also commend the initiatives taken by the
African Union and the Lake Chad Basin Commission.
The dimensions of this crisis are broad, interregional
and interconnected with instability in the Sahel. The
terrorist threat and the scourge of trafficking in persons,
drugs and arms are spreading across the whole region.
I would like to commend the efforts carried out by the
countries of the region to provide stability and security,
as in the case of the Multinational Joint Task Force and
the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel).

I would also like to recall the important role played
by the European Union (EU), one of the key partners
of the region. The multidimensional action of the
EU encompasses security, political and development
cooperation and is based on an integrated paradigm
of policies that consider the Lake Chad region and
the Sahel as a whole geographical continuum. At the
regional level, we strongly support the efforts of the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa and
of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel, as well as initiatives such as the G-5 Sahel force
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
peace and security strategy. Those are important
steps towards a more proactive role for regional
organizations and charting a path towards peace,
security and development.

