The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Algeria,
Angola, Benin, Botswana, Brazil, Canada, Congo,
Djibouti, Egypt, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland,
Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Ireland, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy,
Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Latvia, Lebanon, Libya,
Lithuania, Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan,
Papua New Guinea, Portugal, the Republic of Korea,
Romania, Rwanda, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone,
Slovakia, Spain, the Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland,
Togo, Tunisia, Turkey and Ukraine to participate in
this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs; His Excellency Mr. Ramtane
Lamamra, African Union High Representative for
Silencing the Guns in Africa; and Mr. Vasu Gounden,
Founder and Executive Director of the African Centre
for the Constructive Resolution of Disputes.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
persons to participate in this meeting; His Excellency
Mr. J 050 Pedro Vale de Almeida, Head of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations; His
Excellency Mr. Maged Abdelfattah Abdelaziz,
Permanent Observer of the League of Arab States to the
United Nations; and Mr. Robert Mardini, Permanent
Observer of the International Committee of the Red
Cross to the United Nations.

I propose that the Council invite Monsignor
Antoine Camilleri, Under-Secretary for Relations with
States of the Holy See, to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will nowbegin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/ 169, which contains the text of a letter
dated 13 February 2019 from the Charge d'affaires
a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Equatorial Guinea
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-
General, transmitting a concept note on the item
under consideration.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2019/ 179, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Algeria, Angola, Belgium, Canada,
Congo, Cote d'Ivoire, the Dominican Republic, Egypt,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland,
France, Germany, Guinea, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Latvia,
Lithuania, Malta, Mauritius, Morocco, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nigeria, Norway, Papua New Guinea, Peru,
Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Romania,
Rwanda, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, South Africa,
Spain, the Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Togo, Tunisia
and Ukraine.

The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.

A vote was taken by Show ofhands.

In favour:
Belgium, China, Cote d'Ivoire, Dominican
Republic, Equatorial Guinea, France, Germany,
Indonesia, Kuwait, Peru, Poland, Russian
Federation, South Africa, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America

The President (spoke in Spanish): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft

resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 2457 (2019).

I now give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.


