Mr. Bamrungphong (Thailand): Let me begin by
expressing my sincere appreciation to the United Kingdom
and its presidency of the Security Council for the month
of August for having convened this important debate and
for the comprehensive concept note (S/2014/572, annex).
I also thank the Secretary-General and the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights for their substantive
briefings.

Thailand wishes to align itself with the statement
made earlier by the representative of Iran on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

It is quite ironic to discuss the prevention of conflict
while we are witnessing violence in many parts of the
world, claiming the lives of too many innocent civilians,
including women, children and humanitarian workers.
However, it is indisputable that prevention is the most
desirable and cost-effective approach, both in terms of
human lives and financial costs.

Thailand has placed particular emphasis on preventive
diplomacy, as well as on early warning and the peaceful
resolution of disputes at an early stage. Dialogue and
constructive engagement among and with parties to a
dispute need to be promoted in order to achieve a peacefill
and mutually agreeable settlement.

As mentioned in the concept note, the Charter of the
United Nations entrusts the Security Council with the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Article 1 and Chapter VI of the Charter
provide the Council with a variety of tools to enhance its
preventive role. The question is whether the Council can
use the right tools at the right time.

Conflicts, whether inter- or intra-State, often derive
from historical rivalries, territorial disputes, intolerance
among different faiths and beliefs, social and economic
inequality, the unfair allocation of resources, systematic
and widespread violations of human rights, a lack of good
governance and injustice, to name but a few. Conflict is
often not a sudden or isolated event but a consequence of
unresolved issues. There are usually warning signs when
conflicts or violence are imminent. The Council needs to
fully heed those signs and to take action decisively before
the conflict breaks out.

In order to enable the Council to apply the right tools
at the right time, an accurate and unbiased assessment by
reliable sources of the situation showing signs of potential
conflict is necessary. The United Nations country team
on the ground, special representatives of the Secretary-
General, special envoys and other United Nations bodies,
as well as regional organizations, in accordance with
their respective mandates, can provide useful information
and assessments for the Council's better understanding.
Regular briefings and reports by the relevant United
Nations bodies and countries concerned can provide
the Council with updates and insights. Thailand fully
supports that practice.

Thailand believes that, in many cases, the Council
is well aware of such early warning signs. However,
what impairs swift action by the Council is a lack of
unity, and diverse national and political interests,
among its members. The indecisiveness of the Council
could affect its own credibility and shatter the hopes
of people trapped in conflicts. Above all, it could
cost unnecessary lives and allow massive damage to
occur that could have been prevented. Therefore, the
Council, as the body with the primary responsibility
for maintaining peace and security, needs to live up to
its responsibility by putting aside politics and working
together, because we cannot afford the recurrence of
tragedies and atrocities.

Thailand also believes in the constructive role of
women as agents of peace. Women can significantly
contribute to peace - from conflict prevention to
conflict resolution, from peacekeeping to peacemaking
and peacebuilding, from relief to development and
from recovery to the prevention of relapse into
conflict. The landmark resolution 1325 (2000) and
subsequent resolutions have repeatedly called for
increased participation by women. Thailand therefore
urges further implementation of those resolutions and
is ready to work closely with the United Nations and
other countries to increase women's role in conflict
prevention. Women have always been included in
Thailand's past contributions of military and police
personnel for missions, and the trend is for increased
participation by women.

Thailand joins others in welcoming the adoption
of today's resolution 2171 (2014) and reaffirms its
commitment to implement the provisions set out therein.

Let me conclude by reiterating that the best and
most effective approach to preventing and resolving
conflict is to tackle the root causes by peaceful means,
which may require structural change and a change in
attitudes. The parties to conflict must show genuine
political will to make a change. Without political will,
such change is not possible. The use of force is not an
option. It will not resolve existing conflicts but only
create subsequent ones.

