The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council expresses its grave
concern at recent reports of an upsurge of
violence in Darfur by all sides and insists that all
parties strictly abide by the demands and
commitments made in the 8 April 2004
N'Djamena ceasefire agreement, the resolutions
of the Council and the Abuja Protocols. The
Council strongly condemns the 8 October attack
reportedly by the Sudan Liberation
Movement/Army on African Union Mission in
Sudan (AMIS) personnel in Darfur, which killed
four Nigerian peacekeepers and two civilian
contractors and wounded three others near
Menawasha, and the 9 October attack reportedly
by the Justice and Equality Movement in Tine in
North Darfur, which resulted in the ambush and
detention of approximately 35 AMIS personnel.
The Council extends its deepest condolences to
the families of those killed.

"The Security Council also condemns the
25 September attack in Modaina, Chad, by armed
groups coming from the Sudan, which killed 75
people, the majority of them civilians. The
Council joins with the African Union in
expressing particular outrage at the 19 September
attack by Darfur rebels against the town of
Sheiara; the attack by Janjaweed militias on the
camp for displaced persons at Aro Sharow on
28 September, during which 29 people were
killed and many more wounded; and the attack on
the village of Tawilla by Sudanese Government
forces on 29 September.

"The Security Council expresses its deep
concern at the humanitarian impact that these
developments cause and at the restrictions
imposed on humanitarian operations in Darfur.
The Council insists that restrictions end
immediately and strongly urges all parties to
ensure unhindered humanitarian access in Darfur.

"The Security Council also expresses its
concern that the Secretary-General's report of
19 September stated there had been 'no visible
effort by the Government [of Sudan] to disarm
the militia or hold them to account in accordance
with past agreements and Security Council
resolutions. The SLM/A [Sudan Liberation
Movement/Army] and the Justice and Equality
Movement (JEM) are also failing to abide by the
commitments made under past agreements and
are doing far too little to control their men under
arms'. The Council recalls the obligation
undertaken by the Government of the Sudan to
disarm and control militias. It demands the
SLM/A, the JEM. and the Government of the
Sudan to immediately cease violence, comply
with the N'Djamena ceasefire agreement, end
impediments to the peace process and cooperate
fully with the African Union Mission. The
Council again emphasizes the need to bring to
justice those who perpetrate violence.

"The Security Council recalls the provisions
of resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan.
It urges the African Union to share the results of
its investigations into recent attacks with the
Council for possible referral to the Sudan
Sanctions Committee in order to assist in the
implementation of the provisions of the Council's
relevant resolutions.

"The Security Council expresses its
unequivocal support for the African Union
Mission, and recalls that the Sudanese
Government and Darfur rebel movements have to
take the necessary steps to facilitate the
deployment and effectiveness of AMIS.

"The Security Council remains firmly
committed to the cause of peace in all of the
Sudan, including through the Abuja talks and
through full implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement. It encourages
the Government of National Unity and the Darfur
rebels to engage in the search for a solution to the
Darfur conflict. It urges all parties to make rapid

progress at the Abuja talks to conclude a peace The Security Council has thus concluded the
agreement withoutfurther delay." present stage of its consideration of the item on the

. . . a enda.
This statement Will be issued as a document of g

the Security Council under the symbol The meeting rose (113.25 11m. S/PRST/2005/48.
