Let me just start, if I might, by saying that I think that it is really important that we try to keep the politics out of our humanitarian discussions. That is one reason that we separate out into political, chemical weapons and humanitarian meetings each month on Syria, to enable us to focus on the evidence and the facts as we grapple with how we keep people alive, which is surely the most vital responsibility that the Council faces. I have to say that I listened with sadness today to one representative whose intervention was an attack on those providing aid across Syria and those paying for it. I want to remind everybody that the biggest donors to the Syria appeal are the United States, the United Kingdom, Germany and the European Union (EU), including those areas under Al-Assad's rule. So what does an evidence-based approach tell us? Well, the United Kingdom is deeply concerned about the potentially catastrophic impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in Syria, as highlighted by the World Health Organization. There are 48 confirmed cases in areas controlled by the Syrian authorities, as well as confirmed cases in the north-east and reported cases in the north-west. There are probably already many more. We cannot know because of the lack of testing capacity. And as the United Nations scales up prevention and protection against COVID-19 in areas controlled by the Syrian authorities and in the north-west, it follows that it must be allowed to do the same in the north-east. So it is gravely concerning the gaps in medical supplies in the north-east have in fact widened at a time when facilities should be urgently scaling up to prepare for the virus. The United Nations has confirmed that, in terms of coverage or reach, cross- line access in the north-east has not improved since 2019, when the Al-Yarubiyah crossing was still operational. It is for that reason that in paragraph 19 of his latest report (S/2020/401), the Secretary-General said, "The pressing need to prepare for a COVID-19 outbreak in the north- east has further and starkly highlighted the gap left by the removal of the Yarubiyah authorization". This could not be clearer. There is a clear problem in the north-east, and the United Nations and humanitarian organizations have told us what the answer is. We must not play politics with this virus when it is in our gift to enable aid to get through and save lives. We believe that the mandate for the Al-Yarubiyah crossing should be reauthorized as a matter of great urgency for as long as COVID-19 remains a threat to Syria. Now let me turn to the north-west. If our objective is to save lives, then it is absolutely necessary that the Council renew resolution 2504 (2020) in a timely manner. Monthly truck crossings in March and April were more than double than over the same period last year. That increase in aid is in response to the increased humanitarian need within the region. The renewal of resolution 2504 (2020) therefore remains essential. There is no alternative. I wish to emphasize that, if the resolution were to not be renewed, then no one should have any illusions that the United Kingdom's considerable humanitarian funding for the north-west would automatically transfer to delivery via Damascus, particularly as serious questions remain about assistance from Damascus reaching those most in need. A number of colleagues have talked about sanctions. Goods and medical supplies used for humanitarian purposes are not subject to EU sanctions, which are now part of the United Kingdom's national legislation, and additional exemptions from sanctions are available for humanitarian activities in Syria. In conclusion, the evidence is clearly set out in the Secretary-General's report. There remains a pressing humanitarian need across Syria. We must remember the millions of lives at stake. COVID-19 has changed the world we all live in. It has changed the situation on the ground in Syria. I believe it means that we must be ready to change our approach. We must put aside our political differences and act on the basis of humanitarian needs to authorize temporary cross-border access through Al-Yarubiyah. And we must, of course, renew resolution 2504 (2020). There is no other responsible course of action.
