Mr. Semakula Kiwanuka (Uganda): First of all, let
me congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of this body, and commend you for convening
this meeting, which is discussing a subject that is very
important in our region. My delegation also welcomes the
presence here today of the Minister for External Relations
of the Government of Angola and of the Minister with
responsibility for Africa of the Government of the United
Kingdom.

The Government of Uganda welcomes this report
(S/2000/203), which is very important. We welcome the
recommendations therein, because we believe they will
strengthen the sanctions regime against UN ITA. However,
my Government expresses its regret that, in spite of
extensive discussions which the Panel of Experts held
with Ugandan officials last month, all the information that
was exchanged and provided was ignored. The Panel,
apparently, remained unconvinced, and went ahead and
reproduced the allegations. For that reason, I take this
opportunity to present to this Council and to you,
Mr. President, the record of the discussions that took
place in Uganda on 16 February.

The Panel of Experts to investigate violations of
sanctions imposed against UNITA visited Uganda from
14 to 17 February this year. The team was in Uganda to
investigate allegations against Uganda - allegations of its
collaboration with UNITA in contravention of United
Nations sanctions. The members of the Panel met
Ugandan Government officials on Wednesday,
16 February, and they were led by Ambassador Anders
Mollander.

The Panel raised a number of questions, made
allegations and sought answers from the Government of
Uganda. The Government of Uganda categorized those
questions under several headings, which appear in the
annex to document S/2000/200.

The first category was alleged arms transfers by the
Government of Uganda to UNITA. The Panel sought to
know whether it was true that some of the military tanks
imported by Uganda through the port of Dar es Salaam in
Tanzania in 1998 and early 1999 were destined for
UNITA-held areas.

The Panel of Experts sought to know whether it was
true that there was a relationship between UNITA and the
Uganda-backed rebel movement of J ean-Pierre Bemba,
which is fighting the Government of Kabila in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Panel wanted to
know whether Uganda was a conduit for arms to the rebel
movement, in circumvention of the arms embargo.

The Panel wanted to find out from the Ugandan
Government who issued end-user certificates for arms
re-exported from Uganda.

The Panel of Experts wanted to establish the truth
regarding Ugandan customs procedures, and whether it
was possible to import and re-export UNITA diamonds

 

into and out of Uganda, and to re-export petroleum
products to UNITA-held areas in Angola.
The Panel sought to obtain information about air
supply and cargo aircraft operating out of Uganda. It asked
why an alleged high-level Government official took an
interest in the release of a cargo plane which had been
impounded in Zambia in August 1999, after having
discharged its cargo, on suspicion that it had been ferrying
arms to UN ITA-held areas. It was alleged that someone in
the Government of Uganda asked President Chiluba of
Zambia to intervene in order to have the plane released.

The Panel wanted to verify reports of visits by senior
Ugandan army officers to UNITA-held areas of Angola
between 1996 and December 1999. The Panel also wanted
to establish whether there was a visit to Uganda by
Jonas Savimbi of UNITA in October and November 1999,
as well as visits by other senior UNITA officials.

The Panel asked the Ugandan Government to tell the
truth as to whether Uganda had any information about
Victor Bout or Boutov, an arms dealer operating a cargo
airliner under different names; Jacques "Kiki" Lamaire,
who owns planes and is involved in fuel airlifts to UNITA;
and many others.

The Government of Uganda responded to those
questions as follows. With regard to arms transfers to
UNITA, as far as end-user certificates for large
consignments of arms are concerned, these are issued only
by the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Defence. The
office of the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Defence,
confirmed to the Panel of Experts that no such certificate
has ever been issued for arms to Angola.

As for the alleged importation of tanks through the
port of Dar es Salaam in 1998 and 1999 which were
allegedly sent to UNITA, the Government of Uganda
informed the Panel of Experts that all the tanks which had
been imported through the port of Dar es Salaam were still
in the possession of the Ugandan armed forces, and it asked
the experts to verify physically those facts.

The Government of Uganda informed the experts -
and I would like to inform you, Mr. President, and this
Council - that Uganda does not supply, and has never
supplied arms to UNITA, either directly or indirectly,
through the Movement for the Liberation of the Congo
(MLC). It is a well-known fact that most of the arms which
are used by the rebel group in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo were captured from the Government forces of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and from the allies
of Kabila who were defeated, namely, the forces from
Chad.

I would like to inform this Council that, while the
Government of Uganda is cooperating with the MLC of
Jean-Pierre Bemba, it is not the policy of the Government
of Uganda to dictate whom our partners cooperate with.
Therefore, the Government of Uganda cannot be
responsible for the arms which the rebel groups have in
their possession.

On customs procedures, I would like to inform the
Council, as the Government informed the Panel of
Experts, that Uganda does not have a seaport. Most of the
imports - indeed, 70 per cent of them - come in by
road. With regard to transit cargo, the customs department
of the Uganda Revenue Authority receives and escorts
transit cargo vehicles from entry to exit points. In most
cases, the original seals on the containers are left intact.
Should there be any cause of suspicion, Customs does the
physical verification of the goods, after which a Uganda
Revenue Authority seal is put on the container. In all
cases of transit goods, a customs bond is executed at the
point of entry and the same sum is refunded at the end.

Total verification is done at an inland container
depot for goods destined for Uganda. The Government
informed the Panel of Experts that records showed clearly
that Uganda had neither imported nor re-exported
diamonds into or out of Uganda. Uganda, as you know,
does not produce petroleum products; neither does it
re-export those products, either by land or by sea.

With regard to the cargo aircraft which took off
from Entebbe, the Panel was informed that Uganda has
only one international airport, at Entebbe, with three
runways. The other airfields are either grass or murram
and only take light aircraft.

The Government of Uganda is a signatory to the
Chicago Convention on International Civil Aviation;
Uganda is, therefore, duty bound not to allow into her
airspace aircraft violating the airspace of other sovereign
States. The air base at Entebbe is open to and is used by
many leased aircraft, but it is impossible to conduct secret
flights from there without attracting the attention of the
Government.

The report specifically mentions a plane which was
impounded in Zambia and which was allegedly operating
out of Entebbe. I would like to inform you, Mr. President,

 

that that plane was impounded in Lusaka, Zambia after it
had left Entebbe for the last time, one month, in July, prior
to its impounding. It left Entebbe allegedly en route to
Eldoret, in Kenya. If it diverted itself to Lusaka, the
Ugandan Government was not responsible for that. There
are no records to indicate that the plane returned to Entebbe
after it had been banned, although the operator made
several attempts to have it returned.

The Government of Uganda takes serious exception to
the allegation that a very high-ranking member of the
Government contacted President Chiluba over the release of
the plane, and we strongly object to the insinuation that that
high Ugandan official who contacted President Chiluba
could only have been President Chiluba's counterpart. We
challenge the Panel of Experts to produce evidence for that
insinuation.

With regard to visits by UNITA officials to Uganda
and vice versa, I would like to inform the Council that
Mr. Savimbi never visited Uganda on those said dates. No
UNITA official has ever visited Uganda since the
imposition of the travel ban. No Ugandan Government
official has visited UNITA-held areas in Angola. The
names of people forwarded by the Panel did not appear
anywhere in the records of Uganda.

On other matters that the Panel raised - that UN ITA
assisted the Uganda armed forces and installed an
anti-aircraft battery in Kisangani - the Panel was
informed, and I repeat, that the Uganda Government found
it ridiculous that the Panel could conclude that the Uganda
Government would depend on a fledgling rebel army for its
air defence.

On alleged military cooperation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo: the Uganda armed forces in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo are not holding any
territory which borders UNIT A-held areas and, therefore,
the allegation that the two armed forces are collaborating is
unfounded.

Before I conclude, let me state that the Panel was
informed that Angolan intelligence officers had visited
Uganda in the framework of cooperation between the two
Governments and had the opportunity to travel to different
parts of the country in which they had interest but had not
turned up any evidence incriminating Uganda. The
Government of Uganda would accept and welcome any
follow-up visit, from Angola or from the investigators of
this Panel should they wish to do so, in order to erase the
suspicion of alleged collaboration of Uganda and UNITA.

We state Uganda's support for the Angola Peace
Agreement and respect for and adherence to all Security
Council resolutions. The Panel was informed that Uganda
would submit its findings to the Chairman of the Security
Council Committee on Angola, who would in turn make
a report to the Security Council. The Government of
Uganda takes this opportunity to reiterate its offer to the
Angolans to come to Uganda, if they so wish, and cross
check the information given over the period and on the
allegations made in this report.

In conclusion, Uganda is committed to peace and
security in Africa. Uganda has no collaboration
whatsoever with UNITA. Uganda has never, and will
never, support any measure which breaks the sanctions of
the United Nations Security Council.

