In our view, the Council members need to focus on the most pressing issue at hand: the unprecedented humanitarian emergency the Venezuelan people are suffering through and the overwhelming need for a political solution. We are aware of the Maduro regime's attempts to instrumentalize some reported incidents to divert the world's attention from the real issues. We see that as an effort at diversion by a regime that is responsible for the protracted political crisis and dire economic situation that Venezuelans from all walks of life are suffering. We, as the Security Council, should not fall into that trap. If we really care about the fate of millions of Venezuelans and about regional stability, we need urgent action now. The only way forward is through a peaceful, Venezuelan-owned political process. We strongly renew our call for the restoration of democratic institutions and the rule of law in Venezuela through free, transparent and credible presidential elections. The European Union (EU), through the International Contact Group on Venezuela, stands ready to support that process. Echoing the Secretary-General's call to unite in our shared battle against coronavirus disease (COVID-19), now is the time to overcome the political deadlock and find an agreement, possibly within the framework of the Oslo process, which Germany has always strongly supported. We also support the proposal of a transitional Government for Venezuela, representing both sides, to pave the way towards presidential and parliamentary elections and to unite in order to jointly respond to the challenge posed by COVID-19. We urge the Maduro regime to finally engage in meaningful negotiations. In the context of collapsing infrastructure, mass migration and a Government in denial about the humanitarian emergency, COVID-19 could have disastrous implications for Venezuela. Humanitarian actors need unimpeded and sustained access to the most vulnerable people and must be able to deliver humanitarian assistance in full accordance with the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence. We urge the Maduro regime to grant access nationwide. Humanitarian assistance must never be exploited for political purposes or be misused as a propaganda tool. The politicization of the delivery of humanitarian assistance runs counter to the humanitarian mandate and undermines the safety and security of humanitarian workers. We call instead for a united attempt to combat COVID-19 that includes all political actors. The National Assembly of Venezuela has made a number of constructive proposals to strengthen the country's health-care system. The authorities in Venezuela and the international community must use all available resources at this point in time. That requires all of us to provide sufficient humanitarian assistance, first and foremost through the United Nations. Let me reiterate in that context that EU sanctions do not stand in the way or impede the global fight against COVID-19 or more broadly the provision of humanitarian assistance. On the contrary, EU sanctions, such as asset freezes and travel bans, are targeted and are aimed at those responsible for the policies or actions that violate international law or human rights and aggravate conflict. To be perfectly clear, EU sanctions imposed against Venezuela do not apply to humanitarian assistance and humanitarian activities, including medical assistance. We are alarmed that with the arrival of the pandemic in the country, intimidation and threats against health professionals, members of non-governmental organizations, journalists and human rights defenders have increased yet again. That is unfortunate and must stop. We therefore urge the regime once again to release all political prisoners, especially bearing in mind the consequences of the current pandemic under conditions of detention. Before closing, let me recall that more than 5 million Venezuelans have fled to neighbouring countries, often in search of medicine and basic health services. Sadly, the COVID-19 pandemic further exacerbates their plight. This is the biggest refugee crisis in Latin America's history. On 26 May, Germany will participate in a donor conference for Venezuelan refugees to be hosted by the EU, together with Spain.
