I have the honour to submit this statement on behalf of the States members of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC), in my capacity as Chair of the OIC group. At the outset, I thank France for its successful presidency of the Security Council this month and for providing the opportunity for the OIC group to participate in this important meeting. The question of Palestine is of primary concern to Muslims around the world, and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation reiterates its unwavering support for and solidarity with the Palestinian people. OIC member States have repeatedly stated their concerns over the grave situation in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, particularly in regard to Israel's wall construction, continuing settlement construction and expansion, land confiscation and annexation, and demolition of homes and properties, as well as the forced displacement of Palestinian citizens. The current plan under consideration by the Israeli Government to unilaterally annex vast swathes of the occupied Palestinian territory as early as one week from now requires our particular and urgent attention today. In response to that plan, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of OIC member States adopted on 10 June a resolution rejecting Israel's threat to annex parts of the Palestinian land occupied in 1967 and urging the Security Council to the take the measures necessary to prevent annexation plan including by compelling Israel, the occupying Power, to stop all its illegal actions. The OIC group reiterates that the annexation of Palestinian land would violate international law, the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant United Nations resolutions, including resolutions 478 (1980) and 2334 (2016). The OIC group warns that the implementation of this illegal, unilateral plan would undermine the realization by the Palestinian people of their right to self-determination and the decades- long efforts made by the international community to achieve a two-State solution based on the 4 June 1967 borders and the prospects for realizing a just, lasting and comprehensive peace. Additionally, we underscore that any annexation would have grave consequences for the stability and security of the region and beyond. The OIC group therefore stresses the urgent need for the international community to engage in serious efforts to halt Israel's illegal annexation plan in order to salvage the prospects for peace. Furthermore, States should neither recognize the illegal situation resulting from Israel's occupation of Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, nor render any aid or assistance to illegal settlement activities. With reference to resolution 2334 (2016), the OIC group reiterates its calls on States to distinguish, in their relevant dealings, between the territory of the State of Israel and the occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. The OIC group calls on the Security Council to honour its obligations under the United Nations Charter and to address Israel's annexation plan, which undermines efforts to reach a lasting political solution in accordance with the relevant provisions of international law and United Nations resolutions. The OIC reiterates its demand that Israel, as the occupying Power, fully respect all of its obligations under international law, including international humanitarian law, international human rights law and the United Nations Charter, and to comply with all relevant United Nations resolutions. We urge the international community, while addressing this threat of annexation, to also consider that the health-related, economic and social challenges in the occupied Palestinian territory have been exacerbated by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. In particular, we encourage support for the United Nations COVID-19 response plan in the occupied Palestinian territory, the programme budget of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and the COVID-19 flash appeal for Palestine refugees. In conclusion, the OIC group affirms the urgency of bringing to an end the Israeli occupation that began in 1967 and of achieving the fulfilment of the right of the Palestinian people to exercise their legitimate rights, including their right to self- determination and to sovereignty over the territory of the State of Palestine, based on the 4 June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
