Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (Spoke in Spanish): I
thank Under-Secretary-General Stephen O'Brien for his
detailed briefing. My delegation has requested the floor
because we believe that such briefings are not solely
for the Security Council but for all of the Members of
the Organization. In that regard, as an elected member
of the Council, we believe that it is our duty to share
with the Members that elected us to this position our
opinions on the theme of the open briefings. In order
to ensure greater transparency in our work, I shall now
share the view of my delegation. We would also like
to be consistent with our actions on Monday, when we
took the floor as the political dimension of the conflict
was being addressed with Special Envoy Staffan de
Mistura (see S/PV.7777).

I take this opportunity to thank you, Sir, for having
convened on 21 September the high-level meeting
of the Council (S/PV.7774) at which Heads of State,
Heads of Government and Ministers spoke in favour of
finding a negotiated solution to the crisis. Over the past
week, we have borne witness to an abhorrent attack

on a humanitarian aid convoy, in violation of the most
basic rules of international humanitarian law. In the
past few hours, the city of Aleppo - or rather, what
is left of Aleppo - has been devastated by one of the
most intense air strikes since the start of the conflict,
causing hundreds of deaths and enormous damage to
infrastructure that was already practically in ruins.

This military escalation is another blow to the
protection of civilians and to the expectations of the
Syrian population to stop the protracted suffering that
has lasted for more than five years. As we did yesterday
during the briefing on the implementation of resolution
2286 (2016) (see S/PV.7779), we again vigorously
condemn the continued air strikes on hospitals and
medical facilities in Syria, which have recently become
a repeated criminal practice and must stop immediately.
We condemn the use of besiegement and hunger as a
war tactic and appeal to the perpetrators of such acts to
lift the sieges affecting millions of people in Syria. We
continue to support the 48-hour weekly humanitarian
pauses that could be the precursor to another ceasefire.

Nine months into the year, seven months since the
adoption of resolution 2254 (2015) and seven months
since the adoption of resolution 2268 (2016), and after
almost 50 Security Council meetings on the situation
in Syria, the situation appears to be worsening day by
day. The statements we make here, however good our
intentions, do not change the reality on the ground.
Aleppo and other areas in Syria continue to witness the
daily horror of ceaseless bombings that are gradually
exterminating its population. It is carnage without any
justification whatsoever in the eyes of a world that
appears incapable of responding to so much barbarism.

Given the situation, a few days ago we asked what
the Security Council will do and what the results of our
deliberations will be in the light ofa horror seldom seen
in recent times. In spite of the fact that all of us present
here having stated ad nauseam that there can be no
military solution in Syria, events on the ground prove
otherwise. Therefore, until the parties to the conflict in
Syria and those supporting them cease their attempts
to reach their objectives in that manner, it will be very
difficult for us to reach an agreement that would enable
the parties to resume negotiations to find a political
solution to the conflict.

This is a defining moment. Thus far, the Syrian
people and the international community have witnessed
the failure of the Council to stop the hostilities, ensure

sustained, regular and safe access for humanitarian
aid, and create the necessary conditions to resume the
process of political transition established in resolution
2254 (2015), which has been stalled for five months. It
is our responsibility to fulfil the duties of the Council
or go down in history as those to blame for being
incapable of stopping one of the worst conflicts that
humankind has seen this decade.

I plead for us to pursue every effort to set aside our
differences and achieve once and for all a commitment
to finding a new and perhaps final impulse to the
search for a political solution for Syria. In that regard,
we again urge the Russian Federation and the United
States of America to continue talks in order to arrive
at the agreements necessary to finally end the conflict
and ensure the gradual restoration of peace in Syria.
The Council can count on the support of Uruguay.

It is likely that if the Council were to consider
Syria in terms of giving priority to the men, women
and children, civilians and workers, who make up
the vast majority of the population of that country, it
would arrive at a more viable solution. The hundreds of
thousands of victims and millions of Syrians who have
seen their lives affected by the war will bear witness to
our future decisions.

