Mr. Sauer (Finland): We welcome this open debate
and thank the Dominican Republic for drawing our
attention to this topic. We also thank the briefers for
their contributions.

The threat of climate change and climate-related
disasters posed to international peace and security is
real. Climate change affects food and water security
and multiplies risks related to conflicts and forced
migration. We must tackle those global challenges in
an integrated manner and strengthen the bridge linking
early warning, preparedness and early action. We
believe that the Security Council has a role to play in
addressing this question. As the current Chair of the
Arctic Council, Finland has treated climate change with
its implications to the Arctic region as a priority issue.

The recent wake-up call from the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) is clear. An average
rise in temperature of only 1.5°C degrees is still
dangerous, but 2°C would be devastating. Responding
to the findings of the IPCC report Global Warming
of ].5°C, I would like to inform the Council that,
this morning in Helsinki, the Prime Ministers of the
five Nordic countries - Denmark, Finland, Iceland,
Norway and Sweden - signed a declaration to work
together towards carbon neutrality.

Conflicts over natural resources, such as water, are
often the root causes of armed conflict. From a conflict-
prevention and mediation perspective, addressing these
issues inclusively is crucial. Women are often among
the first to suffer from climate change-related risks,
and women's contribution to peaceful solutions is
decisive. Engaging youth is equally important. We have
seen encouraging examples of young people taking the
lead on climate, and we should do more to support this.

Climate-related disasters cause tremendous
human suffering and economic loss. While enhancing
mitigation remains the most important way to reduce
future risks, we must also do more to respond to storms,
floods and droughts today. As attested by the briefing
earlier in this meeting, the World Meteorological
Organization (WMO) has increased the global impact
of the Organization. Finland commends the role of
the WMO in finding solutions to climate challenges
and thereby participating in the conflict-prevention
efforts of the Secretary-General. Finland has stressed
the importance of hydrometeorological cooperation
and facilitated collaboration between the WMO and
national meteorological institutes around the globe.
Our development aid in the field of meteorology is
the second-highest in the world. Improved capacity to
produce high-quality weather and climate information
will help countries to respond to the increased
climate-related risks.

In conclusion, the most important way to reduce
climate-related risks in the future is to enhance
mitigation. Ifthe Paris Agreement on Climate Change is
to truly deliver, we must raise the level of our ambitions.
We look forward to the Secretary-General's climate
summit next September, which will be an opportunity
for us to show our determination to keep the increase in
global temperatures below 1.5°C.

