Mrs. Patterson (United States of America): My
delegation welcomes your presence here. Your decision
to preside personally over the Council's debates
highlights the importance that your country places on
improving the coordination between the United
Nations and regional organizations. My delegation
shares your interest in exploring ways to enhance that
coordination as part of our continuing joint efforts to
identify efficient and effective methods to help ensure
international peace and security.

We welcome in particular the opportunity that
today's debate represents to review cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations as well as ways to increase
the impact of such cooperation in advancing Security
Council objectives. The activities of regional and
subregional organizations, when properly planned and
capably implemented, can strengthen and reinforce a
variety of critically important United Nations
objectives, such as promoting democracy and human
rights, strengthening international security cooperation,
countering terrorism and transnational crime and
supporting economic development.

Regional and subregional organizations bring
unique and important connections, knowledge and
experience to any effort to address a given regional
issue. A cooperative, multilateral approach between the
appropriate United Nations organ and the appropriate
regional organization has the potential to create
valuable synergies and to increase the probability of
successful interventions.

Allow me to highlight a few of the relevant
initiatives that the United States is undertaking in this
regard. The Global Peace Operations Initiative (GPOI)
is global in scope, as its name implies, but has a
particular regional emphasis on Africa. The Initiative is
designed to increase the capacity of participating
African countries to deploy highly trained personnel in
international peace-support operations. Cooperation
between GPOI and the United Nations Department of
Peacekeeping Operations will enhance interoperability
among peace-support units from different countries.
Increased interoperability translates into greater shared
abilities to address some of the issues raised in the
draft resolution that we will adopt at the conclusion of
today's debate.

The African Contingency Operations, Training
and Assistance programme (ACOTA) is a specialized
African peacekeeping training component of GPOI and
will train selected African military contingents to carry
out peace-support and humanitarian relief operations.
ACOTA works with African partner armed forces and
with regional and subregional organizations to
coordinate crisis-response training. It is our hope and
belief that ACOTA-trained units will be among the
most capable available anywhere for these challenging
assignments.

Partnerships with ACOTA have been developed
after extensive collaboration with African countries
and other stakeholders. The programme enables
African military contingents from different countries to
execute multinational peacekeeping operations by
providing them with interoperable peace-support
operations skills, including the requisite training and
equipment. The programme's comprehensive approach
integrates humanitarian, non-governmental and
international relief organization participation into its
training in order to improve critical coordination when
ACOTA-trained personnel are deployed in real-world
operations. The programme's support to African
regional security organizations will assist the
development of strong planning and organizational
units capable of responding to humanitarian and
peacekeeping crises in the region. Moreover, greater
regional stability, created by an enhanced African
peace-support capacity, will be instrumental in
promoting African democracy and economic growth.

In other regions, similar efforts to enhance
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations can yield similar benefits.

My delegation is encouraged by today's debate
and will study carefully the report that the Council has
invited the Secretary-General to prepare on the
challenges presented and the opportunities offered, as
we seek to maximize the effectiveness of cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations.
The United States will be an active participant in that
ongoing and collective effort. Today's debate has been
a useful way-station along that road.

Finally, my delegation concurs fully with the
statement made by Assistant Secretary General
Erdmann, that NATO is not a regional organization
per se - the long-held and widely shared view among
Member States.

