Mr. Egeland (spoke in Spanish): I would like
respond briefly to the comments of Council members.

(spoke in English)

First, on northern Uganda, indeed, I think that no
one expected the talks to produce the kind of security
improvements that they did produce when they started
as an initiative of Riek Machar and the South Sudanese
Government. But the reality is that we have had the
best period in half a generation in terms of security in
northern Uganda, and that one of the three or four
worst humanitarian crises of this decade can be
brought to an end. Hundreds of thousands are
preparing to return in the next few months, if the
ceasefire, or the cessation of hostilities, holds and we
make further progress in the peace process.

That is why it is so important that you continue
the tension, you continue the investment, directly and
through the United Nations, in this process; it must
become a priority of yours. We must make it as
attractive as possible for the Lord's Resistance Army
(LRA) to stand down, demobilize, disarm and
reintegrate, and we must make it as unattractive as
possible for the LRA and for the Government forces to
break the ceasefire and return to conflict. I think the
conflict could become even worse than it was before.
We should be under no illusions that the LRA cannot
again cause terror across a large area.

On Darfur, the representative of Ghana asked
about figures regarding humanitarian suffering on the
ground. The most difficult figure is the one that we are
frequently asked to give - the number of people who
have died. Estimates range widely. The large-scale
survey that we had in mid-2004 concluded that, of the
1 million people affected at the time, there were 10,000
extra deaths per month. Since then, the number of
those affected has grown from 1 million to 4 million.
Two million of those are displaced persons, and the
other 2 million are people who have been severely
affected by the fighting. It is impossible for us to give
a figure of how many have died, except to say that we
know that, within the camps, the humanitarian effort
has been hugely successful and we are now clearly
below the mortality rates of 2004. I mentioned that is
the figure now - or was, in August - about 0.4
deaths per 10,000 per day. The emergency threshold is
one per 10,000 - and it was above two per 10,000 in
2004, that is, twice the emergency threshold.

However, since August mortality has increased,
malnutrition has increased and the crisis has increased.
Displacement has increased. The number of attacks and
the number of people killed has increased. And in each
of these attacks - and I mentioned several - a dozen,
or several dozen, innocent civilians are killed.

The number of refugees now in Chad is about
230,000, but the number of internally displaced
persons in Chad has grown by many tens of thousands
of late - it has grown even more than the number of
refugees. It is so bad now in areas of eastern Chad that
people are fleeing to Darfur. It has to be pretty bad in
eastern Chad if people are fleeing to Darfur, given how
it is there at the moment.

China observed, very correctly, that the
humanitarian situation depends on progress on the
security front and on the peace front, which the
Council will be discussing this afternoon. Indeed, if the
situation deteriorates further on the security front, if we
do not make progress in the peace talks, the whole
humanitarian operation could falter. That is my main
message today. A lot is at stake. The lifeline to 3
million to 4 million people is really in danger for all of
the reasons that I have mentioned.
What we fear now is that a lot of time will be lost
before serious peace deals are made and before we get
the security force on the ground that could protect the
civilian population.

Today, the reality is that the women come to me

and say, "Thank you for the blankets, thank you for the

Band-Aids, thank you for our daily bread. But what we

really need now is security. When night falls, there is

nobody there. You are not there, as humanitarian

workers; African Union soldiers are not there;

Government protection is not there. There is nobody

when armed men now increasingly infiltrate our camps
or attack our communities."

At times, I have felt that perhaps the talks among
those who can decide on peace, who can decide on
security, should not take place in hotel rooms in capital
cities, but should take place in one of the camps. Dorti
would be a good case in point - that is a camp that
everybody had to leave because it was so bad. The
negotiators - those who have authority on all of these
questions - should bring their families, their children
and their wives. Then I think we would have much
more progress, much more quickly, on all of those
issues.

I would urge those who can influence the
situation - the Asian countries, the Arab countries, the
Islamic countries, the African countries, as well as the
donor countries - to help to influence the
Government, all parts of government, the rebels,
06-62675

everybody, to make concessions. There must be
massive international pressure now on the parties,
because, as was observed by several speakers,
including the representative of the United Kingdom
and others, there is a very real disconnect between
what I saw on the ground and what comes out of many
of the meetings, including the Addis Ababa meeting,
which was a great success and where there was a
declared commitment. The reality is that in recent days
it has deteriorated. That was also the reality after the
Abuja Agreement and the Abuja talks. This time it has
to be different - we have to see a real change on the
ground, and people must be made accountable for what
they do and what they do not do, whether they are on
this or that side. But, I certainly agree with Russia and
others to say that of course the Government has a
particular responsibility now to protect the civilian
population, and the Government, as it now acts, is not
doing what it could do to protect the civilian
population of its own country, the Sudan.

