Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, I wish to thank President Pocar and
Prosecutor Del Ponte of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) as well as
President Mose and Prosecutor Jallow of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for
the reports on their respective tribunals.

China welcomes the recommendations submitted
by the working group on speeding up trials aimed at
enhancing the efficiency of the proceedings. We
believe that it is in the interest of the Tribunals to
enhance the efficiency of their proceedings, drawing on
the strengths and advantages of the civil law as well as
the common law system, and embark on a trial process
that is closely managed by the judges of the tribunals.

We note also that the ICTY is making consistent
efforts to refer cases involving intermediate- and
lower-ranking accused to the competent national
jurisdictions. However, we believe that, due to a
multitude of factors, the progress achieved and the
results of the work done in that area are not evident
enough.

With respect to the ICTR, we appreciate the
consistent manner in which it is carrying out its work
as well as the ongoing efforts it has been making to
implement the completion strategy. We are also
satisfied with the efforts of the ICTR in terms of
transferring cases involving intermediate- and lower-
ranking accused to the competent national
jurisdictions. In addition, we are immensely interested
in the ICTR's outreach programme.

As we approach the deadline set in the
completion strategies, the Security Council has done
considerable work for the purposes of attaining those
goals, including, in response to the recommendation
and requests of the Tribunals, adopting resolutions in
support of the work of the Tribunals. We believe that,
in order to ensure the successful completion of the
work of the Tribunals, it is worth considering
extending, where appropriate, the mandates of the
judges and increasing, where necessary, the use of ad
litem judges to assist in the work of the Tribunals.

In order to carry out the completion strategies, it
would be right for the Tribunals to focus on improving
the efficiency of their proceedings. At the same time,
we also urge the Tribunals, the ICTY in particular, to
continue working on referring cases involving
intermediate and low-ranking accused to competent
national jurisdictions. For that purpose, we appeal to
countries in a position to do so to continue to provide
further financial and technical assistance, and to assist
countries in the region in their judicial capacity-
building, so that they will be equipped, sooner rather
than later, to conduct trials. In addition, cooperation
between and among countries in the region represents
an important guarantee of the timely completion of the
mandates of the Tribunals.

Lastly, it is our hope that the Security Council
will consider as soon as possible the arrangements for
work after the two Tribunals have completed their
mandates. We believe that this is part and parcel of the
effort to promote the implementation of the completion
strategies of the Tribunals.

