Mr. Aisi (Papua New Guinea): Mr. President, we
thank you for convening this important meeting. I also
take this opportunity to thank you personally for your
attention to this matter.

 

We align ourselves with the statement eloquently
delivered by His Excellency Mr. Marcus Stephen,
President of Nauru, on behalf of the Pacific small
island developing States (SIDS) and their friends. We
also thank the Parliamentary Secretary for Pacific
Islands Affairs of the Government of Australia,
Mr. Richard Marles, for his statement.

We, like many other speakers, acknowledge the
severity and urgency of the issue of climate change,
especially the challenges that confront developing
countries, particularly those most threatened by its
adverse impacts - the SIDS and least developed
countries, along with many parts of Africa 4 and that
continue to face enormous pressures from these
impacts on their national capacities and institutions.
Let me also include the Arctic and Antarctic regions,
which have also been adversely affected by climate
change, in turn contributing to rising sea levels
globally. Both regions have been prominently featured
in the international media by the visits of the
Secretary-General in recent times.

The truth, however, is that all of our countries are
in some way adversely affected by the effects of
climate change. Nevertheless, there are United Nations
Member States among us that are and will continue to
be affected and harmed through absolutely no fault of
their own. They will be immediately affected by loss of
land or territory through inundation from rising sea
levels, which could be catastrophic; others will be
affected by horrible droughts that will continue to force
millions of people - as we are seeing in parts of the
world today 4 to move across land borders because of
depleting arable land and the drying-up of scarce water
resources. There are consequences, some of which
could potentially lead to conflict.

Through the global public media, we have been
made aware that scenario planning by military and
intelligence experts, along with various organizations,
forecast the potential displacement of large populations
due to the adverse impacts of climate change, leading
to a variety of negative consequences, including the
potential for conflicts.

The Charter of the United Nations is clear. The
Council is vested with the mandate to oversee and
maintain international peace and security. We would,
however, reiterate here the unequivocal statement made
by the President of Nauru:

 

"Make no mistake: the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change -
the UNFCCC - is and must remain the primary
forum for developing an international strategy to
mitigate climate change, mobilize financial
resources, and facilitate adaptation, planning and
project implementation." (S/PV.6587)

Furthermore, we also strongly support the President of
Nauru's call for the General Assembly to continue
addressing the links between climate change and
sustainable development.

Addressing climate change and its adverse
impacts require, at the national level, a whole-of-
Government approach. In this respect, we would also
argue that there is a need for a whole-of-United
Nations approach, which must include all the United
Nations organs 4 among others, the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council - and the
UNFCCC, along with related United Nations agencies,
such as the United Nations Development Programme,
and international organizations, including the Global
Environment Facility and the World Bank. Each must
play its respective role, be it in setting up the relevant
policy framework as we move forward or in financing
the various response mechanisms to address the
adverse impacts of climate change.

By extension, we submit that the Security
Council also has an important role to play. In this
regard, we would strongly argue that the Council
should and must exercise its mandate relative to
addressing the adverse impacts of climate change,
which may have security implications, including future
contingencies that may arise. We observe that the
Council has been previously called upon to exercise its
mandate to address issues such as development,
HIV/AIDS, children in armed conflict, women in
conflict and other issues. While these issues have
remained on the agenda of the Council, that has not
diluted the primacy of those relevant United Nations
organs and agencies that have direct oversight 4 for
example, the Economic and Social Council over the
development agenda.

We would highlight the effective role that the
Council played in sensitizing the international
community to HIV/AIDS, noting it as a soft and
borderless threat. To be sure, we, the international
community, still have challenges ahead of us in dealing
with this global scourge, but we saw during the

 

recently concluded High-level Meeting of the General
Assembly on HIV/AIDS the real interplay between all
the relevant United Nations agencies in addressing this
issue, which, we reiterate, was initiated by this
Council. The adoption of the outcome document
(General Assembly resolution 65/277) in essence
reflected the unity of purpose within the international
community to continue joint collaboration in
addressing HIV/AIDS. In fact, we delivered as one
United Nations on the commitment to continue fighting
the scourge of HIV/AIDS globally.

In conclusion, we would argue that the same
purposive approach as that employed in the HIV/AIDS
and development issues by the Council, respecting the
mandates of all relevant United Nations agencies and
organs, should be employed to address the security
implications of the adverse impacts of climate change.

