Mr. Larrain (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish):
We are most gratified at the important progress achieved in
the peace process, including the establishment of the
Government of Unity and National Reconciliation, the
return of UNITA legislators to the National Assembly and
the publication of the law on the special status of the leader
of the main opposition party.

The establishment of the Government of Unity and
National Reconciliation in Angola is an historic milestone
which the Government of Chile welcomes, as does the
entire international community.

Although calm has continued to prevail in the country,
we are very concerned at the information we have received
regarding troop movement and clashes in the northern
region. It would be regrettable if events that have taken
place in the region, but outside the territory of Angola,
were adversely to affect the process of consolidating peace
in Angola.

Likewise, we are concerned at tasks that still need to
be carried out in accordance with the Lusaka Protocol. In
military terms, these include the incorporation of members
of UNITA into the national police and the armed forces,
and the demobilization and disarmament of the civilian
population. In political terms, they include normalization of
the State administration throughout the country, legalization
of UNITA as a political party and a prompt meeting on
Angolan territory between President Dos Santos and the
leader of UNITA, Mr. Savimbi.

The Secretary-General has proposed a successor
operation to the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM. III), to be called the United Nations
Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA), whose overall
mandate will be to provide assistance to the parties in the
consolidation of peace and national reconciliation.

The fact that we are able to move on to this new
operation indicates to us that a phase in the recent history
of Angola is coming to an end on the ground and that we
are entering a period of the consolidation of peace and
national reconciliation. This is the beginning of a period
during which Angolans and the international community
must invest all their efforts in the development of the
country.

For the foregoing reasons, my delegation will vote
in favour of the draft resolution under consideration.

I would not wish to conclude my statement without
first expressing thanks to Mr. Beye and all the men and
women who have participated in UNAVEM, as part of
the United Nations system or through humanitarian
agencies, for the valuable work they have carried out in
Angola in the interests of peace. We are also grateful to
the Governments of Portugal, the United States of
America and the Russian Federation for their mediation
efforts and to all States that have cooperated with Angola.

