Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Bolivia): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this meeting.

As this is the first time that I have had the privilege
of addressing the Council in my capacity as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), I should like to say how
honoured I am to have assumed my tenure of the
Committee in January.

I am pleased to have the opportunity to brief the
Security Council on the work of the 1540 Committee in
its task of overseeing the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004).

Flowing fromthe outcome of the 2016 comprehensive
review of the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004)
of the previous five years, resolution 2325 (2016) was
adopted on 15 December 2016. The Committee intends
to build on the momentum imparted by this reinforcing
resolution through the Committee's programme of
work agreed for the period from 1 January 2017 through
31 January 2018. In that programme, the Committee
agreed that it should continue to intensify its efforts
to promote the full implementation by al States of
resolution 1540 (2004). A programme of work for
2017 has been agreed upon by the Committee and will
enable significant progress towards a more effective
implementation of the obligations under resolution
1540 (2004).

In this effort, the Committee considers that a clear
understanding of the challenges faced by States in the
effective implementation of the resolution is needed in
accordance with operative paragraph 11 of resolution
2325 (2016). There is also a need to develop an approach
to implementation and reporting that takes into account
the specificities of States, inter alia with respect to their
ability to manufacture and export related materials,
with a View to prioritizing efforts and resources where
they are most needed without affecting the need for a
comprehensive implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

This point is a key element in the effort to seek more
effective implementation if it is to have any chance of
success. The Committee's next direct interaction with
a State will take place next week. A 1540 Committee
delegation will visit El Salvador to support the
development of a voluntary national implementation
action plan.

The programme of work for 2017 stipulates, inter
alia, the following elements on the implementation of the
resolution by the States: with the objective of achieving
universal reporting as soon as possible, continue to
strengthen efforts to encourage the remaining 16
Member States that have not yet submitted their first
report to do so, including by engaging in dialogue
with those States; continue to encourage Member
States to submit additional information regarding
implementation; encourage the expansion and
undertake initiatives to us strengthen the capacity of
national points of contact; continue to encourage States
to identify and voluntarily report effective national
practices in implementation of resolution 1540 (2004)
and continue the practice of sharing compilations of
effective best practices periodically; and encourage
States to prepare, on a voluntary basis, national
implementation action plans, as appropriate, mapping
out their priorities and plans for implementing the key
provisions of resolution 1540 (2004).

As Council members are aware, there are means to
request assistance formally through the Committee to
help build capacity where needed for implementation.
This assistance can be provided by States with the
ability to do so and by the relevant international
organizations. As mentioned in the final document
of the 2016 comprehensive review, since 2004 56
States and two regional organizations have requested
assistance through the Committee. Of these requests,
17 came from African States, 22 from States in the
Asia-Pacific region, six from Eastern Europe and 11
from Latin America and the Caribbean.

The Committee recognizes that the system for
the provision of assistance to those in need requires
improvement. According to its seventeenth programme
of work, the Committee will engage its working group
on assistance in improving the assistance mechanism.
One focus is the ongoing revision of its assistance
template, which will be finalized by the end of March
2017, in order to better support States in developing
more detailed and effective assistance requests.
According to its programme of work, the Committee
will also consider ways to better provide assistance,
especially as a real-time response to requests made
during dialogue with States, such as through securing
and using additional resources, including, potentially,
the use of the Trust Fund for Global and Regional
Disarmament Activities.

The Committee also plans on reviewing all requests,
offers and related assistance programmes, with, inter
alia, a view to developing more effective matching
strategies. As another part of this effort, I ask those
Council members that have made offers of assistance
to take a lead in reviewing them, as it is clear from the
offers currently published that some need updating.

I pay tribute to those States that have responded to
requests for assistance and encourage others with the
capacity to do so to do likewise. The record shows that,
generally, the most relevant international organizations
have responded well to requests for assistance. I
should mention in particular the International Atomic
Energy Agency, INTERPOL, the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, the World Organization for
Animal Health and the World Customs Organization.

Regional organizations have also played their
part. I should mention in particular the African Union,
which hosted an event in 2016 dedicated to matching
assistance providers directly with those requesting
assistance. This was the first time that States that
had requested assistance were brought together with
potential providers, thereby facilitating a genuine
"matchmaking" platform. Of the 16 African States
that had requested assistance, 12 participated in the
conference. This effort showed practical results and
proved the value of the Committee's 2016 commitment
to adopting a regional approach to the provision of
assistance. I hope that this will continue in other regions
this year and next.
As I mentioned earlier, cooperation among States is
a key element in promoting effective implementation.
In this regard, I would like to point to valuable
elements, including the national 1540 points of contact.
In those States where they have been designated, not
only do they play an important role internally as a focal
point for national stakeholders in the implementation
of the resolution, they are also valuable in promoting
cooperation among States and interaction with the
Committee. Today, 99 States submitted their 1540 points
of contact to the Committee. Since the last briefing,
Algeria, the Bahamas, Costa Rica and Mauritania were
added. Some countries updated.

The Committee supports the initiatives taken by
some States to host training courses for national 1540
points of contact. Indeed, resolution 2325 (2016), in its
operative paragraph 6,

"urges the Committee to continue to undertake
initiatives to strengthen the capacity of such
Points of Contact to assist on the implementation
of the resolution, upon request of States, including
through the continuation on a regional basis of the
Committee's Point of Contact Training Programme".

Furthermore, I understand that Morocco is
planning to host a training course for French-speaking
African States later this year. At the same time, I must
also acknowledge the important contribution that
international organizations have made by providing
instructors for these kinds of training courses. The
Committee finds this direct and practical support
for enhancing implementation of the resolution
most encouraging.

States are making important contributions in other
ways too. For example, a regional 1540 seminar was
conducted over the past two days, hosted by Pakistan in
Islamabad. Representatives from 15 States of Central,
East and South Asia, along with representatives from
the four international organizations most relevant to the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), participated.
I salute Pakistan's initiative in proposing and hosting
this conference and in setting a good example by
covering the in-country costs.

The seminar was an opportunity to promote
awareness of resolution 1540 (2004) among the
policymakers. It also highlighted the national efforts
made by participating States and identified challenges
and opportunities in relation to regional conditions.
It contributed also to identifying opportunities
for collaboration in terms of implementation, law
enforcement, export controls and related matters and
matching assistance needs with offers. In order to
demonstrate its interest in this important event, the
Committee decided to second two members of its
Group of Experts.

My own country, Bolivia, will host a regional
conference on the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) in October for Latin American and
Caribbean countries.

In this context, on behalf of the Committee, I
sincerely thank those States that have made substantial
contributions to the United Nations Trust Fund for
Global and Regional Disarmament Activities directly in
support of the implementation of the resolution. Without
these contributions, the Committee would be severely
hampered in fulfilling its mandate of overseeing the
implementation of the resolution and, in particular, in
facilitating capacity-building where it is most needed.
Canada, Germany, Japan, Spain and Sweden have joined
the list of contributors. The contributions from these
and other countries are essential to the Committee's
being able to fulfil its programme of work.

The Committee, with the support of its Group
of Experts and the Office for Disarmament Affairs,
stands ready to cooperate with and, as requested, to
facilitate assistance to States with their implementation
efforts, which will contribute to achieving our common
objective to prevent the catastrophic use of weapons of
mass destruction by non-State actors.

