Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for using your presidency today to
highlight this issue and organize this briefing on youth,
peace and security. May I also thank our briefers very
much. It is very valuable and important to hear directly
from representatives not only of civil society but also
of the youth - two groups that are more important to
our work but which we in the United Kingdom want to
see participating meaningfully in decision-making on
issues connected with peace and security.

I was particularly impressed by what I heard from
Ms. Muganda about the work of HAKI Africa, in
particular with regard to taking concrete actions on the
ground towards peacebuilding. I believe that she said
notjust in the classroom but real action, and I think that
that is really very important and impressive.

May I also welcome the global policy paper, which
was commissioned by the Envoy of the Secretary-
General on Youth. We look forward to the Secretary-
General's upcoming report to build further on
recommendations to implement resolutions 2254 (2015)
and 2419 (2018).

The importance of youth participation in addressing
the world's most pressing challenges, including
conflict, which is the business of the Council, really
ought to be self-evident. More than half of the world's
population is now below the age of 30 and, looking
around the Council table, it is fair to say that not all of
us around the table are below the age of 30. These are
therefore voices that must not be ignored and it is only
by taking in the views of the youth, including in the
Council, that we can properly account for the diversity
of perspectives and the long-term vision that we need in
order to defend and promote human rights and develop
sustainable political, economic and social solutions to
such challenges.

One of the things that United Kingdom regularly
highlights in the Chamber is the importance of an
inclusive political process when it comes to conflict
prevention and conflict resolution because we know that
when peace processes are inclusive, they are one third
more likely to be sustainable. Greater sustainability is
crucial to ongoing peace.

I therefore agree very much with what Ms. Ramyar
said - she was referring particularly to the situation
in Afghanistan but I think it is applicable more
widely - about the importance of youth having a role
in peace processes and being heard and listened to.
That is vital to the future of such countries because
their future is represented in youth.

I also thought what she said, ifI may, about the
prejudice that she had suffered as a young woman was
really quite revealing. I think that we would say in the
United Kingdom that young women have a key role to
play in that area. In conflict and in post-conflict contacts
we see the engagement of young women as instrumental.
We see it all the time in building coalitions, mediating
local ceasefires, repairing community relations and
challenging and changing the status quo.

Mediation is an issue that we have discussed
regularly before, but allow me to say that we are extremely
proud of the fact that we, the United Kingdom, together
with fellow members of the Commonwealth support the
Women Mediators across the Commonwealth initiative.
We were able to support members of that network to
participate in a youth forum in Nairobi this year, which
addressed the lack of young women's representation
in mediation processes and how we can overcome
such barriers. The Women Mediators across the
Commonwealth now has nine members under the age
of 35, who are supported to resolve conflicts in their
communities, and we are committed to ensuring that
more young mediators are in that network.

When we consider instability in regions across the
world, it is clear that meeting the aspirations of young
people is crucial in defending and promoting human
rights, resolving conflict and sustaining peace. Young
people are an incredible mobilizing force to drive
political change, which is further enabled through the
use of social media and technology, as we have seen
recently in the Sudan, for example.

We must ensure that young people are able to
live to their full potential. In July 2018, the United
Kingdom launched the $75-million second phase of
our Girls' Education Challenge, which will support
70,000 girls and train 1,000 young women to teach in
remote areas. We are also one of the largest bilateral
donors to Education Cannot Wait, which was launched
at the 2016 World Humanitarian Summit to protect
access to education for children and youth in conflict
zones. We urge others in the international community
to support that initiative. Once again, that is all part
of peacebuilding, conflict prevention and post-
conflict stability.

Sadly, there are of course instances in which
young people find themselves in situations of great
danger. In November, the United Kingdom will host an
international conference on preventing sexual violence
in conflict, under the theme "Time for Justice: Putting
Survivors First", and we are ensuring that the voices of
youth survivors will play a crucial role in that meeting.

Let me conclude by thanking you, Mr. President,
for convening this debate, and our briefers for coming
here and for their wise words. I heard the Special Envoy
say that the title of her paper is We Are Here. Well, she
is certainly here today in the Council, and she is heard.

