Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to welcome the Ambassador of the
United States and assure her of our full support in
her work.

France welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2488 (2019), which authorizes the easing
of the arms embargo on the Central African Republic.
I would like to thank all members of the Security
Council for their constructive engagement during
the negotiations. I would like to mention two points
concerning the resolution.

The Security Council is honouring the commitments
it made with resolution 2454 (2019), adopted in
January (see S/PV.8455), and responding to the call
of the Central African authorities regarding the arms
embargo. It is on the basis of the progress made by the
Central African authorities that the Security Council
has decided to embark upon a path towards easing
the arms embargo. This decision is a reflection of the
balance in the positions taken by Council members.

By significantly reducing the exemption procedure
concerning weapons, the Council is responding robustly
to the call made by the Central African authorities once
again only a few days ago. The resolution that we have
just adopted will enable facilitating re-equipping the
Central African defence and security forces so that they
can contribute to the security of their country and that
of all Central African citizens.

Secondly, I stress that the adoption of resolution
2448 (2019) is also an encouragement for the Central
African authorities to pursue the momentum achieved
over the past several months and to continue progress
in the implementation of the five benchmarks identified
by the Council. The resolution includes a number of
elements enabling the Security Council to continue
to monitor the implementation of the easing of the
arms embargo.

Before concluding, I would like to emphasize
that the return of lasting peace in the Central African
Republic is also predicated on combating cross-
border trafficking in weapons and ammunition, which
continues to fuel armed groups. In that regard, we call
on the countries of the region to work together with the
Central African Republic to combat such trafficking.

Lastly, I recall that, in the case of the Central
African Republic, sanctions were never intended as an
end in themselves, but always as a means to contribute
to our common goal, namely, stabilizing and restoring
lasting peace in the Central African Republic.

