Mr. Menon (Singapore): My delegation
commends Germany for the initiative to hold today's
debate. It is timely and will hopefully complement the
initiative by the United Kingdom in 2007. Then,
Singapore was among the voices that argued for the
link between the effects of climate change, in particular
the obvious competition for scarce resources and the
implications for international peace and security.

 

As I said in 2007,

"Intuitively, there may be a nexus between
environmental degradation from climate change
and increased conflict over limited resources
made even scarcer. Land, water, food and
minerals have often been variables in that
complex equation leading to conflict. People
have been studying conflicts for centuries without
arriving at a perfect formula for predicting them.
But while we should recognize the complexity
.., we should not lose sight of the simple idea
that people often fight over tangible things."
(S/PV.5663 (Resumption J), p. 27)

The link is now accepted and a consensus exists that
only concerted efforts by all Member States, working
with relevant non-State actors, can tackle the biggest
challenge of this age.

Climate change is a global problem which
requires sustainable global solutions in the context of a
rules-based and inclusive multilateral framework.
Without the buy-in from the different stakeholders, any
response to climate change would be limited and
ineffective. The United Nations therefore plays an
important role in formulating a multilateral response to
climate change that is global, multifaceted and yet
coordinated and integrated. This is clearly not an easy
task.

We must recognize that the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
is, and will remain, the primary forum for climate
change negotiations. In that context, I support the
statements delivered by the representative of Argentina
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and by the
representative of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement. The aim of the debate today is not to
prejudge the ongoing negotiations in the UNFCCC.

Nevertheless, we do see the need for the
UNFCCC to work closely with other United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes, especially with
regard to adaptation and capacity-building. Ultimately,
the challenge posed by climate change is closely linked
to the larger issue of sustainable development. In that
regard, a key challenge for the United Nations system
is to ensure coherence and coordination in the activities
of agencies and programmes in the field of sustainable
development. This is an area where the General
Assembly and the Commission on Sustainable
Development can make a useful contribution.

 

With this clear understanding that decision-
making authority lies within the UNFCCC track, the
Security Council can also make an important
contribution to the climate change discussion in two
ways. First, it can help to build greater awareness of
the catastrophic long-term consequences of climate
change, including the possible security consequences.
Secondly, the Security Council can help to reinforce
ongoing efforts to inject political momentum into the
UNFCCC negotiating process for a successful outcome
to be adopted at the seventeenth Conference of the
Parties and the seventh Meeting of the Parties to the
Kyoto Protocol, to be held in Durban, South Africa,
later this year. In that regard, members of the Security
Council, in particular the permanent members, must
show leadership in the climate change negotiating
process.
The successful outcome in Cancun last year has
restored faith in the multilateral climate change
negotiating process. The leadership played by Mexico
was instrumental in achieving success in Cancun. We
commend Mexico for its efforts. This year, we are
pleased that South Africa is also showing leadership
and initiative. However, the success of multilateral
negotiations cannot be the sole responsibility of the
country holding the presidency. It must be a collective
effort.

It is clear that developed countries have a clear
historical responsibility for addressing climate change.
But it is equally clear that we cannot solve this
problem without the participation of all countries, both
developed and developing. We must also act with a
sense of urgency, not only because we must respond to
the call for action from our fellow Pacific small island
developing States, but because we are custodians of the
sustainability, security and quality of life of
generations to come.

Let me conclude with a quote from Ralph Waldo
Emerson, who once said that "What you do speaks so
loudly that I cannot hear what you say". I hope the
debate today will not become a substitute for action,
but will be a prelude to action.

