Mr. Simonovic': I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council again on the
human rights situation in Ukraine.

On 28 July, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights issued the
fourth monthly report of the United Nations human
rights monitoring mission in Ukraine, which covered
the period from 8 June to 15 July 2014. Today, I will
highlight the report's key findings, and I will focus
on the rapidly deteriorating situation in the east of
the country and provide updates on the situation since
15 July.

At the outset, let me say that the downing of the
Malaysian civilian aeroplane, which occurred on 17 July,
killing 298 people, calls for our unanimous sorrow and
sympathy for the victims' families and for our outrage.
While the downing of the plane may constitute a war
crime, a thorough, effective, independent and impartial
investigation is needed to determine the facts and
circumstances of that act. That investigation is now
under way, but it is disturbing to learn that the volatile
security situation at the crash site continues to hamper
international investigators, despite the ceasefire zone
declared by the Government of Ukraine around the
area. It is urgent to stop the fighting and to secure the
crash site. At the same time, of course, more broadly,
there must be accountability for those responsible for
other war crimes, serious violations of international
humanitarian law and gross violations of human rights
law, as documented by the findings of the United
Nations human rights monitoring mission.

The intense fighting in the Donetsk and Luhansk
regions of eastern Ukraine is extremely alarming.
The United Nations human rights monitoring mission
reports mounting casualties and serious damage
to infrastructure. All Ukrainians are paying an
increasingly high price. As the Council is aware, the
ceasefire declared by the Government was in effect for
10 days, from 20 to 30 June. The report describes the
rapid escalation ofhostilities that has occurred since the
end of that ceasefire, which, it notes, was violated over
100 times. It also notes the rapid professionalization of
the armed groups, which are increasingly well organized
and equipped with heavy weaponry. Their political and
military leadership includes not only Ukrainians but
also citizens of the Russian Federation.

On 2 July, constitutional proposals were made,
including on decentralization, local governance
structures and the preservation of the use of the
Russian language. Those have been among the main
concerns ofthe Russian-speaking population in the east
of the country. Meanwhile, the human rights situation
has deteriorated significantly in pockets of territory
in Luhansk and Donetsk, which are still controlled
by armed groups and where the Government has been
undertaking its security operations.

The report details what amounts to a reign of fear
and terror in areas under control of the armed groups,
twinned with the breakdown of law and order. There
have been reports of human rights abuses, including
abductions, detentions, torture and executions in those
areas, all of which have increased the terror of civilians
who are trapped there or held as hostages. More must
be done to protect the lives of innocent people and to
bring perpetrators to account. That must start with an
immediate cessation of hostilities.

Since April, some 924 people have been abducted
by armed groups, including 811 politicians, journalists,
professionals, students and other civilians and
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
monitors, while 113 servicemen, military border guards
and security personnel have been detained. Those
figures are provided by the Government.

Abducted individuals have been used as an exchange
currency to free members of armed groups detained by
the Government, to extort money or property and as
a source of forced labour - to dig trenches or build
barricades close to the epicentre of the violence. Some
vulnerable groups, such as persons living with HIV or
drug users, have been made to "work off their guilt" as
forced labour or to fight on the front lines. Recently,
as the Government of Ukraine has regained control
over more of the territory in the east formerly held by
the armed groups, many hostages have been freed or
released through negotiations. But, as of 5 August, the
whereabouts of 465 people remain unknown.

The situation of children affected by the conflict
is particularly worrying and requires more concerted
commitments by all parties to ensure the effective
protection of those children. While it seems that
considerable efforts have been undertaken to evacuate
children from the area of hostilities, according to the
Ukrainian ombudsperson about 300 children remain
in several orphanages in the areas under the control
of the armed groups. Children experience specific
vulnerabilities in the context, and allegations of
abductions or attempted abductions continue to persist.

On 8 July, the authorities of the Russian Federation
announced that a former Ukrainian military pilot held
in a pretrial detention centre in the Russian Federation
would be charged with complicity in the killing of two
Russian TV journalists on 17 June near Luhansk. The
circumstances of her capture have been controversial.
The Russian authorities state that she freely crossed
the border into the Russian Federation and was
subsequently arrested because she had no documents
and was masquerading as a refugee. The Ukrainian
Government says she was abducted in Luhansk by
armed groups and was taken to the Russian Federation
in an operation coordinated with the Russian secret
services. The Ukrainian Consul was permitted to visit
her on 16 July. She remains in detention.

Fighting in and around population centres has
resulted in heavy loss of life and very significant
damage to property and civilian infrastructure. Both
sides must be reminded of the imperative that they act
proportionately and take precautions to avoid deaths
and injury of civilians. Otherwise they will be held
accountable for the casualties that could have been
avoided.

The United Nations human rights monitoring
mission and the World Health Organization estimate
that from the date of the onset of fighting in mid-April
to 7 August, more than 1,543 people were killed in
the east, including civilians, military personnel and
members of the armed groups. At least 4,396 have been
confirmed wounded; the real number is likely to be
much higher.
Some internally displaced people are beginning
to return to territories in the east where the Ukrainian
Government has regained control. The United Nations
human rights monitoring mission visited Slovyansk
earlier this week, and I am pleased to report that life
in that city is returning to normal. Water, electricity
and gas supplies have been restored to 95 per cent
of previous capacity, and children have returned to
kindergarten.

The city no longer needs humanitarian aid,
according to the acting mayor. However, a disturbing
discovery was made in Slovyansk when a mass grave
was uncovered containing 14 bodies, at least 2 of
which were identified as abducted members of a local
evangelist church in that city. The United Nations
human rights monitoring mission spoke to the father of
the two identified individuals, who said that the church
had been threatened by members of the armed groups
on a number of occasions before armed men abducted
four church members on 8 June as they left their church
service. Until the bodies were exhumed on 24 July,
their whereabouts had been unknown.

As the Government regains more territory formerly
controlled by the armed groups, it must ensure that
all atrocities are fully investigated under the full
application of international human rights norms and
guarantees, which include the avoidance of reprisals.
Allegations about arbitrary detention and abuses by
Government forces have to be investigated and acted
upon promptly and decisively.

I wish to inform the Council that the United Nations
Human Rights Office has received a "White Book" on
alleged human rights violations in Ukraine prepared by
the Russian Federation covering the period from April
to mid-June 2014, which we are currently reviewing.
Some of the cases have already appeared in previous
reports of the United Nations human rights monitoring
mission. I would reiterate that the Government of
Ukraine should investigate all alleged human rights
violations, as recommended by the mission.

In the Autonomous Republic of Crimea,
harassment and discrimination has intensified against
Ukrainian nationals, Crimean Tatars, representatives
of religious minorities, minority groups in general
and activists who opposed the 16 March "referendum"
in the area. The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) estimates
that more than 15,200 people have left Crimea, while
tens of thousands continue to flee the fighting in the
east, bringing the total number of internally displaced
persons in Ukraine to more than 117,910, according to
UNHCR, as 0f5 August. The report details a number of
recommendations to the Government for the purposes
of addressing outstanding issues.

The ability of Ukrainians to exercise their
freedoms ofexpression, association, peaceful assembly,
movement and religion or belief, as well as their political
rights, has been strongly affected by the current crisis.
In the east, those rights have been strictly curtailed by
the armed groups. In a significant moment, the United
Nations human rights monitoring mission reported
that, on 1 August, residents of Severodonetsk - a city
regained by Ukrainian forces on 22 July - were able
to openly gather in the central square in a flash mob
to express support for Ukraine. That was the first such
rally allowed since March.

However, worrying trends include the rise of hate
speech, particularly in social media, and a number
of incidents targeting Russian-owned banks and
businesses on the ground that are alleged to be financing
terrorism. Freedom of expression has also come
under attack, especially in the east, where attempts at
media manipulation have been especially egregious in
territory under the control of armed groups.

Journalists in Luhansk were required to meet the
political leadership of the armed groups every Monday
to discuss what to cover and how, and those who did
not comply were threatened and blocked, and their
equipment destroyed. The so-called Defence Minister
of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People's Republic has
prohibited journalists, cameramen and photographers
from taking photos, videos and audio recordings, and
banned them from working in combat zones and in
proximity to military objects. As a result, a number of
journalists, including foreign media professionals, have
been harassed.

Ukrainian j ournalists are treated even more harshly.
In that regard, I note with concern the abduction of a
local field producer for CNN, who was taken from a
hotel in Donetsk on 22 July, held for four days, severely
beaten and accused of being a Ukrainian spy.

It is imperative that the parties to the conflict be
assisted in finding a way out of this murderous and
potentially even more explosive crisis. I welcome the
Ukrainian President's proposal for a new round oftalks
to find a way to restore the ceasefire. A first meeting was
held in Minsk on 31 July, where important agreements
were made to secure the crash site of the Malaysian
Airlines plane and to release a sizeable number of the
hostages being held by armed groups.

Moreover, even once the current crisis has been
resolved, deep psychological scars will remain. The
fabric of society is being torn apart by the continuous
and ongoing violence and fighting. The misinformation
being spread is building divisive narratives, hardening
people's resolve and deepening social divides. The
residents of areas in the east affected by the prolonged
fighting, particularly children, may need psychological
assistance to heal and to rebuild their lives. Many
others, such as the victims of torture and former
hostages, especially those held for long periods, will
require help to recover.

There is a clear need for a multi-year human
rights national plan of action for Ukraine based on
the recommendations of the United Nation human
rights mechanism and the work of the human rights
monitoring mission. It is critically important that the
recommendations in the annex to the report be part
of the broader reform agenda as the international
community and Ukraine prepare for a major donor
conference later in the autumn.

As the report notes, the Government needs to
seriously address the wider systemic problems facing
the country, such as corruption, with respect to good
governance, the rule of law and human rights. The
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights reiterates its readiness to work with the
Government on those issues.

Civil society has played a vital role in Ukraine. The
report describes how citizens have become involved
in areas where their Government has been unable to
respond quickly enough, such as accommodating
people fleeing the fighting. Perhaps that new civic
spirit will help drive the next phase of much-needed
change in Ukraine.

Allow me to conclude by stressing the need to find
a peaceful solution to the current situation. We cannot
afford to wait a day longer when at least 50 people are
being killed or wounded every day. The price being
paid by all Ukrainians as a result of the conflict is too
high. Ukrainians and Russian Ukrainians in the cast
are losing their lives, but the whole country is paying
the price of the conflict as a result of the deterioration
of social services. The political and economic
consequences of the conflict spill over Ukraine's
borders, negatively impacting human rights worldwide,
the civilian aeroplane tragedy being just the most
drastic example.

