Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to thank and congratulate you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting to publicly discuss the
purchasing and procurement system in United Nations
peacekeeping operations. As we know, this is a very
important issue that not only has economic
repercussions, but also affects the prestige of the work
of the Organization and its ultimate goal: achieving
peace.

In the particular case of peacekeeping operations
and the procurement system, it is important to recall
that procurement should be the very means for
attaining the Organization's ultimate objective:
international peace and security. So it is regrettable that
a system designed to serve such a commendable goal
should sometimes be converted into a tool for personal
gain, relegating the main objective to a secondary level
and changing it in the interests of an individual or
group. That is why, with a view to the future, my
delegation believes that the United Nations must do
everything possible to have an efficient system that
permits no failures or errors that would lead to the
diversion or improper use of resources. The budget for
United Nations peacekeeping operations cannot bear
greater expenditures than those that are strictly
necessary.

We believe that the General Assembly, for its
part, has the primary and essential role in monitoring
and accountability in this area. In fact, we believe it is
significant that the most recent report of the Office of
Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) on the procurement
system for peacekeeping operations was initiated by a
request of the General Assembly. Through its
resolution 59/296, as a result of the Fifth Committee's
recommendation, the Assembly suggested that area of
investigation and authorized OIOS to proceed with its
work.

Transparency and accountability are principles
that must guide the activities of all United Nations
staff, particularly those responsible for purchasing. We
recall that the four elements regulating that system are,
according to the United Nations financial regulations,
the best value or best price; an integral, fair and
transparent process; effective competition among
bidders; and the interests of the United Nations itself.
Those principles, in addition to obtaining the best
possible quality, must be systematically followed in
every procurement process.

In that context, we were very concerned to learn
from the OIOS report - requested, as I said, by the
General Assembly - that the planned controls have
proved to be inadequate, that a lack of attention has
been detected in officers with high responsibilities and
that prices paid turned out to be neither competitive
nor economically sound.

Our country attaches special importance to
carrying out the OIOS recommendations in order to
avoid any future repetition of situations that are
unclear or have exaggerated or inflated budgets. We
recall that, late last year, the General Assembly created
an ethics office, in accordance with the decision by our
countries at the September 2005 world summit. We
hope that the office will quickly become operational
and that it will be able to produce the results expected
by the international community: it will consist of a
professional body of highly capable international
officers who have high ethical standards and act
efficiently, not only to detect irregularities, but in
particular to prevent them.

We have always pointed out that one of the best
ways to ensure transparency and the best prices in the
United Nations procurement system is through
competition and, in particular, diversification of the
areas of origin of the products purchased. In that
connection, I take this opportunity to express our
concern at seeing that Latin America has not
traditionally been an important United Nations
supplier. We therefore urge the Secretariat to address
that inequity and to promote equal participation by all
regions and the diversification of its procurement so
that the economies of all Members of the Organization
can benefit equitably from it.

Finally, I wish to say that this important public
discussion should continue in the General Assembly,
because that is the body where all States can express
their opinion. We believe that not only should
transparency be maintained in the peacekeeping
operations procurement system, but transparency
should also be an objective, a standard, that all
Member States must meet.

We hope that the Organization will attain its
objectives, one of which is to inform our peoples of
what we are doing.

