Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would like to
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and for his
tireless efforts to bring a peaceful and secure futuure to
the Middle East. In particular, the Secretary-General's
recent trip to the region was both timely and relevant,
as it renewed the international community's attention
to the urgent situation in Gaza and its commitment to
seeking a peacful solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
issue.
In that vein, the Republic of Korea welcomes the
United Nations-brokered reconstruction mechanism for
Gaza. We believe that the trilateral agreement offers
a robust plan to facilitate the Palestinian Government
in leading the reconstruction efforts, while also
addressing Israel's legitimate security concerns. As
the much-needed construction material is brought into
Gaza, the parties must seek ways to prevent another
cycle of destruction from occurring in the future.

We are also encouraged by the results of the Gaza
donors conference, held in Cairo on 12 October. The
Republic of Korea pledged to provide $12 million in
assistance to the Palestinian people, ofwhich $2 million
will go to supporting Gaza's economic recovery. We
hope that all the pledges made are promptly fulfilled to
help lessen the suffering of the Palestinian people.

However, despite the reconstruction efforts,
the Republic of Korea remains concerned about
the underlying instability and the repeated cycle of
suffering in that region. We agree with the Secretary-
General that time is not on the side of peace. The
longer that the present state of insecurity continues, the
longer the path to genuine peace will be. The prolonged
isolation of Gaza not only is having devastating effects
on the economic and social situation; it also may lead
to more lasting effects in terms of the radicalization of
youth. Scant access to food, medicines and electricity,
coupled with the pronounced rate of unemployment,
will only continue to give rise to more extremism and
violent tendencies. That is certainly not in the interest
of Israel's long-term security or of regional peace.

More efforts are needed to build a foundation
for lasting and durable peace. Although the August
ceasefire is being maintained in Gaza, it cannot be
the final solution. We support a continuation of the
Egyptian-brokered talks with a view to addressing both
outstanding issues and the root of the conflict. We call
on all parties to respect the previous agreements and to
return to the negotiating table so as to work out a viable
framework to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
with the two-State solution at its core.

In that regard, we look forward to the Quartet
meeting in Brussels later this week. We hope that it
can galvanize mediation efforts at this critical time.
As any unilateral action will only hinder progress, we
oppose Israel's newly announced settlement expansion.
We are also concnerd about the growing insecurity in
the West Bank and the clashes that have taken place at
Jerusalem's Holy Sites. We call on all parties to cease
the further fuelling of tensions on the West Bank and
in East Jerusalem.

Turning to Syria, the Republic of Korea is
concerned about the fate of Kurdish civilians under
siege from the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) in Kobani. Mass displacement is occurring at an
unprecedented pace and, as Special Envoy Staffan de
Mistura recently stated, the threat of massacres, war
crimes and possible crimes against humanity are very
real. We urge all actors to take the necessary steps to
ensure civilian protection, including the possible easing
of cross-border restrictions.

We remain very concered about the continued
abuse by the Syrian Government of its own people. The
use of barrel bombs continues despite the Council's
explicit ban of such weapons in resolution 2139 (2014).
Furthermore, the conclusion of the fact-finding mission
of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons that chlorine was used systematically and
repeatedly as a weapon is a cause for serious concern.
The only way to end the ongoing conflict in Syria is
through the resumption of negotiations and a political
solution. We support the ongoing efforts of Special
Envoy De Mistura in that regard.

Regarding Lebanon, we remain deeply troubled
over the simmering tensions inherently related to both
the Syrian conflict and the ISIL threats, which have
deep implications for Lebanese society. The Lebanese
armed forces hostages, held by the Nusra Front and
ISIL, are a source of serious concern, as is the growing
resentment and backlash against the Syrian refugees in
the country. We hope that Lebanon will elect its next
President as early as possible to ensure much-needed
political stability.

