Mr. Oshima (Japan): I would like to thank the
Presidents of the two Tribunals, Judge Fausto Pocar
and Judge Erik Mose, as well as the Prosecutors of the
Tribunals, Ms. Carla del Ponte and Mr. Hassan Jallow,
for their reports to the Security Council.

Japan understands that both Tribunals have been
continuing their efforts to achieve justice. We reiterate
our position that both the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) should be
strongly encouraged to meet their completion strategies
by exploring all measures necessary and appropriate.

In that connection, we expect that the large-scale,
multi-accused trials recently introduced in the ICTY
will successfully accelerate the conduct of trials, while
meeting the requirements of due process. Japan
supports the extension of the term of office of the 11
permanent judges of the ICTR from the point of view
of fulfilling its completion strategy. In his report to the
Council, Judge Mose has repeated his position that

"it is difficult at this stage to indicate a
completion strategy for the ICTR Appeal
Chamber, as it is linked to the ICTY completion
strategy" (S/2006/358, annex, para. 8).
We believe that thorough consideration should be given
to achieving better coordination and scheduling
between the two Tribunals as early as possible.

With regard to the enquiries into the deaths of
Milan Babic and Slobodan Milosevic, we appreciate
the cooperation of the Governments of the Netherlands
and Sweden. We encourage the ICTY to fully
implement the recommendations made by the Swedish
auditors on ways to improve the transparency of the
conditions of detention.

Japan remains concerned that the arrest and
transfer of the key remaining fugitives - especially
Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic to the ICTY, and
Felicien Kabuga to the ICTR - have not yet been
realized. While we note that the Government of Serbia
has begun the eradication of the assistance network of
Mladic, we are informed that there currently is no trace
of his whereabouts. We strongly urge all the relevant
States, including Serbia, to make their utmost efforts in
that regard.

The international community, including my
Government, is strongly committed to bringing about
justice and ending impunity. Japan, however, believes
that achieving justice requires not only the will of the
international community, but also resolution on the part
of the States concerned. If both Tribunals should wait
for an essentially indefinite period for the transfer of
the remaining fugitives, and our support for the
Tribunals should come to be considered unlimited, it
would be very difficult to justify our support for the
Tribunals through the Member States' assessed
contribution. We would like to reiterate our view that
possible funding beyond the deadline set by the
completion strategies should be met through voluntary
contributions by States concerned and by States
especially interested.

The time has come for us to shift the focus of our
activities to capacity-building and outreach activities at
the regional and national levels. We must achieve real
justice and confidence in the reconciliation process. To
do so, we should strengthen cooperation with the goal
of establishing the rule of law and formulating a
mechanism to ensure fair trials at the regional and
national levels. From that point of View, Japan, in
cooperation with the United Nations Development
Programme, has been assisting the War Crimes
Chamber in Bosnia and Herzegovina by training
judicial staff members and providing it with needed
equipment. We have also been considering extending
further assistance to judicial institutions in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We note with appreciation that both
Tribunals have established outreach programmes in
order to raise awareness and provide the public and the
media with information. We hope that those
commendable efforts will be strengthened and that they
will bear fruit in the four and a half years that remain.

In conclusion, we once again call upon both
Tribunals, with the cooperation of relevant States, to
fulfil the purposes of their establishment by bringing to
justice all the remaining fugitives by the deadlines of
their completion strategies. We strongly hope that the
efforts of the international community over 10 years
will be fully integrated into regional, national and
community capacities.

