Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): I would like to
start by thanking the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2018/795) and Assistant Secretary-General Keita
for her informative briefing this morning. Let me echo
colleagues in their appreciation for the way in which
she presented progress made in her charts this morning
as well.

Sweden commends Haiti for the progress made
in its consolidation of democracy and stability. At
the same time, the events of the past few months have
also shown that the situation remains volatile. There
is a strong need for broad-based political support for
key reforms.

The mandate of the United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) is well aligned
with the priorities set out by President Moise, including
the rule of law and respect for human rights, as well
as improving economic development, infrastructure,
resilience and security. We hope that the new
Government will strive with renewed energy to achieve
progress on those priorities, and we hope to see results
soon, such as the adoption of a new criminal code and a
new code of criminal procedure.

The benchmarks presented in the Secretary-
General's report will help those efforts by linking
progress made in core areas of the Mission's mandate
with other key aspects for stability in the country.
Those include socioeconomic development and fighting
corruption. The Mission is one of the first to make a
transition from traditional peacekeeping in an era of
sustaining peace. A continuously successful transition
would therefore be important not only to Haiti, but also
to the wider United Nations system in demonstrating
its capacity to support countries emerging from
internal strife.

We welcome the appointment of Helen Meagher
La Lime as the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Haiti at this key juncture of
the transition phase. Securing a smooth and effective
transition will be one of the main tasks in the coming
months, and we give the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General our full support.

It is important that the Mission continue to pay close
attention to gender aspects in its policies and strategic
development. Supporting women's participation in
political processes is particularly important, as are
measures to improve women's security and protection
against sexual and gender-based violence. The
Mission needs to maintain a strategic focus and clear
gender-budgeting. Ensuring that there is adequate
information-gathering, monitoring and reporting,
and coordination on those matters, is also key. In that
regard, let me thank Ms. Bintou Keita for the gender-
disaggregated data and the comprehensive gender
analysis of the benchmarks that she presented to us in
her briefing today.

Given the lack of progress in some of those areas,
we are worried about the report's conclusion that
the capacities of the Mission and the United Nations
country team to work on gender issues are limited. As
more and more tasks are given to the country team, the
international community must step up to ensure that
the team has the resources to take them on.

Much has been achieved by the Haitian people
in recent years. Now it is important to keep up the
momentum for reform. Longer-term stability and
sustainable development require the continued
commitment of all parties. Sweden will remain a
committed partner for Haiti as the country makes
further progress towards the consolidation of peace,
democracy and the rule of law.

