Ms. Krisnamurthi (Indonesia): Indonesia congratulates
Senegal on assuming the Security Council presidency
for the month of November and thanks you, Sir, for
convening this important open debate.

We associate ourselves with the statement made
by the representative of Thailand on behalf of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations.

Indonesia strongly condemns all acts of violence
against United Nations personnel. Our heartfelt
sympathy is with the bereaved families of fallen
peacekeepers and other mission personnel. We salute
the courage and professionalism of all those United
Nations personnel who have laid down their lives while
performing their duties.

The highly tragic attacks against the personnel
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan, and the everyday dangers
confronted by many other peacekeeping operations,
show the painful costs in terms of flesh and blood
arising from the inability of States to build peaceful
societies and the exploitation of divisions by non-State
actors for their perverse ends.

Indonesia underlines the need for the best possible
protection for mission personnel in a manner that
is well coordinated and properly supported by all
stakeholders, and welcomes efforts to further enhance
the discourse in the context of improving the safety and
security of peacekeepers. This process has to begin
with the Security Council, which should ensure that
realities on the ground are clearly known to all on a
continuous basis. When the mandates of peacekeeping
operations are drafted or modified, the Council should
consult regularly with troop- and police- contributing
countries, host Governments and pertinent regional
actors. Leveraging its networks and pertinent actors,
the Council must also try to build communication with
non-State actors involved in a conflict. Not all non- State
actors may have the same motivations and end goals.
This is not an easy task, but every effort must be made
to make them realize the imperative of not harming
civilians and United Nations personnel.

As the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations and the Secretary-General have rightly
mentioned, peacekeeping operations are not meant
for and should not engage in counter-terrorism
activities. No stone should be left unturned in
enhancing the situational awareness and response
capabilities of United Nations peacekeepers with
better communication, coordination, predeployment
training and adequate protection equipment. The key
to addressing asymmetrical threats from terrorism is in
the sound implementation of the United Nations Global
Counter Terrorism Strategy and prioritizing conflict
prevention and political solutions, as stressed by the
reviews of United Nations peacekeeping operations,
peacebuilding and resolution 1325 (2000).

Violent extremism often increases in the same
conditions that lead to a heightened risk of conflict.
While pronouncements have often been made about
giving higher priority to prevention, mediation,
peacemaking and sustaining peace, as laid out
concurrently in General Assembly resolution 70/262
and Security Council resolution 2282 (2016), much is
expected from the United Nations in terms of clearly
advancing a principles-based approach to resolving
ongoing conflicts effectively and preventing emerging
ones. We would therefore support further discourse
aimed at expanding the scope of how peacekeeping
operations can provide adequate support to national
Governments and local communities to prevent
terrorism and violent extremism.

Given the more complex and volatile nature
of conflicts today, United Nations peacekeeping
missions need to be flexible within reasonable
parameters. Indonesia also fully supports the effective
implementation of protection of civilian mandates,
but the mandates must be explicit, with clear rules of
engagement, reinforced with needed equipment and
resources. Peace enforcement should be pursued only as
an exception and on a case-by-case basis, with thorough
consultations with all relevant stakeholders, particularly
troop-contributing countries and host authorities.

I will not hesitate to repeat before the Council that
it is critical that Blue Helmets not be perceived as a
party to any conflict. Their neutrality and credibility
are of the essence. Any divergence from that principle
threatens not only their safety and security, but also the
safety of population that they are mandated to protect.
The three proven basic principles of United Nations
peacekeeping - namely, the consent of the parties,
impartiality and the non-use of force, except in self-
defence and defence of the mandate - must be upheld.

Since 1957, when Indonesia first contributed
to United Nations peacekeeping, it has accorded
high importance to it. Currently, 2,867 Indonesian
peacekeepers are serving in 10 different missions. We
aim to contribute up to 4,000 of our highly trained and
proficient troops and police by 2019 under Indonesia's
Roadmap for Vision 4000 Peacekeepers. Council
members will always find Indonesia to be unwavering
and vigorous in its efforts to help achieve global peace
and security.

