Mr. Ntonga (Zimbabwe): May I begin by conveying
my delegation's appreciation to New Zealand for having
convened this important open debate on the situation
in the Middle East, including the question of Palestine.
We thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for
his insightful contributions.

Zimbabwe aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Non-aligned Movement.

For the overwhelming majority of the international
community, a two State-solution based on the pre-June
1967 borders is the only sustainable way of ending the
longest occupation in modern history. The parameters
for the resolution of the Palestinian question are
known; they are enshrined in numerous United Nations
resolutions, including Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973), the Oslo Accords, the Madrid
terms of reference, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
Quartet's Road Map for Peace. Despite those known
parameters, violence against the Palestinian people
continues in the occupied territories. According to
the June 2015 report of the Independent Commission
of Inquiry established by the Human Rights Council
(A/HRC/49/52), the scale of devastation in Gaza in 2014
was unprecedented, with sufficient evidence pointing
to serious violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law, which, in some cases, amount to
war crimes.

The Secretary- General's annual report on children
and armed conflict (S/2015/409), released on 5 June
2015, indicates that 540 Palestinian children were killed
and 2,955 were injured. The report concludes that:

"The unprecedented and unacceptable scale of
the impact on children raises grave concern about
Israel's compliance with international humanitarian
law, notably the principles of distinction,
proportionality and in relation to the excessive use
of force".

Despite those findings, Israel has not been held
accountable.

Israel continues to approve the construction of
illegal settlements despite unanimous condemnation of
settlement activities by the international community.
That is all in an effort to change the demographic
character of the occupied territory. Settlement activity
is illegal under international law and prejudicial to a
just peace. The illegal blockade continues, and the wall
of shame remains in place 4 as do the various forms of
persecution perpetrated against the Palestinian people,
including the demolition of homes, illegal arrests under
what is known as administrative detentions, and the
forced displacement of Palestinians. Despite all those
violations, the Security Council has not held Israel
to account. The latest demonstration of the Security
Council's paralysis was the failure to adopt a resolution
on 30 December 2014 that would have set a timetable
for Israel's withdrawal from Palestinian territory. The
resolution, which provided a reasonable time frame for
withdrawal, would have given the Palestinian people a
ray of hope.

We welcome current efforts in the Security Council
by some members to negotiate a resolution that would
pave the way for the withdrawal of Israel from Palestinian
settlements within a given time frame. Endless open-
ended negotiations without clear objectives have not
served the interests of the Palestinian people. As a
measure of goodwill, we call on the Security Council
to prevail on Israel to halt settlement activities, remit
revenues, whenever they are due, to the Palestinian
Authority and to lift the blockade on Gaza.

We listened attentively to the statements delivered
by Council members this morning. All seem to be of
the same mind 4 that the only sustainable way to end
the conflict is a two-State solution, with Palestine and
Israel coexisting in peace. Let us walk the talk. We hope
that recent breakthroughs in multilateral diplomacy will
inspire and provide lessons that will contribute to the
resolution of this long-standing conflict in the Middle
East, and to other conflicts in that region as well. We
also call on the international community to honour
all pledges made towards the reconstruction of Gaza.
Indeed, some Council members this morning gave us
an indication of the magnitude of the gap between the
pledges and their delivery. It is huge.

May I conclude by reaffirming Zimbabwe's
continued support for and solidarity with the Palestinian
people. We look forward to Palestine's admission to its
deserved status as a full Member of the United Nations,
sovereign and equal with all other States.

