Mr. Mminele (South Africa): We join other
Member States in expressing our appreciation to
the United States for convening today's open debate
on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question.

South Africa aligns itselfwith a statement delivered
by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries. Nevertheless, my delegation wishes to make
remarks on six critical issues.

First, South Africa is of the view that this quarterly
debate should not stray from the core Israel-Palestine
issue that has been on the Security Council's agenda
for over 70 years. While several Security Council
resolutions have been previously adopted - including
most recently resolution 2334 (2016) last December,
condemning the establishment of Israeli settlements
in Palestinian territory - the Council has failed to
act decisively on the matter. It remains a stain on the
Council's record. Therefore, while there has been no
progress on the matter in the Security Council, today's
open debate, at the very least, should provide the wider
United Nations Membership with an opportunity to
express their views on the conflict.

Secondly, on 3 April my Government issued a
press statement through which it expressed its deep
concern at Israeli plans to continue with its illegal
settlements, in defiance of resolution 2334 (2016). That
resolution affirmed that the establishment by Israel of
settlements in the Palestinian territory occupied since
1967, including East Jerusalem, has no legal validity
and constitutes a flagrant violation of international law.
We hold the view that this development by Israel will
undermine the conditions for successful final status
negotiations and for advancing the two-State solution
through those negotiations.

Thirdly, we note with disbelief that 2017 will mark
the fiftieth year of Israel's military conquest of Gaza,
the West Bank and East Jerusalem. In his speech to
the General Assembly in September (see A/71/PV.14),
Palestinian President Mr. Abbas urged the international
community to exert greater effort than before to
establish a truly independent Palestinian State, and
called on Israel to recognize the State of Palestine
and put an end to its occupation, so that the State of
Palestine can coexist alongside the state of Israel in
peace and security as good neighbours. He said that
in the context of the fiftieth anniversary this June of
Israel's occupation. According to reports, during that
period over 48,000 homes and related structures were
demolished in West Bank and Gaza; 586,000 acres of
Palestinian land confiscated, and 300,000 Palestinian
refugees created. On that score, South Africa remains
committed to working with Israel and Palestine, and
with the international community, to find a lasting and
durable solution to the conflict within the parameters of
international law.

Fourthly, my delegation is of the View that it may
also be useful to note in today's debate that, as there is
increasing focus on a more effective implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) pertaining to women and peace
and security, the reports from the Secretariat to the
Council on the situation in the Middle East should also
regularly include a specific focus on the impact of the
conflict on women, who face specific challenges under
the occupation.

Fifthly, with regard to the central stance reflected
in the concept note (S/2017/305, annex), the upsurge
in acts of terrorism globally and in the Middle East
reaffirms that terrorism continues to be a threat
not only to international peace and security but also
to fundamental rights and freedoms. South Africa
condemns in the strongest terms possible terrorist
acts wherever they occur and by whomsoever they are
committed. We support the approach that continues to
place the United Nations at the centre of multilateral
efforts to counter terrorism. We remain firm in our
belief that no country can address the challenging and
complex threat on its own, and that terrorism will not
and cannot be defeated by military means.

Last but not least, we wish to highlight the plight
of Palestinian prisoners, especially during this time
when, according to reports, 1,100 of the 6,200 in eight
prisons in Israel are on hunger strike, in protest over
conditions in Israeli prisons. They are calling for
improved conditions, including regular family visits,
improved medical care and an end to the practice of
holding hundreds of detainees without charge.

In conclusion, my delegation firmly believes that
dialogue and negotiation remain the only way forward
to finding a lasting solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. Furthermore, I would like to reiterate my
delegation's commitment to continue working within
the United Nations and other multilateral structures to
seek ways of countering the threat posed to international
peace and security by terrorist acts in an effective and
efficient manner.

