Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I am now
speaking in my national capacity.

First, let me welcome our German colleague to the
Security Council. I will make three points concerning,
first, the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (J CPOA);
secondly, Iran's ballistic missile programme and its
role in the region; and, thirdly, the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015).

Let me turn to my first point - the JCPOA. The

J CPOA is a major diplomatic accomplishment and a key
non-proliferation achievement. It has been unanimously
endorsed by the Security Council via resolution 2231

(2015). For the Kingdom ofthe Netherlands, preserving
that robust and effective agreement is a clear priority.

It is crucial for the security of the region, Europe and
the entire world, and the JCPOA has been delivering on
its objective, which is to prevent Iran from developing

nuclear weapons - an obligation it also has under
the Non-Proliferation Treaty. The JCPOA is based on
solid verification. Inspectors from the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) spend more than
3,000 calendar days per year on the ground in Iran and
monitor more than 25 locations in Iran on a 24/7 basis.

That is an important IAEA endeavour to which my
country has contributed more than €l.5 million. The
inspection regime has resulted in eleven consecutive
IAEA reports, which confirm that Iran is living up to
its commitments under the JCPOA.

It is in that light that we deeply regret the decision
of the United States to withdraw from the agreement.
We believe that this international agreement effectively
blocks the route to an Iranian nuclear weapon. It is better
than any alternative. That is why we call on the JCPOA
participants to remain committed to the agreement.

That brings me to my second point, the position of
Iran. Whereas Iran fulfils its nuclear commitments, the
Kingdom of the Netherlands shares the concerns voiced
by others today about its ballistic missile programme
and its destabilizing role in the region. Iran mingles
in the internal affairs of other countries and supports
armed groups. We strongly condemn any Iranian
involvement in the missiles fired on Saudi Arabia by
the Houthis from Yemen. We also note with concern the
continuation of arms transfers, as well as violations of
the asset freeze and travel ban, in violation of resolution
2231 (2015). We call on Iran to refrain from any such
activities, to fully implement resolution 2231 (2015)
and to engage in serious dialogue on these concerns
outside the framework of the JCPOA.

As long as Iran remains committed to the JCPOA,
the international community should do so as well.
Therefore, as my third point, I wish to call on the
entire international community to continue to support
and implement resolution 2231 (2015), including the
JCPOA. The international community should ensure
that Iran continues to benefit from the agreement as
was foreseen, including trade - if appropriate, via the
procurement channel. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
will continue to play its part to ensure the full
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) - nationally,
as a member of the European Union, and as a facilitator
for resolution 2231 (2015) here in New York this year.

In conclusion, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
sees it as a clear priority that the JCPOA participants,
including Iran and the wider international community,
remain committed to resolution 2231 (2015), including
the JCPOA - especially now that the agreement faces
serious challenges. At the same time, Iran should address
international concerns regarding its ballistic missile
programme and its destabilizing role in the region.

The JCPOA showed that the international
community can come together and solve even the
most complex of issues. It showed that it is possible to
overcome differences through dialogue and diplomacy.
It is a clear example of effective multilateralism.
Ensuring the continued implementation of resolution
2231 (2015) is in the interest of the Iranian people, of
the region and of us all.

