Mr. Santos (Mozambique): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of September. We are
confident that under your presidency the Council will
discharge its function with efficiency and effectiveness.

I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate
your predecessor, Ambassador Martin Andjaba of Namibia,
for the able manner in which he presided over the
deliberations of the Council during the month of August.
Ambassador Andjaba continues to discharge important
responsibilities relating to the issue before the Council
today.

It was with satisfaction that the people and the
Government of Mozambique learnt of the signing on 5 May
of the Agreement on the question of East Timor between
the Governments of Portugal, Indonesia and the Secretary-
General of the United Nations. We and the international
community at large believed that the agreement was an
important step towards the resolution of the long-standing
issue of East Timor and the culmination of a long period of
intense efforts to achieve a comprehensive and
internationally acceptable solution to the question.

The decision of the Security Council to establish the
United Nations Mission in East Timor (UNAMET) with a
view to organizing and conducting the popular consultation
was an important factor leading to a fair and democratic
process. The peaceful and orderly participation of an
overwhelming majority of the East Timorese population in
the popular consultation held on 30 August 1999 was an
unequivocal expression of their democratic will and of their
hopes of living in peace and of exercising their right to
self-determination.

Following the announcement by the Secretary-
General on 3 September 1999 of the result of the popular
consultation in favour of independence, the security
situation in East Timor became critical and has assumed
alarming proportions as a result of the actions by armed
militia.

The Government of Indonesia has failed to fulfil its
obligations and responsibilities under the 5 May
Agreement signed with Portugal and the United Nations
to maintain order and security after the popular
consultation. The armed militia started the massive killing
of the innocent people of East Timor, including women
and children, burning their houses before the eyes of the
Indonesian military, who were supposed to protect them.

The people of East Timor and the people of
Mozambique share a common history. Therefore it was
with satisfaction that the people of Mozambique learned
about the result of the popular consultation in favour of
the independence of the territory. As members know, a
popular consultation was also held in Mozambique for
those East Timorese who have been residing there for
many years now. The people, the Parliament and the
Government of Mozambique congratulated the people of
East Timor on that historic occasion.

It is with grave concern that today we are witnessing
the massacre of the people of East Timor solely because
they democratically chose to be free and independent. The
Security Council, the United Nations as a whole and the
international community at large must not accept that the
massacre of the people of East Timor continue.

We would like therefore to agree with the Secretary-
General, who yesterday said that the time has clearly
come for Indonesia to seek the help of the international
community in fulfilling its responsibility to bring order
and security to the people of East Timor and to allow
those who have been displaced to return home in safety.

We consider this to be the only way in which the
Government of Indonesia can show its commitment to the
solution of the question of East Timor. We expect the
Indonesian leadership to fulfil the commitments they
adhered to in the 5 May Agreement so as to bring to an
immediate end the killing, destruction and suffering that
the people of East Timor are being subjected to.

Our own experience in Mozambique has taught us
that it is wise for a government to seek the assistance of
the international community to help alleviate the suffering

 

of the people. The humanitarian catastrophe that is
unfolding in East Timor demands an immediate intervention
by the international community.

We commend the decision of the Security Council to
send a team to Indonesia, and we earnestly hope that
concrete and urgent action will follow. The Security
Council has to continue to discharge its Charter
responsibilities with determination whenever or wherever its
intervention is deemed necessary. The Security Council
should not fail the people of East Timor at this important
stage.

As in the past, throughout the evolution of this
question, we wish to reiterate the readiness of the
Government of Mozambique to cooperate with the United
Nations towards the success of UNAMET. Mozambique has
given its modest contribution. We are ready to send more
Mozambicans to help UNAMET fulfil its mandate.

