Mr. Guterres (Timor-Leste): It is a great honour
to see you, my dear friend Ambassador Nana Effah-
Apenteng, presiding over the Security Council for this
month. I wish you and your country, Ghana, every
success during these very challenging times.

Today I would like to share with the Council my
Government's views on the role of the future United
Nations presence and of international assistance in
Timor-Leste beyond the completion of the mandate of
the United Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL),
on 20 August 2006. Let me start by reiterating, on
behalf of the Timorese people, our gratitude to the
troop-contributing countries - Australia, Malaysia,
New Zealand and Portugal - for having so promptly
and efficiently re-established and maintained law and
order and saved many Timorese lives. That
intervention was made at the request of the President of
the Republic, Mr. Xanana Gusmao; the President of the
national Parliament, Mr. Francisco Lu'Olo Guterres;
and the Prime Minister of the first constitutional
Government, Mr. Mari Alkatiri.

We welcome the report of Secretary-General Kofi
Annan (S/2006/628) and we commend the great
contribution of Special Envoy Ian Martin and his team
on the assessment mission. The report was the product
of wide consultation in Timor-Leste. In that respect, we
concur with its recommendations, which are in line
with the spirit of the letters of President Xanana
Gusmao and other key leaders calling for the
establishment of a robust United Nations police,
military and civilian mission to assist the people of
Timor-Leste. That was followed by a letter
(S/2006/620, annex) by Prime Minister Ramos-Horta
dated 4 August 2006, to you, Mr. President, and to the
Secretary-General calling for the establishment of a
multidimensional and integrated peacekeeping mission,
with a police force of considerable strength and a small
military force under the command and control of the
United Nations.

The Secretary-General's report provides a good
account and a sound analysis of the events that took
place in April and May of this year. For the sake of
brevity, I shall not elaborate any further in that regard.
Those events revealed the institutional failures of the
security forces and the fragility of democratic
institutions. It also revealed an acute need for
continued long-term international assistance in the
building of viable State institutions, notably in the
areas of security, justice and development.

Cognizant of the fact that institutional failures in
the Timorese national police (PNTL) and the Timorese
armed forces (F-FDTL) are at the core of the recent
crisis in Timor-Leste, a holistic approach to security-
sector reform will be required. International advisory
support is important in reviewing the future role and
needs of the defence sector, including both the F-FDTL
and the Ministry of Defence.

In the area of justice, the funds made available
under the Justice System Programme of the United
Nations Development Programme are not sufficient to
cover the support needed for the Office of the
Prosecutor-General, particularly in the light of the
recent violent incidents and the expected increase in
the number of cases that the national judicial system
will have to handle. Also, a significant number of
human rights officers are needed to support our
national institutions, including the Office of the
Provedor and the national Parliament, as well as civil
society, in monitoring, promoting and protecting
human rights and promoting justice and reconciliation.
It is of vital importance that the international
community remain engaged in fostering the genuine
commitment to justice and human rights that exists in
the Government, in civil society and among the
Timorese people.

At the same time, I wish to assure the members of
the Security Council that the Government will
expeditiously search for a solution to the grievances of
the 594 petitioners by means of the recently
invigorated national Commission of Investigation.

I wish to express my Government's greatest
appreciation for the work of the international
Independent Special Commission of Inquiry, which is
currently undertaking an investigation into the events
of 28 and 29 April, 23 to 25 May and related events
that contributed to the crisis. The establishment of the
facts and circumstances relevant to those events will be
critical if Timor-Leste is to achieve reconciliation and
uphold the rule of law. The Commission will submit its
findings and recommendations by 7 October. The
Government considers the domestic justice system to
be the primary avenue of accountability for any
criminal acts and human rights violations identified by
the Commission. We therefore welcome the report of
the Secretary-General on justice and reconciliation
(S/2006/580). The Government is considering the
recommendations contained therein, and will take
appropriate measures.

We believe that a strong international police
presence will be vital if executive policing functions
are to be performed in Dili and throughout Timor-Leste
while the PNTL is being reconstituted. United Nations
police officers will be equally important in assisting
and further enhancing the capacity of our national
police in the maintenance of law and respect for human
rights throughout the districts and subdistricts. While
the national police have been trained by United
Nations police and bilateral partners and have the basic
know-how to carry out routine policing, the most
recent events demonstrated the inability of the PNTL to
adequately deal with developments that are of a
political nature. The impartiality of the PNTL in a
tense political environment will be tested again when it

deals with the first nationwide elections. The presence
of United Nations police will be vital in providing
advice and in supporting the national police in
planning and carrying out their electoral-related
security responsibilities, including through training and
assistance in the development and implementation of a
comprehensive election security plan aimed at
forestalling volatility and possible violence throughout
the electoral period.

The Government is moving to prepare for the
upcoming elections. The draft electoral laws on
presidential and parliamentary elections, which were
submitted to the national Parliament for a broad public
debate, are expected to be approved, after the
Parliament's annual recess, in mid-September. The
President and the Government have agreed to hold both
the parliamentary and presidential elections before
May 2007.

The Government of Timor-Leste is committed to
a free, fair and credible electoral process. Having
consulted internally and having taken due
consideration of concerns raised by civil society, the
Church and other stakeholders, we have called upon
the international community to assist us in that
endeavour, including through the provision of technical
and logistical support. We intend to continue
discussions with the United Nations regarding the most
appropriate type of assistance.

Timor-Leste is one of the poorest countries in the
world. While the primary underlying causes of the
current crisis are political and institutional, poverty and
the related high urban unemployment and the absence
of any prospects of employment opportunities,
especially for young people, also contributed to the
crisis. In order to ensure coordinated support for the
economic development of our country, the new mission
should work closely with the Government and its
partners and provide assistance in the design of
poverty-reduction and economic growth policies and
strategies so as to promote the goals of our national
development plan and work towards the achievement
of the Millennium Development Goals.

The 2006-2007 budget was adopted yesterday by
the national Parliament; it represents an increase of 122
per cent compared with the previous fiscal year. As
Prime Minister Ramos-Horta has said, the budget is
pro-poor and pro-job-creation. We hope and pray that
the combination of better economic and social policies
and continuing international support in all areas will
help us to overcome today's crises.

We acknowledge that there are differences of
opinion among Member States, but I am hopeful that
the Council will take into account the seriousness of
the situation confronting our people and our country
today. While there are no more gunshots, many guns
remain in civilian hands, and the underlying causes of
the conflict have yet to be fully addressed. It will take
time for us to reconstitute the defence and police
forces. It will take many more years for those
institutions to regain the confidence and trust of our
people. We therefore believe that the recommendations
of the Secretary-General, including the
recommendations relating to the presence of a very
small military force under the command and control of
the United Nations, are important. That is the best
option that we have in facing the current crisis in East
Timor.

As a colleague who has for many years shared
with Council members the corridors and meeting
rooms of this House, I appeal to the Council to work
with us in ensuring that Timor-Leste does not relapse
into conflict again.

Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
express our deep appreciation to UNOTIL and all of its
staff, and, in particular, to Special Representative
Hasegawa, for the excellent cooperation and support
given to the Government and people during the crisis
that we recently faced. We would also like to thank the
international community for its support, and the
embassies in East Timor for their cooperation and
support during the crisis. We will work with
determination with all of you to guarantee that our
people have a great future - a future in peace,
stability and development.

