Mr. Adom (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): At the
outset, let me to extend to you, Madam, my delegation's
warm congratulations and wishes for your country's
every success during its presidency of the Security
Council for the month of September. I am also pleased
to offer my delegation's thanks to Ambassador Karen
Pierce and her entire team for the mastery with which
they conducted the work of the Security Council,
as well as for the relevance of the topics addressed
during the month of August under the presidency of the
United Kingdom.

I thank Mr. Gonzalo Koncke, Chief of Staff to the
Secretary General of the Organization of American
States, and Mr. Felix Maradiaga, civil society
representative, for their briefings. I welcome the
presence among us of Mr. Denis Ronaldo Moncada
Colindres, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Nicaragua.

Since April, Nicaragua has been in the throes of
sociopolitical demonstrations that hardly seem to have
let up. The vicious cycle of repressed social protests
has left more than 300 people dead and led to the
displacement of more than 23,000 Nicaraguans to
neighbouring Costa Rica, where shelters are struggling
to cope with the increasing flow and needs of refugees.
The dialogue for peace between the Government and
civil society, led under the auspices of the Episcopal
Conference of Nicaragua with a view to achieving
a peaceful solution to the crisis, has yet to achieve
the hoped-for results. Mutual mistrust between the
Government and civil society organizations has spread
to the Episcopate, which the Government is accusing of
bias by favouring the protesters, thereby adding to the
complex nature of the situation.

The urgent calls of the international community for
the immediate cessation of violence - a prerequisite
for establishing an environment conducive to the
resumption of the sociopolitical dialogue - have
gone unanswered. In that regard, the recent expulsion
from Nicaragua of members of the mission of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights does not bode well. Concerning the
current stalemate and the ongoing deterioration of the
sociopolitical situation, Cote d'Ivoire would like to
express its deep concern about the risks associated with
the deteriorating conflict, the long-term humanitarian
consequences of which - although it is internal in nature
at present - could be unprecedented for Nicaragua and
neighbouring countries. My country therefore urges the
Government and civil society organizations to renounce
violence and resume negotiations without delay for a
peaceful resolution of the crisis in the best interests of
the people of Nicaragua.

The recent history of humankind reminds us of
many instances in which what were initially low-
intensity crises developed into armed conflicts with
various and often tragic humanitarian consequences.
Such tragedies, which continue to shake our collective
conscience, have arisen owing to the obstinacy of the
parties concerned in failing to recognize the gravity
of the situation in their country, on the one hand,
and, on the other, to a lack of interest and adequate
reaction on the part of the international community.
As preventive diplomacy is unanimously accepted as
the most effective means of conflict prevention and
management, my country urges the United Nations and
the Organization of American States to use the range of
tools available to them in the framework of a preventive
approach so as to establish a constructive dialogue with
and among all the actors in the crisis in Nicaragua.

That is the gist of our support for the proposal made
by members of the Council to include the Nicaraguan
issue on the programme of work for September. My
country therefore echoes the call made by Secretary-
General Antonio Gutteres for an immediate end to
the violence and the resumption of inter-Nicaraguan
political dialogue - the only guarantee for a lasting
return to peace and stability.

In conclusion, cote d'Ivoire remains convinced
that a return to a peaceful situation in Nicaragua
will be possible only if Nicaraguans themselves are
willing and committed to take ownership of existing
mechanisms to assuage tensions within Nicaragua and
the subregion. In our opinion, it is imperative for the
Council to support them in that regard.

