Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having organized this debate on a topic of great
importance to our efforts for peace and security. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2010/514) and to welcome the presence and
statement of Mr. Lamamra on behalf of the African
Union. My delegation associates itself with the
statement to be made later by the representative of the
European Union.
I should like to underscore the following points.
First, we commend the efforts undertaken this past year
by the African Union, often in the most difficult
conditions. The African Union plays a significant role
in the Sudan by contributing to the African Union-
United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur; through

the African Union High-level Implementation Panel led
by President Mbeki, who plays a facilitating role on the
issues of Darfur and South Sudan; and, finally, through
the role of the Joint African Union-United Nations
Chief Mediator for Darfur, Mr. Djibril Bassole,
heading the Doha peace process. Similarly, in Somalia,
the African Union's establishment of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) has prevented the
seizure of Mogadishu by extremists. The contingents of
Uganda and Burundi are making a significant effort to
contain the violence of Al-Shabaab and protect the
Transitional Federal Institutions.

We note that the African Union is one of the
world's regional organizations that have most
developed their partnership and cooperation with the
United Nations. This exceptional relationship - forged
both between the Security Council of the United
Nations and the African Union's Peace and Security
Council, and between the African Union Commission
and the United Nations Secretariat - is justified, inter
alia, by Africa's prominent place on the peacekeeping
agenda. We welcome the growing role played by
African States within peacekeeping operations, which
are mostly deployed in Africa. We also believe that it is
important to preserve the universal nature of the
personnel of these operations.

The African Union contributes a great deal to the
United Nations. It contributes proximity to the
situation on the ground, intimate knowledge of the
regional environment, and the conviction that the
continent is taking responsibility for its own security,
pursuant to the United Nations Charter. Conversely, the
United Nations contributes to the African Union
legitimacy in the context of its Charter, skills,
resources and shared experiences that can assist the
Union in its crisis prevention and management
missions on the continent. Today, all our efforts are
aimed at ensuring that this original and mutually
beneficial partnership, imbued with the spirit of
Chapter VIII of the Charter, endures and improves.

In this respect, we believe that the official
establishment in July of the new United Nations Office
to the African Union in Addis Ababa will contribute to
strengthening this partnership by further integrating the
United Nations activities. I wish to congratulate the
Assistant Secretary-General, Mr. Zachary Muburi-
Muita, on his appointment to head the Office.

France, like its European Union partners, is
greatly committed to supporting peacekeeping by
African regional and subregional organizations,
beginning with the African Union. The President of the
Republic announced during the Africa-France summit
in Nice in May that we intend to contribute €300
million over the next three years to bolster the peace
and security architecture, in addition to our bilateral
contribution to the European Union's African Peace
Facility. We also intend to contribute to the training of
12,000 men.

We attach a special importance to strengthening
African capacities in the field of training and
deployment. The network of regionally oriented
national schools, which we support, is an effective tool
for training the various components of the African
standby force and strengthening military, police and
civilian capacities.

France also contributes significantly to European
assistance, which surpasses €l billion, to the
maintenance of peace and security on the African
continent. As the Secretary-General underscores in his
report, the European Union has become a key partner
of the African Union in the field of capacity-building
and support for deployed peacekeeping operations. I
recall, for example, that in Somalia the European
Union's African Peace Facility has committed almost
€95 million to AMISOM, and a decision to provide €47
million in additional financing was adopted last July.
We must, however, abide by the operational rules of
the European Union in this commitment, which means
that, for instance, today we cannot finance lethal
equipment with the Peace Facility.

In the case of Somalia, I wish to pay tribute in
particular to the exemplary mobilization of Uganda,
which hosts the European Union Somalia Training
Mission and, with Burundi, contributes troops to
AMISOM.

United Nations support for African Union
operations calls for innovative responses on our part to
the external and internal challenges we face. From the
security perspective, the difficulty today lies in our
ability to respond to new forms of cross-cutting threats
facing the United Nations and the African Union. I
note that the range of peacekeeping and political
mediation tools is often not well adapted to this type of
situation.

In the Sahel and on the west coast of Africa, we
note an increase, and a growing overlap, in the factors
of instability, terrorism, trafficking and rebellion,
which undermine the security and the integrity of
States. That is why support for security sector reform
and promotion of the rule of law must, in time, become
key elements of operations deployed by African
regional and subregional organizations. How to achieve
that?

In that regard, the peacebuilding work carried out
by the Mission for the consolidation of peace in the
Central African Republic, within the framework of the
Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) and with the financial support of the
European Commission, France and ECCAS, has
opened up noteworthy paths of work. In addition, the
African mission project for assistance to security sector
reform in Guinea-Bissau, if it takes shape in suitable
conditions, would also merit our attention, like its
cooperation with the United Nations and the European
Union. In other words, all of that shows that ways of
supporting peace and security on the African continent
are far from being fixed and uniform.

Internally, it is also very clear that the current
difficult budgetary circumstances of contributing States
should force us to seek greater efficiency in
peacekeeping operations, while monitoring spending
more closely. If we have decided to pursue our work
that started in the context of the Franco-British
initiative - which seeks to strengthen the chain of
command of operations and to improve the cooperation
with troop contributors - it is also to ensure stricter
financial tracking of those operations, whose budget
has increased exponentially in recent years.

We also believe that if the United Nations is to be
committed to such a reform process, its partners cannot
stay in the background, especially when their
involvement is so great, as is the case with the African
Union. In that regard, in the Secretary-General's report,
we note with interest the efforts undertaken by the
African Union to reform its management methods and
to diversify its peacekeeping funding sources.
However, the issue of operations follow-up remains
crucial. The United Nations must retain primary
responsibility for the operations that it funds.

For those reasons, both budgetary and
operational, we believe that resorting to United Nations
funding, through obligatory contributions, of
operations that it does not lead poses difficulties. That
option should not serve as the cornerstone of broader
and bolder consideration, which must be undertaken
based on support for African peacekeeping capacities.
In that regard, I would like to underscore that the new
African Peace Facility of the European Union is a first
appropriate response to the African request for
predictable and sustained financing for peacekeeping
operations led by Africa. We believe that we should be
inspired by that voluntary step to support security on
the African continent.

That brings me to conclude by underscoring that
such support for African capacities concerns us all -
the United Nations, the European Union, bilateral
partners and international donors. But it is also, of
course, the concern of African States themselves,
whose willingness to take charge of their security
governs any success. Rest assured that France will
remain actively involved at their side.

Finally, I would like to voice my delegation's
support for the draft presidential statement.

