Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Resolution 1483 (2003), adopted today by
the Security Council, is of particular importance for the
Iraqi people and also for the future activities of the
United Nations on key problems relating to the
maintenance of international peace and security in new
conditions.

The Russian Federation is pleased at the results
obtained during the negotiations. Definitely - and
many colleagues stressed this point - there was
compromise. But, to make this compromise possible,
all participants in the negotiations took steps to
accommodate one another, even on matters where it
seemed at first to be difficult to narrow the gaps
between initial positions. The fact that this was largely
possible attests to the recognition by all Council
members that the legitimate and just settlement of the
Iraqi problem is possible only on a collective basis, and
based on the United Nations Charter, which provides
reliable legal frameworks for resolving the most
complex tasks of our day.

Of course, the resolution that was worked out as a
result of these negotiations does not give final answers
to all questions on the Iraqi settlement. Its significance
is primarily that it creates an international legal basis
for joint efforts to be made by the entire international
community to deal with the crisis and outlines clear
guidelines and principles for those efforts.

I would refer, first of all, to the observance by the
occupying Powers of international humanitarian law;
secondly, to the guaranteeing of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Iraq; and finally, to the speedy
restoration, in practice, of the right of the Iraqi people
themselves to determine their political future and to
gain control over their natural resources.

The attainment of those goals should be
facilitated by the work of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, who has been entrusted with
independent functions in virtually all areas, including
participation in the political process, through the
creation of an internationally recognized Government
of Iraq. The Special Representative would have direct
access to Iraqi political forces and to other countries of
the Middle East region.

The resolution assigns an important role to the
United Nations, to the Security Council and to the
Secretary-General at all stages of the settlement. The
Council will regularly monitor the entire process
through consideration of reports from the Secretary-
General and from representatives of the United States
and the United Kingdom about what they are doing in
Iraq. It is important that in 12 months' time there will
be a thorough Council review of the resolution's
implementation, including the elaboration of further
steps that might be necessary for an Iraqi settlement.

This resolution significantly increases the
opportunities for resolving the acute ongoing
humanitarian problems facing the Iraqi people and for
rehabilitating the devastated infrastructure and
restoring a normally functioning economy. To that end,
apart from the lifting of economic sanctions, within the
next six months, the potential of the oil-for-food
programme should be actively and fully used, with
maximum attention being given to decisions already
taken within the framework of the programme at
previous stages.

It is important that agreement was reached in a
gradual transition, without any sudden movements,
from humanitarian programmes to new methods of
exporting Iraqi oil and spending the export earnings
until a legitimate, internationally recognized Iraqi
Government is established.

All these activities in the interim period will be
transparent and will be carried out under the control of
the International Advisory and Monitoring Board, with
the participation of the plenipotentiary representative
of the Secretary-General, who will report back to the
Security Council.

The resolution clearly reaffirms the need to
clarify the issue of Iraqi programmes of weapons of
mass destruction, taking into account previous Council
decisions as well as the mandates of the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) and the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA).

The next opportunity to consider that aspect of
the Iraqi settlement will come at the beginning of next
month, when the Council receives its regular report
from UNMOVIC. We look forward to receiving from
coalition forces, as requested in the resolution,
information on their efforts to find traces of Iraqi
weapons of mass destruction programmes. We hope
that the corresponding provisions of the resolution will
make it possible, de jure and de facto, finally to reach
closure on this issue and to implement Council
resolutions that seek to prevent the resumption of
Iraq's weapons of mass destruction programmes.

Also of great importance is the need to complete
the implementation of other United Nations resolutions
on individuals reported missing during the first Gulf
war, on the payment of compensation following that
war and on the settlement of Iraq's foreign debt. That
should take place in accordance with international
standards, inter alia, within the Paris Club.

On the whole, agreement on resolution 1483
(2003) reaffirmed the desire of all members of the
Council constructively to find generally acceptable
agreements that will genuinely help the Iraqi people to
regain full sovereignty as soon as possible. We are
convinced that this task must remain central to our
future efforts.

