Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We are honoured to
have you, Mr. President, presiding over this important
meeting, giving our friend Mr. Jose Singer Weisinger a
bit of a break. I think he deserves a break. We are also
honoured by the presence of the Foreign Minister of
Colombia, His Excellency Mr. Carlos Trujillo Garcia,
and his delegation, as well as the Foreign Minister of
Indonesia, Mrs. Retno Marsudi.

We welcome the extensive and informative briefing
by Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia. We furthermore
acknowledge the role played by Cuba and Norway,
as the guarantors and facilitators of the Colombian
peace process.

At the outset, South Africa extends its deepest
condolences to the Government of Colombia and its
people following the attack that claimed more than 20
lives in Bogota last week and injured many more. We
condemn, in the strongest terms possible, this senseless
violence, which must not be allowed to threaten and
derail the hard-won and significant achievements of the
peace process in Colombia.

Notwithstanding that regrettable and tragic incident,
South Africa welcomes the report (S/2018/1159) of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia, which conveys a generally
positive view of progress in achieving lasting peace in
the country. However, the report also notes the killing
of social leaders and human rights defenders, which is a
major concern and presents an ongoing challenge.

In addressing those challenges, South Africa
would like to emphasize, based on our experience, the
importance of working to expand the State's presence
throughout its territory, which is particularly necessary
in areas that have been affected by conflict and vacated
by former combatants. It will also help to resolve
the sensitive land question and restore much-needed
basic services to all, including combatants who have
surrendered and their families.

As Colombia commemorates the third anniversary
of the 2016 Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict
and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace, it is important
that we recognize and commend the Government
of Colombia, led by President Duque Marquez, for
its significant efforts in encouraging dialogue and
the implementation of the peace agreement. We take
note, inter alia, of the Government's launching in
2019 of its "Peace with legality" plan, which aims to
provide concrete solutions to potential obstacles to the
peace process.

South Africa also expresses its full support for
Colombia's Commission on Truth, Coexistence and
Non-repetition, known as the Truth Commission. Our
very own Truth and Reconciliation Commission in
South Africa, as painful and imperfect as it may have
been, was invaluable in allowing our people to confront
our painful history and deal with the deep wounds that
had divided us for a long time. Therefore, in order to
foster healing, it is important that Colombia's justice
process, embodied in its Special Jurisdiction for Peace,
receive the full support and cooperation of all the parties
involved. Its independence and autonomy, as well as the
judgments it arrives at, also need to be fully respected.

Furthermore, as pointed out by the Secretary-
General in his most recent report, it is critical that the
reintegration process in Colombia involve efforts to
empower local communities, in close collaboration with
the private sector, universities and other stakeholders,
such as civil society organizations, women, victims
of violence and ethnic or indigenous peoples. On
this point it is important to recognize the important
pioneering efforts and achievements of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia in working
specifically to address youth in the peace process. As
the country's future leaders, its youth and their futures
are critical to the success of the peace process in
Colombia. That pioneering work by the United Nations
Verification Mission should serve as an important
example for other peace missions.

South Africa also commends the efforts of regional
bodies, such as the Organization of American States
(OAS), particularly through its Mission to Support of
the Peace Process in Colombia, led by Mr. Roberto
Menendez. We encourage greater coordination between
the United Nations efforts and those of the OAS.

As has been mentioned, the transition that
Colombia is undergoing bears many similarities with
the experiences of South Africa. Following the end
of apartheid, South Africa's fledgling democracy had
to deal with similarly complex challenges, including
reforming the security sector, demobilizing and
reintegrating former combatants, processes related to
truth and reconciliation, as well as justice.
Peace is expensive. Peace is complex. Making
peace is a difficult, yet necessary, undertaking.
Patience is needed. Respect and equal treatment for all
is required. Certainty about the common future must be
spelled out. Justice must be applied fairly to everyone.
Inter-Colombian dialogue is the way to go. Neighbours
should give the Colombian people a chance to deal
with the painful past to heal, to deal with mistrust, to
bond together and to move together. Democracy needs
compromises. Democracy needs accommodation.
Work together with former combatants. Do not
demonize them.

As always, South Africa remains ready and willing
to share the small experiences and lessons that it
learned through those difficult processes, in the hope
that Colombia and its people might find lasting peace
and prosperity.

