Mr. Mahendran (Sri Lanka): Sri Lanka has
consistently urged Iraq to comply fully with the United
Nations Security Council resolutions obliging it to
eliminate weapons of mass destruction. Until now, the
lack of full compliance has led to the present situation.
Therefore, the elimination of weapons of mass
destruction in Iraq has not been completed through
peaceful means. Unfortunately, the lack of concurrence
in the Security Council on how to proceed with its own
resolution 1441 (2002), adopted unanimously, has led
to the collapse of the United Nations process.

Sri Lanka is committed to the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Iraq. We are greatly disturbed by
the outbreak of this conflict in the Middle East. Sri
Lanka is gravely concerned about the massive political,
economic, social and, above all, humanitarian
consequences that would ensue in the military conflict,
affecting Iraq, the Middle East region and indeed
international peace and security.

We express our confidence in the coalition
partners to move early to minimize the adverse
consequences on the civilian population in Iraq and, in
association with other members of the international
community, to coordinate rehabilitation efforts in the
country.

The United Nations must play an active role
during and after the crisis situation. In this context,
there is an urgent need to address the major
humanitarian requirements of the Iraqi people and to
ensure the safety of the civilian people.

Beyond the current issue, the United Nations
must continue to play an undiminished role in other
situations of tension such as, in particular, the question
of Palestine. There should be substantial progress
towards an enduring and just peace, in which the State
of Israel and Palestine can live in freedom and mutual
trust within secure boundaries in accordance with
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973)
and 1397 (2002).

The all-pervasive evil of terrorism must not at
this stage be permitted to exploit and thrive on the
global uncertainty and tension, which have now been
heightened. The international consensus and collective
will to eradicate all forms and manifestations of
terrorism, wherever and in whatever circumstances it
occurs, must not be deflected or blunted. Terrorism
should not be identified and stereotyped with any
particular religion, nationality or civilization.

It is tragic in the current dangerous situation that
the United Nations system, in particular the Security
Council, has been rendered ineffective, and apparently
even abandoned, due to disagreement among its
members. Sri Lanka nevertheless continues to firmly
believe that issues affecting international peace and
security should be as far as possible identified,
considered and resolved through the United Nations,
the primary global institution through which the will of
the international community can be legitimately
expressed.

Therefore, it is essential that the role of the
United Nations and its credibility and authority be
restored and respected. The Government will continue
to monitor closely the complex implications of the
situation in Iraq. Sri Lanka will also seek to work
closely with like-minded countries in the national and
collective imperative to keep United Nations alive.

Sri Lanka urges a quick end to this crisis based on
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq and the
safety, security and welfare of its people.

