Mr. Radomski (Poland): First, let me extend our
thanks to Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo Garcia for his
presence with us in the Council today. I would also like to
thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his informative briefing.

The signature more than two years ago of the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable
and Lasting Peace between Colombia and the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del
Pueblo (FARC-EP), followed by its implementation
process, remains an undeniable success story and a
great example for others to follow. The implementation
of such a complex agreement is a demanding task that
may sometimes result in disaffection and mistrust
among the parties involved.

Having said that, we are of the view that the recent
situation, where a small group of former FARC-EP
combatants have contested the agreement to the point
where they have decided to take up arms and continue
their fight outside of the provisions of the law, is
unacceptable and demands universal condemnation. At
the same time, we recall with appreciation messages
coming from the different sides of the Colombian
political scene that focus on the unity of all Colombians.
We want to praise the efforts of the Government
and a clear majority of former FARC-EP guerrilla
members who overwhelmingly support the ongoing
peace process. Thanks to the peace agreement, both
parties can turn to the Commission for the Follow-up,
Promotion and Verification of the Implementation of
the Agreement to overcome implementation challenges
and thereby strengthen the coordination mechanisms.

Much has been done in the area of the protection
of human rights defenders and social leaders. However,
according to the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/780), there is still a significant gap to be
diminished. Close protection, especially for former
FARC-EP members around and outside of the territorial
areas for training and reintegration, must be ensured.
Comprehensive security measures must be provided
without delay to the departments historically affected
by the conflict.

The full political, legal and socioeconomic
reintegration of former FARC-EP members is crucial
to creating trust and confidence in the peace process.
As urban reintegration is steadily gaining relevance,
it is essential to ensure that the former combatants
will get appropriate access to housing, health systems
and education. We are pleased to note that the
implementation of the development programmes with a
territorial focus is gaining traction and soon will bring
relief to the areas that suffered the most during the
armed conflict period.

Let me now focus on the local elections scheduled to
take place on 27 October. Expectations are high in that
regard. That is why we are worried about the spike in
attacks against candidates, as is noted in latest report of
the Secretary-General. We hope that the security forces
will step up and deliver the best possible protection. On
a positive note, it has to be underlined that the signing
by all major political parties of the National Pact for
Political Culture and Non-Violence during the Electoral
Campaign was a much-needed step to reject violence as
a way of conducting policy.

In conclusion, let me underline Poland's support
for the United Nations Verification Mission and the
United Nations country team. I would also like to
reiterate our strong support for the Government and the
people of Colombia in their dedicated efforts to ensure
sustainable peace in the spirit of national unity.

