Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank our three
briefers, as well as the United States for proposing this
discussion today and Vice-President Pence for joining
the Security Council.
It is clear from the briefings that we heard that
the humanitarian crisis in Venezuela has reached epic
proportions, and it is right that the Security Council
should discuss such issues. I know that there is an
age-old debate that we have never resolved as to how
bad a situation must get within a country in order
for it to constitute the sort of issue that the Security
Council has looked at. But the figures that we have
heard today and their effect on the Venezuelan people
and their neighbours, as well as the View of the regional
authorities and international authorities, as represented
by the Joint Special Representative and the Emergency
Relief Coordinator, make it, I believe, absolutely an
issue that the Council should be discussing.

We have heard today how ordinary Venezuelans
are unable to access food and basic health care.
Preventable diseases, such as measles and diphtheria,
have reappeared. HIV goes untreated and maternal and
newborn mortality rates are extremely high. Electricity
and water shortages, as many speakers have said, have
made it all much worse. The figures are appalling, but we
are also starting to hear words such as 'unprecedented"
and "unparalleled".

Today I heard some things that I did not know,
particularly about the health side. In that regard, I thank
Ms. Page. They are truly shocking. The malaria figure
especially stuck in my mind. I think the answer with
respect to measles is to refer to the George Washington
University study about Russian social media, so I am
not going to go into that. But I think that the malaria
figure alone ought to really horrify us.

It is all the more shocking because, as a number
of speakers have said, the crisis is man-made,
and even more so because Venezuela used to be a
prosperous country. My understanding of the figures
of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development and World Bank is that Venezuela was
considered to be an upper-middle-income country. The
fact that it can go from that status to having the sorts
of problems that we heard described today really does
draw the concern of the international community.

I want also to reference the refugee situation. The
figure we have heard is that 3.4 million Venezuelans
have left their country to go to their neighbours. I too
welcome the presence ofthe Colombian Foreign Minister
here today, and we commend him and his Government;
our Security Council colleague, Peru; and others in
the region that have offered refuge and hope to those
millions of ordinary Venezuelans. But we cannot rely
solely on the region's efforts because, as we also heard
today, that number is set to rise quite dramatically.

I wanted to thank the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the International
Organization for Migration, through the Joint Special
Representative, for the efforts that they have made. I
think that we agree that it is a positive first step that
the Maduro regime no longer denies the existence of a
crisis and that the Red Cross and the United Nations are
allowed to start the international humanitarian response.
The scale of what is needed was set out graphically by
the Emergency Relief Coordinator, which points to how
much more needs to be done.

The United Kingdom agrees with the majority
of the Council on the need for a new start in
Venezuela, and we will be working closely with the
international community to ensure that assistance
can reach those most in need. However, I want to
echo what Vice-President Pence said in his emphasis
on democracy and the rule of law. We stand with the
Venezuelan people. This is about what is needed to help
the Venezuelan people. We therefore support the United
Nations efforts, under the leadership of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, to mount
an international humanitarian response commensurate
with the severity of the situation and underpinned by the
principles of independence, neutrality and impartiality.
I call Member States' attention to the three areas that
the Emergency Relief Coordinator outlined.

We call on the Maduro regime and all actors to
facilitate the humanitarian process and allow further
international organizations, such as the United Nations,
Red Cross and non-governmental organizations,
unhindered access to deliver humanitarian assistance
to meet the urgent needs of the Venezuelan people. I
repeat that it is against international law to try to deny
one's own people the help that they need, particularly
with respect to food.

I would also like to use this occasion to call on
Member States to support the United Nations efforts.
For our part, we have committed a package of nearly
$9 million in humanitarian aid to respond to the most
severe needs in Venezuela and host countries. We hope
that our aid package will respond to the most severe
health and nutrition needs by supporting emergency
rooms and maternity wards. We hope to help people
fleeing their homes get access to critical support, and
we hope to help meet the immediate needs of those
forced to flee Venezuela, who are at greater risk of
exploitation. We therefore plan to offer migrants access
to personal documentation and information on how to
access basic services.

It is important that we are clear that the suffering
faced by the Venezuelan people is the result of years
of mismanagement by the de facto Government.
Humanitarian aid is urgently needed, but, as many
speakers have said today, it will not solve the crisis.
Political change is equally urgent. The legitimate
interim President - Juan Guaido - was stripped of
his immunity as Speaker of the National Assembly. His
Chief of Staff was arrested and others who are trying to
secure peace and democracy in Venezuela have suffered
similar forms of intimidation and threats. Mr. Guaido
has our full support in his efforts to bring about the
necessary change. The people of Venezuela deserve a
better future.

I repeat that it is our belief that it is time for a new
start, with free and fair elections in accordance with
international democratic standards.

