Ms. Maite: I thank you very much, Sir, for the
opportunity to address the Council.

My name is Naledi Maite and I represent an
organization called South African Women in Dialogue,
commonly known as SAWID, which I became affiliated
with at the age of 18. SAWID is an independent South
African women's forum committed to providing a
platform for every woman to be heard through dialogue
in order to improve the status of women in our country.

SAWID was born out of an organic process of
sisterhood and solidarity. The journey began in 2002,
at the time of the Inter-Congolese Dialogue, which
took place in Sun City, a conferencing and holiday
resort in South Africa. As it may be recalled, this was
the second attempt as the initial dialogue in Ethiopia
had collapsed. We as South Africans, like the rest of
the world, watched the proceedings on our television
screens, hoping that a common peace agreement would
finally be achieved. However, the marked absence of
ordinary South Africans in and around the talks gave a
group of women the idea to organize themselves and to
drive to Sun City. On their arrival, the intention was not
to meddle in the affairs of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. They came with one very simple message,
namely, to pledge their solidarity with the struggle of
the women of that country. For them, it was agonizing
to watch the tensions and anxiety among the women
participating in the process and how they were not
central but peripheral to the talks.

As recognized in resolution 1325 (2000), in times
of conflict it is women and children who are the worst
affected. Having experienced their own political
transition just eight years prior, that handful of South
African women understood first-hand for whom the
shoe pinches and what it feels like to want peace yet not
to have a voice. The small civil society delegation was
well received, which gave birth to a number of activities.
Chief among them was the Congolese and South African
women's dialogue, held in Johannesburg in March 2003,
at the request of Congolese women, and endorsed by
the leader of the Inter-Congolese Dialogue facilitation
team, the late Sir Quett Ketumile Joni Masire.

The dialogue was attended by approximately 120
Congolese women and 180 South African women and
its purpose was twofold. The first was to facilitate
dialogue among Congolese women. Tensions ran high
at the start of the dialogue. As one can imagine, the
women came from different warring parties and
factions and dialogue was therefore difficult and
almost impossible at the start. The second purpose was
for the South African delegation to share experiences
and strategies on institutional mechanisms and laws
with a View to providing an environment for women's
emancipation and equality in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

Following the success ofthe dialogue, the Congolese
women resolved to hold a follow-up conference,
which took place in Kinshasa in May 2003. At the
conference, they collectively created a framework for
the Inter-Congolese Dialogue to integrate women and
ensure their effective participation in the transitional
process. Through the newly created collective, they
pressured the various negotiating parties to sign a final
agreement. Through the dialogue process, Congolese
women, in spite of deep-rooted and historical divisions,
demonstrated that even if one is affected by or a party
to conflict, that does not mean that it is impossible to
work towards a common goal, namely, that of peace and
stability in their country.

Emanating from these interactions with the
Congolese women was the realization by South African
women of the need to reflect on their own journey since
achieving democracy. The process with our sisters from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo revealed to us
that we had assumed the existence of our cohesion and
unity, which was not necessarily the case. The women
realized that post-1994, they had handed over their
agency to Government, creating a void, particularly
at the grass-roots level, and that there was an urgent
need for a collective voice representing the interests of
women in the new South Africa and enabling women to
play a more active role in ensuring that we contribute
towards nation-building and sustaining peace.

That is what led to the birth of South African
Women in Dialogue, an event held in July 2003 and
attended by approximately 1,000 South African women
from all walks of life. Our carefully crafted dialogue
model was based on three key guiding principles, which
were largely influenced by the lessons learnt from
our interactions with our sisters from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

First was the creation of a non-partisan platform
where women were encouraged to express their own
individual views and not those of the organizations they
were affiliated with.

Second was the issue of diverse participation,
which stems from the realization that women are not
a homogenous group and that we are divided by many
issues, such as ethnicity, religious beliefs, class and
political affiliations, just to mention a few. It was also a
way to move away from the global tendency of educated
and middle-class women setting the agenda for and
speaking on behalf rural and poor urban women. Such
inclusion is the backbone of the model as there can be no
legitimate outcome from a process that is not inclusive.
The third guiding principle was the facilitation of
a private, self-reflective space away from the glare of
the cameras, where women could unburden themselves,
albeit momentarily, of current traumas and stresses.
That created a communion of sisterhood and shared
understanding of our commonalities and became the
foundation of honest and effective dialogue.

From that moment, SAWID grew to become a
formidable brand that was adopted wholeheartedly by
South African women. It went on to host 10 national
dialogues, which cascaded into many more provincial
and community-based dialogues that adopted the
SAWID model. Major local successes of SAWID
include facilitating the inclusion of women's voices and
experiences in the national development plan. SAWID
also led and lobbied for the establishment of a women's
ministry and lobbied for and presented a poverty
eradication model, which it implemented jointly with
the Government. Under its pan-African peace and
reconciliation dialogue programme, SAWID also went
on to facilitate peace dialogues with the women of
Burundi, shortly before the 2004 elections, and with
the women of the Sudan in 2007. It also facilitated an
African Peer Review Mechanism dialogue in 2006
and has participated in election observer missions in
various African countries.

Through those dialogues over the years, the
efforts of the SAWID forum can be summarized as
having facilitated partnerships between women and
national and international bodies to shape community,
provincial, national and continental agendas. Through
the use of dialogue, SAWID has contributed to
strengthening solidarity and social cohesion with the
aim of promoting and consolidating peace, security and
stability in local communities and on the continent,
thereby creating a conducive space for socioeconomic
development and the eradication of poverty.

In closing, I would like to emphasize that SAWID
believes that dialogue is an important tool for both
conflict prevention and the overall consolidation of
peace in developing and post-conflict societies. Most
often, initiatives like SAWID are looked upon as
soft approaches to maintaining peace and preventing
conflict. As a result, most post-conflict strategies
neglect such initiatives, often prioritizing the military,
infrastructure and other development issues. Those are
important issues to prioritize; however, it is essential for
Governments to recognize that the project of rebuilding
societal links, acknowledging the pain and trauma of
citizens and actively investing in the healing of nations
is also of paramount importance and is by no means a
soft matter.

Investing in constructive dialogue mechanisms at
all levels of society may be a saving grace for fragile
and volatile communities. However, we would caution
that, despite their efficacy, those dialogues should not
be a grand one-off effort. Our biggest lesson from the
South African Women in Dialogue interventions is
that dialogue must be consistent and sustained in time,
otherwise the positive benefits of the understanding and
agreements reached during the dialogue can become
diluted and violence can re-emerge.

The South African Women in Dialogue forum has
been progressively evolving and continues to champion
the interests of South African women. However, due
to the lack of adequate resourcing, its scope has been
dwindling. That diminished presence has once again
created a void, and South African women are yearning
for the forum's revitalization. The rate of violence
against women and children, including femicide and
rape, have reached unprecedented levels in South
Africa, and we occupy a low ranking on the Global
Peace Index. Those are just a few indicators of why
initiatives like the South African Women in Dialogue
forum must be preserved, especially at the grass-
roots level.

