The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Burundi, in which he requests to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the consideration of the
item without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nsanze
(Burundi) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Charles Nqakula, Facilitator of the Burundi Peace
Process and Minister of Defence of South Africa.

It is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to Mr. Charles Nqakula, Facilitator of the
Burundi Peace Process and Minister of Defence of
South Africa.

I invite Mr. Nqakula to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Anders Liden, Chairman of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission and
Permanent Representative of Sweden to the United
Nations.

It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Liden to take a seat at the Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2008/745, which contains the fourth report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Integrated Office in Burundi.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by His Excellency Mr. Charles Nqakula,
Facilitator of the Burundi Peace Process and Minister
of Defence of South Africa, and by His Excellency
Mr. Anders Liden, Chairman of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission and
Permanent Representative of Sweden to the United
Nations.

I now give the floor to Mr. Charles Nqakula,
Facilitator of the Burundi Peace Process and Minister
of Defence of South Africa.


