The Secretary-General: Let me start by thanking
the Security Council for this opportunity to present the
Council with my assessment of the situation in Kosovo
and my idea for the way forward for the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) as the international civil presence in
Kosovo.

Before doing so, I would like to welcome the
presence here today of His Excellency Mr. Boris Tadie
of Serbia and of His Excellency Mr. Fatmir Sejdiu of
Kosovo.

The challenge facing us is an enormous one. In
almost 40 years of my diplomatic life, I have never
encountered an issue as divisive, as delicate and as
intractable as the Kosovo issue. Legally, politically and
morally, it is a landscape of enormous complexity and
sensitivity that requires the exercise of extraordinary
objectivity and balance. The declaration of
independence in February, the violence at the customs
posts and in Mitrovica, the elections organized by the
Serbs, the promulgation in Pristina of a new
constitution - all of those recent developments, and
many before them, have been fiercely contested by the
communities and by their supporters abroad, and have
profoundly changed the environment in which we are
operating.

In coming before the Council today to listen and
to seek its guidance, I am very aware that the package I
have developed is a humble effort in the light of those
new developments to try to find an operational modus
vivendi to help move Kosovo a few steps back from
the brink of further conflict. To many, it may not be
fully satisfying, because it does not completely meet
the aspirations of any of the key stakeholders. Indeed,
it is not a winner-take-all solution. Nevertheless,
personally, after open and transparent consultations
with all concerned over the past months, I have come
to the View that the package represents the least
objectionable way forward. I have presented it to the
Council mindful of the need to preserve and safeguard
the credibility and effectiveness of the United Nations,
in the interest of all of its Members.
08-39202

If there is any wisdom in this package, I should
also thank Council members: I have greatly benefited
from my wide-ranging consultations with you and with
your ministers in the development of the package.
Indeed, I held consultations with every member of the
Council, as well as with the parties and other
stakeholders, including the leaders present here today. I
appreciated their flexibility and admired their
leadership. I have drawn richly on their ideas. My
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations
has also benefited from consultations in both Pristina
and Belgrade. This has been further enriched by the
daily contacts of my representatives on the ground and
by the work of the men and women of UNMIK.

The report (8/2008/354) before the Council sets
out the key recent developments in relation to Kosovo.
As the Council is aware, following the declaration of
independence by Kosovo's representatives, on
17 February of this year, some Member States have
recognized Kosovo as a sovereign and independent
State, while others have not. The differences within the
international community have added to the complexity
of this issue. I have taken note of the position of the
Republic of Serbia as conveyed to me by President
Tadie.

Mindful of the divisions in the international
community, the United Nations has taken a position of
strict neutrality on the question of Kosovo's status.
UNMIK operates within the framework of Security
Council resolution l244 (l999), which is the legal
framework for its mandate and which remains in force
until the Security Council decides otherwise. As I have
indicated to the Council on prior occasions, UNMIK
has continued to operate and to implement its mandate
in the light of the evolving circumstances, however
difficult that might be. That is the foundation of my
package.

Following the declaration of independence by
Kosovo, UNMIK's ability to operate as before has
come into serious question. The constitution
promulgated by the Kosovo authorities came into effect
on 15 June. That constitution envisages no real role for
UNMIK. The powers residing with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General are sought to
be assumed by the new authorities. On the other side of
the ledger, the Kosovo Serb community has
overwhelmingly rejected the new constitution and the
new laws that are emerging from Pristina. They have
expanded their boycott of Pristina institutions and,
08-39202
while they have agreed to continue to apply UNMIK
laws, they have opposed -sometimes violently - any
effort to bring them under the aegis of the new
arrangements in Pristina.

All of that is contributing to a substantially
changed situation in Kosovo. It is my assessment that,
taken together, these developments have created a
profoundly new reality in which UNMIK is no longer
able to perform as effectively as in the past the vast
majority of its tasks as an interim administration. That
needs to be acknowledged as a fact of life.

In the light of recent developments, the report
notes that I intend to adjust operational aspects of the
international civil presence in Kosovo and to
reconfigure the profile and structure of UNMIK. I will
not repeat the details of the package here; it is more
important for me to hear the reactions of participants. I
will just note that a reconfigured and restructured
UNMIK will continue to carry out a number of
functions. These will include, significantly, functions
related to the dialogue on the implementation of
provisions in six areas contained in my letter to
