The President: I thank the Assistant Minister for
Foreign Affairs of China for the kind words he addressed
to the Permanent Mission of the Netherlands.

I call next on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Bahrain, His Excellency Shaikh Mohammed Bin Mubarak
Al-Khalifa.

Shaikh Al-Khalifa (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): It
gives me great pleasure, Sir, to express to you our great
appreciation for your country's initiative and for your own
efforts in convening this Security Council debate on the
question of small arms, which is a source of concern for
the international community.

The international community has for some time
understood the danger posed by the proliferation of these
weapons and their role in fueling ethnic conflicts. They
have been used by transnational organized criminal
groups and fanatic terrorist elements. Many parts of the
world are now embroiled in violence and turmoil, which
has a negative effect on their economic and social
development programmes and on national and individual
safety and security.

The many conflicts raging today in Africa and
elsewhere are the clearest testimony to the threat posed by
the use of these weapons, which are readily available to
groups involved in armed conflicts. Moreover, the human
suffering caused by such conflicts - including the death
and injury of a vast number of innocent people, mainly
children, women and the elderly, and the displacement of
thousands - now haunts the conscience of the
international community. This should make us take
immediate action to check the flow of these weapons and
to combat illicit trafficking in them.

These weapons are not merely dangerous. They also
obstruct the provision of humanitarian assistance to
civilian refugees and displaced persons in areas of
conflict.

In keeping with Bahrain's firm commitment to the
maintenance of world security and stability and to putting
an end to all conflicts, my country supported the
resolutions on small arms adopted by the General
Assembly at its fifty-third session.

Bahrain again advocates the development of specific
regulations to govern the flow of small arms. We
therefore support all international efforts to contain and
prevent the illicit traffic in such weapons in the context of
preparations for the international conference to be held in
2001. Of particular importance here are the efforts that
will be made in the light of the outcome of that
conference and of the report of the panel of Governmental
Experts on small arms to be submitted to the General
Assembly at its current session. The report will contain a
number of ideas and recommendations that should
contribute to successful preparations for the conference.

It behooves our Council, concerned as it is with the
maintenance of international peace and security, to call
upon the parties involved in the trade in such arms to
heed the appeals of all peace-loving nations; also, it must
call upon regional and international organizations to take
measures to ensure that the flow of such arms to conflict
zones and to those involved in such conflicts is halted.
The Council is duty bound also to affirm its stand against

 

the illicit traffic in such arms and against terrorism and
transnational organized crime. It is further bound to prevent
the supplies of weapons and funds from reaching terrorists
and fanatics. We must restrict their actions by tightening
immigration and residence laws, depriving them of safe
havens and freedom of action. It augurs well for this
important matter that the Security Council has included it
in its agenda, which has a direct bearing on peace and
stability in many regions of the world. We hope that this
meeting will be a good beginning and will lead to
agreement between all States Members of the United
Nations on a definitive, unanimous position to eliminate the
risks and painful consequences of the misuse of small arms.

In the light of its interest in this matter, the State of
Bahrain will endorse the statement by the President which
the Council will issue today.

The President: I call on the representative of
Namibia.


