Mr. Christiane: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its 28 Member States.

The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova
and Georgia, align themselves with this statement.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report (S/2018/1092) and Special
Representative Yamamoto and the Ambassador of
Afghanistan for their statements.

The EU highly values and welcomes the efforts of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and Special Representative Yamamoto to
support peace and development in Afghanistan. The EU
also welcomes the outcome of the Geneva Ministerial
Conference on Afghanistan, where the EU was
represented by High Representative Federica Mogherini
and by the European Commissioner for International
Cooperation and Development, Neven Mimica.

Four weeks ago, the EU adopted Council
Conclusions on Afghanistan, reaffirming the EU and
member States' long-term commitment to supporting
the people of Afghanistan in their efforts towards
peace, security and prosperity. We acknowledge the
current momentum for peace in Afghanistan. We
consider the coming months to be key for advancing the
peace agenda. To that end, at the Geneva Conference
the EU High Representative made a concrete offer to
support peace in Afghanistan, including but not limited
to helping the Government to make the peace process
more inclusive; supporting post-conflict reforms,
including security sector reform; providing incentives
for ex-combatants; having the EU as a guarantor of
the peace process; and supporting cross-border trade,
infrastructure and connectivity. We are currently
working with the Afghan Government to develop that
offer into concrete actions.

The EU firmly believes that any peace process
should include mechanisms to represent the interests of
all Afghans, women and minorities in particular. Civil
society is also a key actor and can provide important
perspectives, not least those witnessed here today.
We support a possible peace deal. The EU will stand
strongly behind the protection of human rights. Peace
must not come at the cost of progress made over the
past 17 years. All international efforts to bring peace
are welcomed. However, in order to guarantee full
Afghan ownership of an eventual peace process, direct
peace talks between the Government of Afghanistan
and the Taliban cannot be delayed much longer. The
international community needs to bring all negotiation
formats under the Kabul process.

I would like to address three points. The first
point is about reforms. At the Geneva Conference,
the international community took stock of the
implementation of the reforms by the Government of
Afghanistan and agreed on new benchmarks for the
future years. The EU signalled once more its firm
commitment to that endeavour. It announced a support
package of €474 million for Afghanistan, including
€311 million for the State and Resilience Building
Contract for the years 2018-2021.

It is, however, of utmost importance that
Afghanistan focus not only on the adoption, but also on
the implementation of reforms. In that context, the EU
notes the finalization, ahead of the Geneva Conference,
of the developmentpolicy framework consisting of the 10
national priority programmes linked to the Afghanistan
National Peace and Development Framework, as well
as the progress made in their implementation. Notably,
progress has been made with regard to a more enabling
environment for business and promoting private sector
growth, public finance management reforms, trade
facilitation, and security sector reforms. We encourage
the Afghan Government to continue those reforms.

The fight against corruption needs also to continue
and deliver concrete results, which will help maintain
and increase people's confidence in Afghan institutions.
The same applies for the protection of human rights,
with particular focus on areas such as the elimination
of violence against women, the implementation of
the national action plan for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), the protection of children and
the prevention of torture and ill treatment. In that regard
the EU would like to emphasize the need to implement
the law on the elimination of violence against women
and to adopt the child protection law, which has been,
deplorably, recently rejected for the fourth time in the
Afghan Parliament.

The second point I would like to address is about
elections. The EU concurs with the United Nations
assessment and finds it positive that elections took place
in October and that many Afghans - including women
and young people - actively participated despite
security threats. However, we note that the polling
was negatively affected by substantial organizational
and technical difficulties, as well as suspicions of
large-scale fraud.

For the preparation of the presidential elections,
the coming months will be essential to address those
shortcomings and draw lessons from them so as to
ensure credibility and transparency and to preserve the
inclusivity of the political process. There is no need to
say that strong and swift measures that will ensure the
safety, transparency, accountability and credibility of
this ballot need absolutely to be taken.

The coming elections and the peace process are
two separate things. The international community
must remain firm in supporting both a Kabul-led
peace process and presidential elections that are
transparent and strengthen the legitimacy of the
resulting Government. It is also important that the
presidential elections take place on time. To that aim,
the EU is gladly providing electoral assistance to the
tune of more than €18 million, both through the United
Nations Development Programme Electoral Support
Project and through a separate project to help reduce
the vulnerabilities of the election process. We are ready
to work with the international community, especially
the United Nations, on the identification of how best to
further support the Afghan electoral process.

The third and last point I would like to address is
about security. The EU remains deeply concerned about
the security situation in the country, particularly by the
high level of civilian casualties - more than 8,000
since the beginning of the year 4 and grave violence
affecting children, as documented by UNAMA. All
parties should comply with their obligations under
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law to ensure the protection ofthe civilian
population, including women and children, and protect
and respect humanitarian and medical personnel, their
means of transport and equipment, as well as hospitals
and other medical facilities.

Considering the scope of the humanitarian needs
and the dire situation of internally displaced persons,
humanitarian principles must be respected and upheld.
The vital role of humanitarian agencies and the
humanitarian space must be preserved in order to meet
the most urgent needs of the most vulnerable persons.
Conflict-related violence must not destroy another
generation's livelihood, homes or property, or displace
families and limit access to education, health care and
other services.

With regard to migration, we would like to
assure the Security Council that the EU continues its
comprehensive dialogue on migration in the framework
of the EU-Afghanistan Joint Way Forward and by
addressing the regional dimension of migration.

The climate-related security risks at play in
Afghanistan include water shortages and droughts in
the majority of provinces, with direct consequences for
harvest and cattle, which in turn risks triggering and
exacerbating local conflicts over land and water and
increasing recruitment into armed groups. To make
our peace efforts more efficient, we need adequate risk
assessments in this regard.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our support to
the NATO-led Resolute Support Mission efforts aimed
at providing further training, advice and assistance to
the Afghan security forces and institutions. I would also
like to reconfirm that the EU strongly acknowledges
the crucial role played by the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and all the United
Nations agencies in supporting the Afghan people. The
EU remains committed to working alongside UNAMA
and international partners to achieve a democratic and
self-sustainable Afghanistan.

I have personally been several times in Kabul and
I sincerely hope that many kites will soon fly again in
the beautiful sky of this city.

