Mr. Ipo (Cote d'lvoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the holding of this briefing on
developments in the situation in Guinea-Bissau and
thanks Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant Secretary-General
for Africa, and Ambassador Mauro Vieira, Chair of
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for their excellent briefings.

Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the progress made by the
authorities of Guinea-Bissau in resolving the crisis,
in particular the peaceful holding of the legislative
elections on 10 March, the appointment of a Prime
Minister and the formation of a new Government on
3 July. My delegation also notes with satisfaction the
decision of President Jose Mario Vaz on 18 June to set
the date for the presidential elections for 24 November.

Those positive developments are the outcome of
continued and robust dialogue among the stakeholders
of Guinea-Bissau. They were also made possible
through the support of the international community, in
particular the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS). ECOWAS has indeed remained
constant in its support for the ongoing political process,
while remaining firm in its call for all stakeholders to
respect the commitments freely entered into under the
Conakry Agreement and the ECOWAS Road Map for
the Resolution of the Political Crisis in Guinea-Bissau.

Despite the encouraging progress made in recent
months, the sociopolitical and security situation remains
fragile, as evidenced by the resurgence of tensions a
few weeks before the presidential election. My country
therefore urges all political actors in Guinea-Bissau
to join forces to organize an inclusive, credible and
peaceful presidential election on 24 November as a
crucial step towards the conclusion of the electoral
cycle and the preservation of achievements in the crisis
resolution process. The steadfast commitment of local
actors to forging a path to peace and stability should
be supported by the international community and
development partners, who must strengthen their level
of mobilization around Guinea-Bissau.

With regard to the activities of UNIOGBIS, Cote
d'Ivoire welcomes the mission's support of political
dialogue, the national reconciliation process and the
implementation of the Conakry Agreement and the
ECOWAS Road Map. Furthermore, it notes the definitive
cessation of the activities of the Bubaque regional
office on 21 June, which marked the starting point for
the closure of all regional offices by 31 December, in
accordance with resolution 2458 (2019). In addition,
my country welcomes the ongoing transition planning
process and encourages the authorities of Guinea-Bissau
to seize this opportunity to strengthen their cooperation
with UNIOGBIS with a View to ensuring ownership of
the activities to be transferred to the country and better
management of post-election institutional reforms.

Cote d'lvoire reaffirms its full support for the
United Nations, the African Union, the European
Union, the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries and ECOWAS, whose decision, taken at the
55th Summit of Heads of State and Government on
29 June, to extend the mandate of the ECOWAS Mission
in Guinea-Bissau until April 2020 is welcome. C6te
d'lvoire urges them to increase synergies in support
of the implementation of the Conakry Agreement and
the ECOWAS Road Map. My country also expresses its
appreciation to Mr. Jose Viegas Filho, outgoing Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Guinea-
Bissau, UNIOGBIS staff, the United Nations country
team and the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel for their commitment to peace and stability in
Guinea-Bissau.

In conclusion, C6te d'lvoire reiterates its call on all
political actors in Guinea-Bissau to prioritize dialogue
as a means of resolving their political differences and to
resolutely join in the international community's efforts
to promote a definitive and lasting solution to the crisis.

