Ms. Coomaraswamy: Mr. President, I thank you
for convening this open debate of the Security Council
at the ministerial level, a meeting devoted to taking
action to ensure the protection of children exposed to
armed conflict. The level of the debate and your
presence here today, Mr. President, testifies to your
strong commitment on this critical issue.

I am grateful to the Security Council, its Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict and particularly
the leadership that France has been providing in the
Working Group on the agenda for the protection of
children affected by armed conflict.

It is with hope tempered by caution that I present
to the Council this report of great significance. The
seventh annual report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict reviews developments in
18 situations of concern, recording systematically the
following six grave violations: killing or maiming of
children, recruiting or using child soldiers, attacks
against schools and hospitals, rape and other grave
sexual violence against children, the abduction of
children, and the denial of humanitarian access to
children. Altogether, 58 offending parties have been
specifically named and listed; they are drawn from
13 situations of concern. All 58 offending parties are
responsible for the recruitment and use of child
soldiers. In addition, many of them are also responsible
for committing other grave abuses, as recorded in the
lists.

I am pleased to state that this report has been a
United Nations system-wide collaborative effort. I
would also like to stress that the hallmark of the
monitoring and reporting exercise, as well as of this
annual reporting to the Security Council, has been a
08-23611
constructive dialogue at all levels with the Member
States concerned for the benefit of the war-affected
children.

Over the past year, much has been accomplished
on this ambitious agenda for children. The Security
Council Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict has met on six occasions, and there have been
positive developments as a result of its
recommendations and actions. In the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, after an initial delay, the
Government brought to trial former Mai-Mai
Commander Kyungu Mutanga, also known as Gedeon,
for war crimes and crimes against humanity, including
the recruitment of 300 children in Katanga Province
from 2003 to 2006. That action followed strong
recommendations by the Working Group to take
appropriate legal measures against members of armed
groups accused of grave crimes against children. This
marks a turning point which shows us that through our
collective efforts we can transform protective standards
into compliance and mere condemnation into
accountability.

Important precedents have also been set to end
impunity for crimes against children. We look forward
to the trial proceedings by the International Criminal
Court for militia leader Thomas Lubanga, who is
facing charges of having recruited child soldiers in the
north-eastern Ituri region of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo; similar indictments are in place for two
other Ituri militia leaders. The trial of former head of
State Charles Taylor of Liberia by the Special Court for
Sierra Leone, and the sentencing by the Special Court
of three members of the Armed Forces Revolutionary
Council and the Civil Defence Forces militia for the
recruitment and use of child soldiers - all of that
sends an important message that such crimes against
children will not be tolerated and that those who
engage in such practices will be brought to justice.

We are also increasingly witnessing the
implementation of key commitments by parties through
action plans, and that in turn is beginning to yield
concrete results in terms of protection for children on
the ground. A noteworthy achievement has been
realized with the parties to the conflict in Cote
d'Ivoire, where, for the first time, we have had a
de-listing of parties from the annexes. The Forces
nouvelles and four armed militias have successfully
implemented their action plans and have ceased all
recruitment of children, and that continues to be
3
verified by the United Nations country team - hence
their de-listing.

The dialogue in C6te d'Ivoire has resulted in the
release of approximately 3,000 children to UNICEF
and child protection agencies. That success should
reinforce the resolve of the Council, as its engagement
is making a real difference in the lives of these
children. Progress on action plans to end the
recruitment of children by armed forces and groups has
also been made in the Central African Republic,
Myanmar, the Sudan, Sri Lanka, Uganda and Chad. I
am also pleased to note that the Government of
Colombia has agreed to implement the monitoring and
reporting mechanism pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1612 (2005), and I look forward to working
closely with that Government.

In spite of the impressive progress, I regret to
report that the overall situation of children affected by
conflict remains grave and entirely unacceptable. There
are still many challenges, and my Office, along with
fellow partners - especially UNICEF, peacekeeping
operations and political missions - continues the
important work begun by the Council, by enhancing
our collective efforts for the protection of children
affected by conflict. Indeed, although I am addressing
the Council, the protection of children is an issue that
necessitates concerted efforts by all Member States. I
am happy to see the presence of the representatives of
many Member States in this Chamber today, and I
thank them for their commitment on this issue.

It is also imperative to note that, in certain
situations of concern, the inability of the United
Nations monitoring and reporting regime to engage in
dialogue with non-State actors has impeded progress
on securing the release and rehabilitation of children
associated with such groups. I urge the Council to call
on relevant Member States to facilitate dialogue with
non-State armed groups for the purpose of developing
action plans to halt the recruitment and use of children
and to address all other grave violations and abuses
committed against children.

I would also like to draw the attention of the
Council to several urgent challenges that will require
our close examination as a basis for continued global
efforts for war-affected children. In order to achieve
the protection of children affected by conflict, we need
to expand our recognition of the changing
characteristics of conflict. Today there are grey zones
of conflict that blur traditional lines between armed
conflict and criminal violence, often involving
transnational crime, non-traditional warfare and
trafficking. Terrorism and counter-terrorism measures
pose their own special problems for the protection of
children today, as we have witnessed recently in
Baghdad. The use of suicide bombing is entirely
unacceptable; nothing can justify it. We have witnessed
child victims at both ends of such acts: children have
been used as suicide bombers in certain instances,
while many children have been killed by suicide
bombings. Counter-terrorism strategies also cause
concern as we move away from police methods to
large-scale military action, with collateral damage that
sometimes includes the killing and maiming of
children.

Systematic and deliberate attacks on
schoolchildren, teachers and school buildings have
escalated in certain situations. In Afghanistan, such
attacks are targeted against girls' schools in an effort to
intimidate and to prevent girls from gaining access to
education. This seems to follow a particular pattern and
to contain an ideological dimension that is disturbing.
We urge that measures be taken to secure schools as
zones of peace, through commitments by parties to
ensure the child's right to education.

In regional conflicts, such as those in the Great
Lakes and Horn regions of Africa, the cross-border
recruitment of children from camps for internally
displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees is surging.
Research shows us that security in camps is one of the
major factors in the recruitment of children: the greater
the security, the less the recruitment. This has
important implications for humanitarian agencies
running refugee and IDP camps as well as for our
peacekeeping operations. The cross-border movement
of child soldiers and their recruiters is also posing a
great many problems for agencies working with these
extremely vulnerable populations.

The detention of children for alleged association
with armed groups, in violation of international
standards, is increasingly worrisome. Many detained
children are subjected to ill treatment, torture and
forceful interrogation methods and are deprived of
food and education. These children also lack recourse
to prompt and appropriate legal assistance and usually
are not separated from adults.
08-2361]
The use of indiscriminate weapons, such as
cluster munitions, during attacks in areas of civilian
concentration has a severe impact on those
populations, especially children, even long after the
conflict may have ended. I am heartened to learn that a
major international conference on a binding
international instrument prohibiting cluster munitions
will take place this spring in Dublin.

Sexual and gender-based violence, including
rape, against children is a devastating consequence of
conflict in many parts of the world. Sexual violence
against children by State and non-State parties to
conflict is prohibited by international law. We have
received information that in the Great Lakes region,
particularly in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Burundi, there are appalling levels of sexual and
gender-based violence. Impunity for such acts is
widespread. It is imperative that the perpetrators of
acts of rape and other kinds of sexual violence, which
have a long-term, devastating impact on the victims, be
prosecuted in accordance with the gravity of such
crimes. Like the recruitment and use of children,
sexual violence is always deliberate, targeted and a
direct consequence of criminal intent. We cannot
tolerate such action in any context, but when it
involves children it is especially abhorrent.

The recruitment and use of child soldiers has
been the main concern of the Council and the gateway
to the lists annexed to the annual reports of the
Secretary-General to date. We feel this was a great step
forward for the Council; the parties that continue to
engage in this serious crime must be put on notice that
targeted measures will be undertaken against persistent
violators. However, there are five other grave
violations, and child victims of those grave violations
and abuses deserve the attention and protection of the
international community. It is our belief that the
gateway to the annexed list of parties should include
all the grave violations.

Nonetheless, for the reasons I have mentioned,
the Council may wish to take an incremental approach
and initially consider systematic sexual violence
against children as an additional gateway to the
annexes. In this respect, the inclusion of grave sexual
violence would represent an important step in the
monitoring process, particularly in terms of holding
violators accountable for this egregious crime against
children.

08-2361]

It is now time that the Security Council move
from words towards effective action. There are 16
persistent violators who have been on the annexed lists
for five years in a row. Although certain parties in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda, Sri Lanka
and Myanmar are making efforts, several others remain
in contempt of the Council and its resolutions. The
Council has already, on previous occasions, expressed
its intention to take concrete and targeted measures
against those parties. It is most important that the
Council make good on its promise in order to ensure
the credibility of this exercise.

The targeted measures could include the
imposition of travel restrictions on leaders and their
exclusion from any governance structures and amnesty
provisions, the imposition of arms embargoes, a ban on
military assistance and restrictions on the flow of
financial resources to the parties concerned. I urge the
Council to begin to set up a mechanism to review and
oversee the imposition of targeted measures against
these violators to end the trend towards impunity in all
situations.

The Security Council is playing a historic role
when it deals with this theme and this mandate. In
recognizing that the protection of children in armed
conflict is an important peace and security issue which
requires effective and decisive action, the Council has
moved the agenda forward, understanding that there
can never be peace in the world unless we take care of
our children. One of the hallmarks of this agenda has
been that, at the most critical moments, the imperative
to protect children has overridden political
considerations. The Council and its Working Group are
encouraged to continue to give high priority to children
above all else.

No one who has looked into the eyes of a child
soldier can be at peace unless we rid this world of this
scourge. No one who has held the hand of a young girl
who has suffered multiple rapes can ever forget the
duty to work for the protection of the vulnerable.

I would like to thank the Council and my fellow
partners for taking this historic journey together,
towards peace and justice for children.

