I thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda for her briefing. I welcome His Excellency Ambassador Taher Elsonni, Permanent Representative of Libya, to this meeting. We continue to follow closely the situation in Libya, which has seen significant progress in the past few weeks. Viet Nam warmly welcomes the permanent ceasefire agreement signed by the 5+5 Joint Military Commission on 23 October. Furthermore, we are pleased to see that the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum launched yesterday in Tunisia. We commend the tireless efforts of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya, countries and organizations of the region and other international partners in promoting the peace talks. The recent positive developments have clearly demonstrated one thing - the Libyan-led and -owned political process is the only solution for long-term peace in Libya. In that connection, Viet Nam wishes to stress the following points. First, we call on the parties in Libya to fully uphold the permanent ceasefire agreement, respect international humanitarian law and allow unhindered humanitarian access to assist those in need. The international community, including the Security Council, should support the parties in the implementation of the ceasefire agreement, as appropriate. Secondly, we urge the parties in Libya to continue to engage constructively in peace talks under the three tracks - political, security and economic - in line with resolution 2510 (2020), on the Berlin Conference on Libya. The substantive outcome of the three-track dialogues will be the key to achieving sustainable peace and stability in Libya. It is also crucial for all sides, inside and outside of Libya, to fully uphold the arms embargo, in accordance with all the relevant Security Council resolutions. Thirdly, Viet Nam reiterates our consistent position that all perpetrators of crimes must be brought to justice, but the State has the primary responsibility for the implementation of international humanitarian law and the prevention and suppression of serious criminal acts, such as war crimes, crimes against humanity and crimes of aggression. The establishment of accountability for violations of international humanitarian law and serious criminal acts shall be conducted in accordance with the fundamental principles of international law, including respect for States' independence and sovereignty. In that regard, Viet Nam takes notes of the updated report of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011).
