The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Spain, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2010/l75, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation concerning
Western Sahara.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2010/216, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by France, the Russian
Federation, Spain, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of
America.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall now read out
the following revised first preambular paragraph of the
draft resolution:

"Recalling and reaffirming all its previous
resolutions on Western Sahara".

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall now read out
the following revised eighth preambular paragraph:
"Stressing the importance of making
progress on the human dimension of the conflict
as a means to promote transparency and mutual
confidence through constructive dialogue and
humanitarian confidence-building measures, and
noting the need for all parties to adhere to their
obligations, taking into account the roles and
responsibilities of the United Nations system and
the relevant paragraphs of the United Nations
Secretary-General's report".

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall now read out
the following revised operative paragraph 9:

"Decides to extend the existing mandate of
MINURSO until 30 April 2011".

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it,
as orally amended. Unless I hear any objection, I shall
proceed to put the draft resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the
voting.

