Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish at the outset to thank Ambassador Sinclair, the
representative of the Secretary-General, for his very
comprehensive briefing. I also appreciate the briefing
by the representative of Papua New Guinea.

On 29 July, Ambassador Sinclair submitted to the
Government of Papua New Guinea a report verifying
and certifying the completion of the work of stage II.
The relevant Papua New Guinea constitutional
amendment and the new organic law have begun to be
formally implemented. Implementation of the
Bougainville Peace Agreement has yielded preliminary
results, for which the Chinese Government feels
greatly encouraged.

At present, the Bougainville peace process
continues to face the task of weapons disposal in stage
III. Important work, such as establishment of a
constituent assembly to review and adopt a constitution
and the holding of elections for an autonomous
Government, will be successively carried out.

I shall discuss a few points concerning the peace
process.

First, efforts should be continued to step up the
weapons collection programme. Success in creating a
constitution and holding elections will depend upon the
success of the weapons collection programme. We
appeal to the various parties to be flexible in order to
reach a consensus on how to dispose of the weapons
already collected and to conclude the work in stage III.
This will help promote confidence among the various
parties and will increase the sense of security among
the people of Bougainville and their confidence in the
peace process.

Secondly, former combatants should be
reintegrated into society and plans should be made for
them. Weapons collection and disposal is only one
element of the security situation. Only by successfully
reintegrating the former combatants and guaranteeing
that they lead stable lives will security risks be
eliminated. China greatly appreciates the work done by
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
in this regard.

Thirdly, the United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville (UNPOB) and the Bougainville
Transition Team (BTT) should continue to play an
important role. Under the leadership of Ambassador
Sinclair, UNPOB has made positive contributions to
the peace process in Bougainville. China appreciates
and will continue to support the work of UNPOB. At
the same time, we appreciate the important role played
by the outgoing Peace Monitoring Group during its
tenure. We welcome the establishment of the BTT.

China encourages UNPOB to continue to conduct
full consultations with the Papua New Guinea
Government and the relevant parties, in order to try to
consistently promote the achievement of the various
goals provided for in the Bougainville Peace
Agreement.
