Ms. Kyung-wha Kang: I would like to thank
you in particular, Mr. President, and the Permanent
Representative of Luxembourg for giving us this
opportunity to update the Security Council on the
human rights and humanitarian situation in the Central
African Republic.

During the two months since the Arria Formula
briefing by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) Emergency Operations
Director, the humanitarian crisis in the Central African
Republic has deepened. The political system has
failed, security infrastructure has disintegrated, there
has been a complete breakdown of law and order, and
public service institutions, which were already weak
and overstretched prior to the current crisis, have
ceased functioning. Horrific atrocities continue to be
perpetrated against ordinary people in the country,
as has been so powerfully described by the previous
speaker.

More than half of the country's population -
2.5 million out of 4.6 million people - have been
affected by the crisis and are in need of assistance,
and people across the country are living in fear. More
than 900,000 people have fled their homes and are
internally displaced, including some 480,000 in the
capital, Bangui, alone. At the airport in Bangui, around
100,000 people are sleeping out in the open with little
access to basic services and very limited supplies.
Outside Bangui, thousands of people are hiding in the
forest with no aid or services, too afraid to come out.
Half of the displaced are children.

In addition to those internally displaced, some
86,000 Central Africans have fled as refugees and
sought protection in neighbouring countries over the
last year, mostly in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, but also in Chad, Cameroon and the Republic
of the Congo. This brings the total number of Central
African Republic refugees in the subregion to 246,000.
Some 28,000 third-country nationals have been
evacuated from the Central African Republic since the
crisis escalated in mid-December 2013.

We have received horrendous reports of people
being killed or injured while attempting to flee the
violence. Just a couple of days ago, a convoy carrying
mostly Muslim families being evacuated from the
village of Vakap and ultimately destined for refuge
in neighbouring Cameroon was reportedly stopped in
Bouar, northwestern Central African Republic, and
attacked by people carrying grenades and machetes. At
least 3 children and 19 adults were killed, and at least
23 people, including children, were injured.

The crisis in the Central African Republic is a top
priority for the international humanitarian community.
On 11 December 2013, we activated our highest level of
response, known as a level 3 system-wide humanitarian
emergency activation. We have reinforced humanitarian
leadership on the ground through the deployment of a
Senior Humanitarian Coordinator, Mr. Abdou Dieng.
We have also sent our most experienced and skilled
staff, released emergency funds and mobilized relief
supplies and pipelines. The Inter-Agency Standing
Committee principals met twice this month to take
stock of the situation and identity areas needing urgent
attention. OCHA's Emergency Operations Director
was back in the country just last week to meet with
humanitarian partners and communities affected by the
cr1s1s.

On the ground, non-governmental organization
partners and the staff of humanitarian United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes are working closely
with civil society and religious leaders from all
communities to deliver assistance in a very dangerous
and unpredictable environment. The World Food
Programme has mobilized food for around 315,000
people in December and January. Me'decins Sans
Frontieres is leading medical assistance. The Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
has provided crucial relief items, including blankets
and mattresses, for some 20,000 people this month,
and thousands more will receive relief in the coming
days. UNICEF and the World Health Organization have
supported the Ministry of Health and other partners
to vaccinate some 72,500 children at 17 sites this
month. The International Organization for Migration
is monitoring displacement and airlifting thousands of
stranded migrants from the Central African Republic
with priority attention given to the most vulnerable,
such as those needing medical attention.

One of our main challenges to date has been the
international community's chronic underfunding of the
crisis. Last week, we revised the humanitarian appeal,
taking into account the rapidly deteriorating situation.
We now require over $551 million for our response in
2014.

On that point we have good news. At the High-Level
Meeting on Humanitarian Action in the Central African
Republic, which was co-chaired in Brussels on Monday
by the Emergency Relief Coordinator, Ms. Valerie
Amos, and the European Union Commissioner for
International Cooperation, Humanitarian Aid and
Crisis Response, Ms. Kristalina Georgieva, Member
States generously pledged over $200 million for
humanitarian assistance and an additional $280 million
for development and long-term reconstruction.
Those very welcome pledges will allow us to provide
life-saving food, drinking water, shelter and health care
for the next few months. However, we need much more.

Humanitarian assistance cannot solve the situation
in the Central African Republic. The collapsing State,
after years of neglect and failure by the international
community to heed the warning signs of a looming
crisis, cannotbe shored up with humanitarian assistance.
Security and stability must be urgently restored.

The ongoing deployment of the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic, supported by French troops, has had a
positive effect in the areas where it is operating, and the
political developments over the past week, including
the designation of a new interim President and the
agreement of the European Union to deploy troops,
have given people in the Central African Republic
hope. However, they remain fearful and sceptical in the
light of the horror that they have seen and endured. The
international community must consider all options for
re-establishing security.

The international response must also build stronger
and more resilient communities in the Central African
Republic. We need to look beyond today and take
immediate action to restore livelihoods, preserve
community support structures and strengthen local
economies in order to provide a foundation for early
recovery and long-term development.

The root causes of the conflict, including lack of
effective, inclusive and efficient governance institutions,
poor management and distribution of access to natural
resources, including diamonds, fragile social cohesion
and deep-seated feelings of marginalization must be
urgently addressed. We need to support civil society,
religious leaders and local communities as they strive
to heal the wounds of violent conflict, rebuild social
cohesion, stabilize communities and reduce sectarian
violence, including through interfaith dialogue.
Community reconciliation is crucial to protecting the
internally displaced people in the Central African
Republic.

We have already seen the human cost of the
international community's neglect of the Central
African Republic. We need to act urgently.

