Mr. Haneda (Japan): Since the Security Council
met for its open debate on this item last week, there
have been various international efforts to improve the
situation in the Middle East, the most important of
which was the visit of United States Secretary of State
Colin Powell. We support and appreciate the efforts he
made with both parties to establish a ceasefire under
extremely difficult conditions. While the cycle of
violence seems to have eased, at least for the time
being, the situation on the ground unfortunately shows
little sign of improvement. Many Palestinian and
Israeli casualties have been reported since the
Council's last open debate.

We are especially concerned at the humanitarian
situation in Palestinian cities. According to the United
Nations relief mission dispatched to the Jenin camp
two days ago, the situation there is catastrophic, with
people in desperate need of food and water. In his
statement before the Council this morning, Secretary-
General Kofi Annan quoted United Nations staff
members who described the situation as horrific. The
Government of Japan calls upon Israel to grant
international humanitarian agencies full and free access
to Palestinian cities so that they can carry out their
activities. Moreover, we hope that the visit to the
region by the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, Mary Robinson, will take place as
planned.

Efforts to restore calm to the situation must
continue. Secretary of State Powell made it clear that
the United States would continue working for the
realization of a ceasefire. The Government of Japan
strongly supports the continued engagement by the
United States and will extend all possible cooperation
to its efforts. In that connection, the Government of
Japan urges both the Government of Israel and the
Palestinian Authority to respond positively to the
efforts of the United States, and to take decisive action
to bring about a ceasefire and to resume the peace
process.

We call once again upon both parties immediately
to implement relevant Security Council resolutions,
particularly resolution 1402 (2002). We urge Israel to
withdraw its troops from Palestinian cities, including
Ramallah, where the headquarters of Chairman Arafat
are located. Holding Chairman Arafat, the legitimate
leader of the Palestinian people, under siege is
counterproductive and must be ended at once. We note
the anti-terrorism statement made by Chairman Arafat
last Sunday. We sincerely hope that it will be followed
through with concrete action.

The situation along the Blue Line is another area
of concern. The Government of Japan calls on all
parties to respect the Blue Line and to show the utmost
restraint to avoid an escalation of violence in that area.

Various constructive ideas and initiatives to
promote peace have been put forward, including the
proposal that the Secretary-General presented to the
Council this morning. The international community
should continue to discuss those ideas and initiatives
with a view to improving the situation. Japan, for its
part, is determined to extend all possible assistance to
such efforts.

