Mr. Shcherbak (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Deputy Secretary-General Migiro;
Mr. Antonio Maria Costa, Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime; Mr. Sergio
de Queiroz Duarte, High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs; and Mr. Louis Sylvain-Goma for
their substantive briefings.

The Russian Federation has consistently
supported enhancing the role of the United Nations in
coordinating the efforts of the international community
to address the problems of the illicit traffic in arms, in
particular small arms and light weapons. Today's
meeting highlights the Security Council's interest in
supporting the efforts of Member States to develop
overall approaches to combating the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons throughout the world. Of
course, priority in this context should be given to those
regions where the problem of illicit arms trafficking is
particular acute.

My delegation thanks the Gabonese delegation
for organizing today's debate, since the illicit arms
trade is a major destabilizing factor for Central Africa.
First of all, this concerns those countries in the
subregion where there are ongoing threats to peace and
stability. That situation appears to be further
deteriorating because of the actions of armed groups
using well-oiled channels for obtaining small arms and
light weapons. This was mentioned in the briefings of
our colleagues.

Russia has always supported robust measures in
any circumstance in which weapons are supplied to
illegal armed groups. The Security Council's arms
embargos are, of course, a major tool in eradicating
illegal supplies of weapons to conflict zones. To ensure
the full effectiveness of such prohibitions, they must be
steadfastly respected by all States. We express our
support for individual and collective measures by
countries of the region to combat the illicit trafficking
in small arms and light weapons.

The Russian Federation has always stressed the
importance of mobilizing activities in this area, not
only at the international level, but also nationally and
regionally.

In that regard, we welcome the implementation of
the Sao Tome Initiative by the Central African States
and the consideration, in the context of the ministerial
meeting of the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa of

the draft legally binding instrument on the control of
small arms and light weapons in Central Africa, their
ammunitions and all equipments that might be used in
their manufacture. We believe that the adoption of that
instrument would enable the countries of the subregion
to further strengthen their efforts to combat the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons.

Efforts to address the issue of attempts to
illegally supply of small arms and light weapons to
conflict zones, in particular in Africa, and to eradicate
the threat that such supplies pose to the stability of
post-conflict countries are seriously hindered by the
absence of a unified approach by the international
community to counteract the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons. We believe that all efforts to
address that scourge should be based on the relevant
United Nations Programme of Action. We are
convinced that it continues to be effective, and we
should realize its full potential.

In that context, we look forward to the successful
holding of the Fourth Biennial Meeting of States to
Consider the Implementation of the Programme of
Action in June. We also consider it important for all
States, in particular those of Central Africa, to
implement the International Instrument to Enable
States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable
Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons.

The Russian delegation appeals to the countries
of Central Africa region to continue to pay close
attention to the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. Clearly, if that problem is not resolved, it
will be impossible to achieve the full settlement of
ongoing conflicts or to guarantee security, stability and
sustainable development.

In conclusion, I would like to say that the Russian
Federation supports the draft presidential statement on
this issue, prepared by the delegation of Gabon.

