Mrs. Carrion (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, let me thank the Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Wane, for his briefing
on the special report (S/2017/437) of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission and the Secretary-
General of the United Nations on the strategic review
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) .

Uruguay notes the report's indication that hostilities
between the Government of the Sudan and rebel forces
have decreased considerably in recent months, and that
the regional climate has improved as a result of greater
cooperation with the Central African Republic, Chad
and Uganda. It should be noted, however, that one of the
main sources of violence persisting in Darfur remains
conflicts between communities, which are closely
related to the root causes ofthe conflict and exacerbated
by armed militias, as well as by the fact that weapons
are widespread among the civilian population and that
the institutions of the rule of law do not yet have the
necessary capacity or effectiveness to overcome such
obstacles.
Yesterday, the Security Council convened to
discuss mine action and the mitigation of the threat
of explosive devices (see S/PV.7966). Today, We
are addressing conflict in which former battlefields
remain contaminated by remnants of war explosives,
particularly in Jebel Marra. The Government of the
Sudan and the international community must work
together to remove all artifacts of war and thereby
guarantee the inhabitants the possibility of safe transit
throughout their territory.

We are encouraged by the general improvement
of the security situation and by recent political
developments in the context of the national dialogue.
In that regard, we consider it essential that the
Government of the Sudan and the armed movements
continue to work towards signing and implementing
an agreement on a cessation of hostilities and the
full implementation of the remaining provisions of
the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. Progress in
those areas would undoubtedly create the conditions
necessary to effectively addressing the root causes of
conflict and contribute to the safe return of more than
2.5 million internally displaced persons from Darfur to
their homes.

With respect to UNAMID, Uruguay takes note of the
strategic review conducted by a joint team of the African
Union and the United Nations, which includes proposals
for adjustments to the Mission, taking into account the
evolution of the situation on the ground and adjusting
the Mission's mandate to the remaining challenges. In
this regard, we support the recommendations relating
to the Mission's priority tasks, namely, the protection
of civilians and the facilitation of humanitarian access,
support for the political process, in cooperation with
the African Union, and support for addressing the root
causes of conflict.

In conclusion, let me express Uruguay's gratitude
to all UNAMID personnel, the United Nations country
team and the humanitarian workers who continue to
work tirelessly, often in difficult conditions, to achieve
sustainable peace in Darfur.

