Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I would like to thank
today's invitees for their insightful, thought-provoking
and detailed briefings.

As we heard earlier today, Lithuania also welcomes
this once-a-year opportunity to hear from United
Nations Force Commanders about the most pressing
challenges in today's peacekeeping. Given the changing
peacekeeping environment and the ever more complex
challenges that peacekeepers face, an exchange of this
kind once a year is the very least we can do. Let me
take this opportunity to express our appreciation to
all of the Force Commanders, whose sound judgment
and decisions under increasing fire are critical for the
successful implementation of mandates, as well as
for the lives of peacekeepers and those they serve to
protect.

The primary responsibility to protect civilians,
as we often say, rests with the national Governments.
However, as seen in various crises, there is often a tragic
lack of the national capacity needed to protect one's
own populations, and at times even a lack of political
will. The protection of civilians under imminent threat
therefore remains a key priority for peacekeeping
missions. Mission leadership is crucial, as it must
ensure that the protection of civilians, including women
and children, is considered an essential task by the
mission as a whole. That is a key element of the "one
mandate, one mission, one force" approach, which we
strongly support.

In the current environment, a static presence is far
from sufficient; peacekeeping has progressed along a
much more kinetic line. Peacekeepers must be ready to
demonstrate their willingness and the courage to act in
a proactive manner - to fight insecurity and protect
civilian lives and themselves. Within the mission, all
must be fully committed to the mandate, prepared and
ready to defend it by force if necessary. Implementing
protection mandates requires clear focus, improved
situational awareness, intelligence and analysis,
adequate structures, logistics and materiel, training
and resources.
In South Sudan, the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) took an extraordinary step
to accommodate thousands of internally displaced
persons at its sites, saving countless lives. However,
acknowledge the challenges such a step poses to
the Mission. As a political solution remains distant,
the numbers of those in need of protection can only
keep growing. All parts of the United Nations should
work together to find suitable solutions to address the
situation. Closer interaction with local populations, as
some of the Force Commanders noted earlier today, and
better cooperation with the Government of South Sudan
are required, especially when it comes to securing a
safe environment to facilitate the voluntary return of
internally displaced persons. However, continuous
violations of the status of forces agreement do not help
and are a cause of serious concern.

In that context, I would like to inquire whether
Force Commander Tesfamariam could elaborate on the
practical impact of such violations on the protection
mandate and on the Mission's own provisions and
supplies. Other questions to the Force Commander
would be: To what extent would an arms embargo
help UNMISS in its task to protect civilians? How
do peacekeepers themselves feel in that complex
environment? What measures have been taken to ensure
their safety under the current circumstances? What is
the perception of the operating climate in terms of the
Mission, at present?

Turning to operations in an asymmetric environment,
it is important to recognize that a number of countries
hosting United Nations peacekeeping operations are
countries where the levels of threats from militant and
terrorist groups are among the highest. The United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) is one of the missions
that is operating in an exceptionally challenging
environment, where local populations seem to expect it
to substitute for the Government and provide services
for which the Government is responsible, while at
the same time they are interpreting its role as biased
in favour of one or another side to the conflict. All
of that is taking place in the presence of a persistent
terrorist threat and growing interconnections between
trans-border organized crime, terrorist networks and
traffickers - as a result, MINUSMA has become one
of the deadliest missions.

Attacks on peacekeeping personnel in Mali
have taken a significant toll on the Mission's efforts:
28 peacekeepers have lost their lives. We pay our
respects to all of those that have lost their lives in that
noble Mission.
The recent mine attack of 28 May in the region
of Tombouctou on the MINUSMA convoy in which
the Force Commander and Police Commissioner were
travelling is yet another reminder that the Mission has
become a primary target of attacks by extremist groups.
In our view, the lack of accountability in that case, as in
many others involving the deaths of peacekeepers, has
certainly become a big challenge.

With regard to the operational environment, the
Force Commander has spoken about the importance
of intelligence gathering and better intelligence
analysis. We can only concur with that, and on the
use and importance of adequate modern technologies
in operations in ensuring a safer environment and
facilitating preparations for the adequate protection of
civilians.

As another delegation has already asked, we too
would like to know how the Security Council could
better enable Force Commanders to lead and command
their forces. What are the current command and control
structures, and are they flexible enough to operate in
a highly dynamic threat environment? What else can
we do, as Council members, to facilitate the work of
the Force Commanders? What training and additional
equipment would be most needed? If one had to indicate
one item, what would it be? What additional measures
must be considered to ensure the protection of the force
itself? Is the increase in the ceiling of the missions
under the current circumstances sufficient? Would an
additional increase be necessary?

Finally, on national caveats, the safety and security
of peacekeepers is, and must remain, among the top
United Nations priorities, as well as one of the key
factors for troop- and police-contributing countries to
continue providing the forces necessary in the field.
In a rapidly changing security environment, even
long-functioning traditional peacekeeping missions
are facing asymmetric and unconventional threats.
Countries therefore resort to using caveats to minimize
the risks to their contingents. As has been described
before and as the information note indicates, that
practice may become a challenge to command and
control, and hence to mission performance, and is of
course of concern to Force Commanders.

In that respect, mutual commitments between the
United Nations and the troop-contributing countries
are necessary. The United Nations must ensure that the
utmost will be done to ensure safe and secure mandate
implementation, as well as the safety and security of
peacekeepers. We in the Council must support those
efforts by ensuring that missions are adequately supplied
and trained and that accountability for attacks against
United Nations personnel is pursued with all due vigour.
At the same time, the troop-contributing countries
should recognize the need for efforts to flexibly adjust
a mission's posture and tasks in an environment that is
evolving daily, as well as the growing need for robust
peacekeeping operations that are a departure from the
long-standing static peacekeeping tradition. That issue
is naturally linked to the peacekeeping operations
review process and should be further discussed in the
light of the new report and recommendations by the
High-Level Independent Panel on Peace Operations.

Lastly, many delegations have spoken about
accountability for sexual crimes and a zero-tolerance
policy regarding sexual crimes without regard to
the perpetrator. Certainly, my delegation adds its
voice to all of those concerns expressed and calls for
accountability and strict implementation of the zero-
tolerance policy.

