Mr. Feltman: The conflict in Ukraine will
soon enter its fourth year. Since the Department of
Political Affairs last briefed the Security Council on
the situation in eastern Ukraine, on 28 April 2016
(see S/PV.7683), fighting has continued unabated,
with only short periods of respite. Almost 10,000
people have been killed - Ukrainian armed forces,
civilians and members of armed groups - and more
than 23,000 have been injured since the beginning of
the conflict, according to the human rights Special
Monitoring Mission in Ukraine; over 2,000 of those
killed were civilians.

Since 7 January, and in particular over the past
few days, we have seen a dangerous intensification
of the conflict. On 1 February, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Special
Monitoring Mission reported over 10,000 explosions in
the Donetsk region over 24 hours, the highest number
of violations yet recorded by the Mission. While the
most serious clashes in the past few days predominantly
hit the Avdiivka, Yasnuvata and Donetsk airport areas,
heavy fighting has also been reported near Mariupol,
Popasna and the Svitlodarsk/Debeltseve areas, both
in Government- and non-Government-controlled
territories. The entire length of the contact line has
seen a serious escalation of hostilities, and there is still
a risk of further deterioration of the situation.

The OSCE Special Monitoring Mission has also
registered frequent use of heavy weapons proscribed
by the Minsk agreements, such as multiple launch
rocket systems, including in the areas designated for
disengagement, as per the 21 September 2016 framework
decision of the Trilateral Contact Group relating to
the disengagement of forces and hardware. There are
reports of civilian casualties, including at least four
deaths since the escalation on 28 January, and heavy
losses among combatants on both sides. The human
rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine also recorded
damage to civilian houses and a school in populated
areas of Avdiivka, which raises serious concerns about
possible violations of international humanitarian law
by all sides.

There are now reports of clashes that are directly
endangering civilian crossing points, residential
areas and critical civilian infrastructure, such as
water purification plants and delivery systems, power
lines and heating supply lines. Ensuring the urgent
disengagement of forces at all checkpoints across the
contact line would greatly improve the security of
the population in the conflict-affected areas, where
more than 20,000 people cross the contact line daily.
Hundreds of thousands of civilians on both sides of
the contact line are still at risk of losing all access to
heating, water and electricity, bringing the spectre
of further displacement closer. That is particularly
worrying given the frigid winter temperatures in the
region at present.

There are also real threats of serious environmental
disasters should any of the major chemical-waste
storage locations in the area be shelled. As ofyesterday,
thousands of inhabitants in Avdiivka, including
children, were reportedly at risk of being evacuated.
The combatants must stop the shelling in cities such as
Avdiivka, on both sides of the contact line, and enable
basic services to be restored. The Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Stephen
O'Brien, will shortly provide further updates on the
humanitarian situation on the ground.

We welcome the prompt statement (SC/ 12700)
issued by the Security Council on 31 January on the
deterioration of the situation in the Donetsk region. The
Secretary-General has expressed deep concern about
the high level of military readiness and the recently
intensified fighting, which is having an increasingly
serious impact on the civilian population in the
conflict areas. He has called on all parties to halt all
hostilities immediately, fully observe the ceasefire,
allow immediate and unhindered humanitarian access
to the affected population, facilitate full and safe access
for the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission so that it
can report on the situation on the ground, and renew
serious efforts to reach a peaceful settlement of the
conflict. He particularly underlines how imperative it
is that all sides take every possible measure to protect
civilians and refrain from any action that could be seen
as provocative or might escalate tensions.

In just a few days, the intensity of the hostilities
around the Avdiivka-Yasnuvota-Donetsk airport areas
has risen to levels that the Special Monitoring Mission
has never before recorded in the area. The escalation
demonstrates how precarious the situation continues to
be and how suddenly and abruptly the security situation
can deteriorate. The statement agreed on at yesterday's
meeting in Minsk between the Trilateral Contact Group
and representatives from various areas of the Donetsk
and Luhansk regions lays down the urgent measures the
sides should take, not only in the area under discussion
but along the entire contact line, in order to prevent
further ceasefire violations that could in turn spiral
out of control. That is a positive development, but the
test will be in the implementation of the measures. The
pattern of successive ceasefire agreements broken by
fresh violence has left civilians caught in the crossfire
and trapped in suffering. With every new day of
fighting, the conflict becomes more entrenched and
more difficult to resolve. There is no military solution
to this conflict.
Despite the commendable efforts of the Trilateral
Contact Group and the Normandy four, the recent
intensification of the conflict coincides with a period
of relative stagnation in the diplomatic processes
designed to find a peaceful solution and ensure the
full implementation of the Minsk agreements. The
international community must remain constructively
and actively engaged, however, if we are to prevent
this crisis from becoming a catastrophe. In that regard,
there is a pressing need to revitalize the negotiation
process without delay.

The United Nations continues to strongly support
the efforts being made in the Normandy four and
Trilateral Contact Group frameworks and of the
OSCE chairship in Ukraine. We commend the work
of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission, which is
carrying out essential work under extremely difficult
circumstances in the conflict areas. The United Nations
calls on both sides to lift all restrictions on the Special
Monitoring Mission's freedom of movement and to
immediately end all use of force or threats against the
Mission's monitors. We welcomed the January visits of
Mr. Sebastian Kurz, OSCE Chairperson-in-Office and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Austria, to Ukraine and
the Russian Federation, and hope that his engagement,
along with other ongoing efforts, will bear fruit. The
United Nations stands ready to support those efforts.
I look forward to hearing today from Ambassador
Apakan, ChiefMonitor ofthe OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine, about his assessment of the latest
developments the ground.

It has been almost two years since 12 February 2015,
when the package of measures for the implementation
of the Minsk agreements was signed in Minsk, and in
turn endorsed by the Security Council's adoption, on
17 February, of resolution 2202 (2015). That remains
the foundation based on which we, the international
community, have committed to seeking lasting peace
in eastern Ukraine. I urge the Council to continue those
efforts with renewed vigour.

In accordance with the relevant Security Council
and General Assembly resolutions, the United Nations
remains committed to supporting a peaceful resolution
of the conflict in a manner that fully upholds the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence
of Ukraine. The United Nations priority continues to
be on supporting the peace efforts in Ukraine led by
the OSCE and ensuring the full implementation of the
Minsk agreements. The parties themselves, however,
have the main responsibility to work constructively to
that end.

