Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like, at the outset, to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I am confident that your wisdom will
serve to steer the Council towards achieving the best
possible results.

Allow me to also thank Mr. Moreno-Ocampo,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for his important briefing. I would like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute to the efforts he and his team
have made as part of the ICC's mandate to achieve
justice and put an end to human rights violations and
impunity. I would also like to commend his
professionalism, which has helped Libyan authorities
to make progress towards achieving justice and putting
an end to impunity, which are the overarching goals
that our authorities are striving to achieve,
notwithstanding the grave challenges they face.

Furthermore, I would like to commend the
intervention of the ICC in Libya at the height of the
acts of suppression and murder that the Libyan people

were subjected to, including its issuance of arrest
warrants. Those efforts have strengthened the Libyan
people's resolve to put an end to the crimes committed
by the tyrant Al-Qadhafi and have served as an
important step towards upholding the right to
protection by combating impunity.

On 17 February 2011, the Libyan people rose up
against the Al-Qadhafi regime in order to restore their
rights and dignity and to achieve justice for all citizens
after long decades of injustice, human rights violations
and infringements of fundamental freedoms. Following
the success of the revolution, Libyan authorities are
aware of the importance of achieving justice and of
building a new and democratic State. Moreover, they
are aware of the close links among justice, human
rights, national reconciliation, security and
development. They therefore count justice among the
top priorities and have undertaken the necessary
judicial reforms, including adopting a law on the
separation of powers between the executive and
judicial branches, in accordance with the Constitutional
Declaration and the principle of the independence of
the judiciary. In addition, special courts were abolished
and the judicial system was freed of corrupt judges. We
can now safely say that the legal system is based on
new foundations and is now ready to carry out fair and
impartial trials that meet international standards.

The Libyan authorities have cooperated with the
ICC and have provided it with witnesses and evidence,
on the basis of which it issued arrest warrants against
Muammar Al-Qadhafi, Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and
Abdullah Al-Senussi. Both the Libyan Government and
people appreciate the significant role that the Court can
play in the absence of an effective national judiciary.

Libya has not taken any negative stand with
regard to the Court, at either the official or the public
level. However, the status quo on the ground has
changed. It is therefore incumbent upon the Libyan
Government to take that into account, in particular with
regard to the following.

First, Libya's national judicial system has been
reformed and is now ready to conduct transparent and
fair trials that meet all safeguards provided for in
international law, including the provision of defence
counsel and the presence of international monitors and
observers. Secondly, the internal situation in Libya is
highly sensitive, and there is unanimous agreement
among the Libyan people on prosecuting senior
officials of the former Libyan regime. Thirdly, Libya is
not a party to the Rome Statute. The primary
responsibility for addressing major crimes therefore
falls to the national judiciary. In accordance with the
Rome Statute, the role of the ICC is only
complementary to that of the national judiciary.
Fourthly, the ultimate purpose of trials is to achieve
justice in accordance with internationally agreed
principles and standards, irrespective of the venue of
the trials or of who the judges are. Fifthly, on
8 January, the Libyan Prosecutor examined the serious
crimes allegedly committed by Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi. Moreover, the Military Prosecutor in
Libya will further investigate the charges against
Abdullah Al-Senussi.

In line with the points that I have just
enumerated, on 1 May, the Libyan Government issued
a request to the ICC contesting its hearing of the case
of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi, in accordance with
paragraph 2(b) of article 19 of the Rome Statute. The
request asserted that the case was inadmissible owing
to the fact that the Libyan judiciary was actively
investigating the case and attempting to further clarify
the criminal responsibility regarding the accusations
against Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah
Al-Senussi. The charges pertained to crimes against
humanity committed through large-scale attacks on
Libyan civilians, including crimes committed before
and after 15 February 2011.

Such a request only serves to underscore the fact
that Libya's judicial authorities are adamant that the
trials should be carried out in Libya. The trial
documents, as well as the defendant and witness
statements, are part of Libya's history. All Libyans are
therefore eager that the trials should take place in
Libya. The Libyan authorities look forward to
receiving further support and cooperation from the
Security Council and the ICC in order to hold the trials
in Libya in accordance with international standards.

In that regard, I would also point out the concern
expressed by some representatives with regard to Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi not having a defence lawyer. I
would like to assure the Council and others that Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi will have a lawyer, since Libyan
law does not permit the trial of any defendant in a
criminal case without the presence of one. That issue is
primarily up to Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi, who, to date,
has refused to appoint a lawyer to defend him. The
matter is therefore in the hands not of the Libyan

authorities, but of the defendant himself. However,
there are no impediments to employing a lawyer to
defend him.

With regard to the high number of detainees
suspected of having committed crimes and the
difficulty of trying all cases simultaneously, the Libyan
judicial authorities decided to follow the provisions of
the policy paper issued by the Office of the Prosecutor
of the ICC, which stipulates the following:

"As a general rule, the Office of the Prosecutor
shall focus its resources of its investigative and
prosecutorial efforts and resources on those who
bear the greatest responsibility, such as the
leaders of the State or organization allegedly
responsible for those crimes."

In the first phase the investigations and trials will focus
on Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi,
as well as a number of political and security leaders,
for example, Baghdadi Ali Al-Mahmoudi and
Al-Tuhami Khaled, given the high level of the
planning, organization and instigation associated with
the crimes. As for the other cases, they will be dealt
with through an integrated plan for transitional justice
in a manner that will ensure that justice is served,
impunity ended and national reconciliation, stability
and social peace established.

The Libyan judicial authorities are aware of the
importance of investigating the allegations that rebel
forces committed torture and crimes against detainees,
and will deal with them appropriately, bearing in mind
the circumstances that prevailed at the time and their
responsibility to respect human rights and avoid the
practices of the former regime of the tyrant Al-Qadhafi,
under which crimes committed by his forces and
security people were allowed to occur with impunity.

As for the allegations about crimes committed
against civilians by NATO forces in Libya, the Libyan
authorities are firmly convinced that the strategies
employed by the NATO leaders were designed merely
to protect civilians from the violence aimed at them by
the tyrant Al-Qadhafi's forces. Nevertheless,
preliminary investigations have shown that some
mistakes were made, as a result of which some
civilians were killed. These, however, were the kind of
errors that happen in all wars. According to statements
and accounts by our military experts, there were fewer
such errors than was expected, considering that in the
last month of the revolution the tyrant Al-Qadhafi was
anxious to defend his leadership strongholds,
especially in civilian areas and residential
communities.

In all such cases, the Libyan authorities will
further investigate individual incidents, which may rely
on the cooperation of the NATO member States
concerned if the need arises. When the investigations
are completed, the Libyan authorities will take all
necessary measures, including possibly providing
compensation for those harmed. Overall, the Libyan
national and local authorities intend to account for all
who were killed or adversely affected during the
revolution in order to learn more about the
circumstances of their deaths or injuries and their
whereabouts, irrespective of the side they were fighting
on or whether they were civilians who had nothing to
do with the fighting. Ultimately, the fate of all sons and
daughters of Libya is an integral part of the country's
history. The authorities and civil society organizations
12-34157
are therefore eager to record that history accurately and
to address its consequences in a way that will secure
the unity of the Libyan people and encourage them to
overcome the past and focus on the future.

In conclusion, I would like to affirm that the
Libyan authorities continue to make progress in
controlling and monitoring the detention centres. They
intend to transfer authority over all the detention
centres to the central Government by the end of the
year, the same deadline as that for dissolving all armed
forces, so that the national army and police will take
over the duties that the rebels are still currently
carrying out.

