Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I would
like to welcome His Excellency Mr. Nikola Spiric',
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, back to the Council and thank him for his
comments.
Let me also welcome High Representative
Valentin Inzko, thank him for his comprehensive
briefing and express our gratitude for his dedication
and hard work. The United States fully supports the
actions taken by the High Representative to implement
the Dayton Peace Agreement.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has made extraordinary
progress in the years since the war that tore the country
apart in the early 1990s and caused such suffering for
all its people. Since the signing of the Peace
Agreement 14 years ago, Bosnians have worked hard
to rebuild their economy and infrastructure and have
begun the long, difficult process of reconciliation.

The country has assumed its obligations as a
responsible member of the international community. It
has dedicated itself to playing a constructive role in the
region and in the world. NATO members have
welcomed it into the Partnership for Peace, and Bosnia
and Herzegovina has signed a Stabilization and
Association Agreement with the European Union (EU).
At the United Nations, we are proud to sit on the
Human Rights Council with Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and we look forward to welcoming it to the Security
Council in January.

The United States is committed to helping the
Bosnian people achieve their aspirations to become
members of the EU and NATO. In that spirit, the
United States and the European Union have engaged
with party leaders, civil society representatives and
Parliamentary committees in Bosnia and Herzegovina
in what has become known as the Butmir process, so
named since meetings of those groups took place at the
military base outside of Sarajevo that has served as the
headquarters of international peacekeepers since the
days of the Multinational Military Implementation
Force.

The Butmir process is an effort to help Bosnian
leaders not only resolve the remaining issues in the
5-1-2 agenda set by the Peace Implementation Council
for closure of the Office of the High Representative,
but also to reform the Bosnian Constitution within the
Dayton framework so that the State can advance
towards joining the European Union and NATO.

For all the distance that Bosnia and Herzegovina
has come, several aspects of the High Representative's
report (S/2009/588*) are indeed troubling.

First, we are greatly concerned that very limited
progress has been made towards meeting the
outstanding requirements that the Peace
Implementation Council set for the transition from the
Office of the High Representative to an enhanced
European Union Special Representative mission. We
are similarly troubled by the lack of progress on the
priorities and conditions required for Euro-Atlantic
integration.

Secondly, Bosnia and Herzegovina has witnessed
a sharp and dangerous increase in nationalist political
rhetoric that could stir up anger and resentment and
undermine the very State institutions that must be
strengthened if the country is to meet the challenges of
the twenty-first century. Such divisive and aggressive
rhetoric is particularly troubling as the campaign
season for the October 2010 presidential and
parliamentary elections approaches.

Thirdly, the High Representative has noted that
war crimes prosecutions and reform of the judicial
sector have suffered due the inability of leaders to
reach political decisions that advance national goals.
We agree with the highest State-level judicial and
prosecutorial officials that the mandates of
international judges and prosecutors in the war crimes
and organized crime chambers of the State Court and
the Prosecutor's Office should be extended past
December. Extending the mandates of those
international officials is critical to the successful
completion of related investigations. The practical,
political and budgetary preconditions that would let
that vital work continue without international
assistance are not yet in place.

Fourthly and finally, we are deeply concerned
about the lack of support for the authority of the Office
of the High Representative. Let me state once again
that the United States continues to fully support the
High Representative and his work. We look forward to
the day when the Office can make the transition to an
enhanced European Union special representative
mission. But first, the agreed-upon reform agenda, the
five objectives and the two conditions must be
completed. A successful transition will require action
and support from all Bosnians, including the country's
leaders.
As the High Representative points out, Bosnian
leaders have taken some positive steps recently,
including the adoption of legislation that will help
fulfil the conditions necessary for visa-free travel
within the European Union and steps towards resolving
issues among the entities that had threatened the State
electricity transmission company, Transco.

Finally, let me note the one-year extension of the
mandate of the European Union peacekeeping
(EUFOR), which the Council adopted last week
through resolution 1895 (2009). As High
Representative Inzko has pointed out, EUFOR plays a
key role in contributing to a safe and secure
environment. We believe that EUFOR should remain in
its current executive mandate and configuration for the
time being.

The United States remains fully committed to
supporting peace and stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and to supporting that country's greater
integration into Euro-Atlantic structures. We stand
ready to assist the Bosnian people in these efforts.

