Mr. Aldouri (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my appreciation to the
permanent and non-permanent members of the Security
Council for their efforts aimed at reaching a peaceful
resolution to the current crisis, which was created by
the United States, the United Kingdom and Spain, with
the intention of launching a hostile war against Iraq
and occupying it under the pretext of the presence in
Iraq of weapons of mass destruction. I would also like
to express my gratitude to the Secretary-General for the
sincere and peaceful efforts he has made, and continues
to make. We hope that he will be able to continue with
those efforts.

We have heard three or four discordant voices
calling for war in the course of many meetings in this
Chamber. At the same time, many other voices -
responding to the international community and human
conscience, as well as to the principles of truth, justice
and the Charter of the United Nations - have called
for peace.

For the record, and for the sake of historical
accuracy, as well as to reassure every State that has
recently made active efforts to maintain peace and to
prevent war, we would like to reiterate that Iraq no
longer possesses weapons of mass destruction. The
presence of such weapons has been relegated to the
past. Iraq decided in 1991 to destroy the weapons it
had produced. That action stemmed from the
conviction underlying Iraq's policy to rid itself of such
weapons. Proof of this fact lies in the failure by the
United States and Britain to prove any allegation that
Iraq has possessed such weapons in recent years, and
especially during the period following the adoption of
resolution 1441 (2002).

I would sincerely like to thank international
inspectors for the relentless efforts they have made. I
would also like to thank Mr. Blix and Mr. Elbaradei for
their distinguished work, which has been characterized
by neutrality and objectivity.

With regard to weapons of mass destruction, I
would like to say that the inspectors have refuted all
the misleading information that was presented by the
United States and Britain. They proved that
information to be false, including the information that
the Secretary of State of the United States worked so
arduously to put before the Council as damning
evidence. After the failure of those two countries to
provide even a shred of evidence, and after they
realized that the world was beginning to understand the
truth, namely, that Iraq was free of weapons of mass
destruction, those countries decided to expose their real
goals and intentions, that is, to occupy Iraq and to
control its oil wells. That is the only truth; no other
exists. The coming days will prove the reality of that
truth. But by then it will be too late.
I do not wish to dwell in detail on the report of
Mr. Blix that is before the Council, which pertains to
the main disarmament tasks. Suffice it to say that Iraq
had been requesting that report for a long time. Iraq put
forth quite a bit of advanced information within the
context of the tasks being discussed by the Council
today. Iraq therefore welcomes the report, and will do
its utmost to complete those tasks as soon as possible
and to answer every question raised in the report. In a
telephone conversation I had this morning with General
Amer Al-Saadi, who is the person in Iraq responsible
for this issue, I was told that Iraq had finalized two
important reports that it plans to hand over to the
United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC). The first report, which runs
about 80 pages, concerns anthrax. The second, which
pertains to unmanned planes, will be delivered to
UNMOVIC as soon as we receive it from Iraq. There
are currently difficulties in communicating with the
country.

At this difficult time, I feel compelled to draw the
Council's attention to the reality of what is already a
dire humanitarian situation, which is due to an unjust
embargo maintained in particular by the United
Kingdom and the United States, and to the delay in
receiving humanitarian supplies under the oil for food
programme. That situation will further deteriorate, in
spite of the fact that the Iraqi authorities are
currently- and shall be for a reasonable period -
able to meet basic needs for food and medicine.
However, food and medicine alone are not enough.
Electricity, potable water, sewage treatment,
communications and other essential needs that cannot
be stored or distributed will be affected or, as was the
case in 1991, destroyed. That will lead to a real
humanitarian catastrophe. Human beings cannot live by
bread and medicine alone, as the United States and the
United Kingdom would wish the people of Iraq to do.
The Security Council and the Secretary-General will
therefore have a direct responsibility if war breaks out.

I do not wish to comment about what the
Permanent Representative of the United States has said
about the humanitarian situation in Iraq and about the
great generosity demonstrated by the United States of
America and the scores of millions of dollars dedicated
to saving the Iraqi people, which they do not need. The
executioner cannot help the victim, except by killing
him. That is what the United States wants for the Iraqi
people; and that is what it is working for.

The direct humanitarian effects of the military
attack will mean tens of thousands of causalities and
the complete destruction of the country's infrastructure.
I would like to recall here that the United States and
the United Kingdom have made commitments to
rebuild the infrastructure that they are about to destroy
either today or tomorrow. This is, of course, cause for
sincere joy to all. Epidemics and diseases will also
spread.

It is regrettable that this will take place at a time
when the work of all specialized United Nations
agencies in Iraq has ceased in the fields of health,
education, food relief, environmental protection and
other humanitarian activities. The personnel in those
fields have been withdrawn. We need such personnel at
a time of crisis and war, not during peacetime. The oil
for food programme has nonetheless been suspended
and its entire international staff has been withdrawn in
record time. This is truly astonishing. The decision to
withdraw the inspectors so swiftly paves the way for
the United States and the United Kingdom to carry out
acts of military aggression against Iraq much faster
than was expected.

Hence, my delegation believes that in order to
minimize the magnitude of the expected humanitarian
catastrophe - and the tens of millions of dollars so
generously offered by the United States and the United
Kingdom will not be enough to cope with it - the
Council has no choice but to renew expeditiously the
work of the oil for food programme, especially given
that delaying the agreed-upon shipment of
humanitarian goods on their way to Iraq, amounting to
more than $10 billion, will have dire consequences,
especially in areas related to food, medicine and basic
civilian needs.

In light of the imminent dangers facing Iraq, the
region and the world, I do not believe that members of
the Council and the Secretary-General need to be
reminded of their responsibilities under the Charter for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
especially in the event of a threat to or breach of peace
or an act of aggression. This is precisely what is
happening now.

The prospect of an attack against Iraq by the
United States and the United Kingdom is almost
certain. It might well occur within hours from now.
This fact should compel the Council to immediately
take the necessary steps to ensure international peace
and security, particularly after the United States, in the
words of its President, has confirmed its intention to
launch a war against and occupy Iraq, regardless of the
circumstances.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm that Iraq
will continue to work with the Security Council to
make the truth known: Iraq is free of weapons of mass
destruction. Iraq hopes that the Council will continue
to search for a peaceful solution to the crisis, ensure
that the work of the inspectors continues and resume
the oil for food programme.

