Mr. Casardi (Italy): Just a few months ago - on
10 November 1995 - the Security Council met to adopt a
resolution that recognized the new situation created in
Liberia following the Abuja peace Agreement. The
resolution pointed out the appreciable progress the Liberian
parties had recently made towards the peaceful resolution
of the conflict, including the re-establishment of a cease-fire
and an agreement on a timetable for the implementation of
the peace process, from cease-fire to election.

As we know, the Secretary-General's latest report
presents us with a very gloomy and disturbing picture of
the peace process. I must admit that one may feel
discouraged by its contents: recently there have been major
violations of the cease-fire, which have taken a tragic toll
on the African soldiers of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG). These developments, in turn, have prevented
the complete deployment of both ECOMOG and the United
Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) and
therefore substantially delayed the critical process of
disarmament and demobilization in general terms. We
would like to take this opportunity to express our deep
condolences to the families and Governments of the
soldiers that have lost their lives.

Despite these serious setbacks and the delays in the
implementation of the Abuja Agreement of August 1995,
we share the opinion of the Secretary-General that the
United Nations and the international community must
remain committed to the Liberian peace process. In spite
of all the negative circumstances in the country, there is
still an adequate degree of commitment to attaining peace.

At this particular stage, the complete cooperation of
the Liberian National Transitional Government and the
Council of State with both ECOMOG and UNOMIL is of
paramount importance. Together, they can ensure that the
Liberian factions fulfil their obligations and enable the
start of an effective disengagement of forces, which in
turn will allow the process of disarmament and
demobilization to begin.

A few months ago, a donor conference was held in
New York. We understand that the availability of
adequate financial resources for the peace process are at
this moment critical. As the Secretary-General correctly
points out, however, such support will also depend on the
establishment throughout the country of a safe and secure
environment.

The international donor community is nevertheless
strongly committed to helping the Liberian people in the
critical field of humanitarian assistance. The European
Union, both directly and through the bilateral aid of some
of its member States, is among the major providers of
relief assistance to the country.

We are convinced that steady progress in the peace
process will greatly improve the capacity of the donor
community to commit itself to the search for peace and
stability in Liberia, a goal that can be reached only if the
parties in the country show that they are truly committed
to this objective. We are ready to verify in the next few
months whether it can be fulfilled.

