Mr. Kelapile (Botswana): Mr. President, my
delegation joins others in warmly congratulating
your country, the People's Republic of China, on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of November. We particularly commend
you and your delegation for having convened this open
debate under the important theme "Peace and security
in Africa: strengthening peacekeeping operations
in Africa".

We also thank the Secretary-General and the
African Union (AU) Commissioner for Peace and
Security, His Excellency Ambassador Sma'il Chergui,
for providing invaluable insights in their briefings on
the subject matter.

At the outset, my delegation aligns itself
with the statement delivered by delegation of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

As we engage in today's debate, my delegation
joins others in paying a befitting tribute to all of the
peacekeepers deployed around the world for their
gallant efforts and commitment to sacrificing their
precious lives to achieve peace and comfort for their
fellow human beings. We have recently once again
been reminded of the unavoidable price of peace by
the regrettable loss of life of Tanzanian and Malawian
uniformed personnel in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. As we mourn their heroic demise and convey our
heartfelt condolences to their families and other loved
ones, it is incumbent upon us to ensure that their loss
and that of others before them was not in vain but will
embolden our collective resolve and focus to enhance
peace and security globally, particularly in Africa.

Despite the notable overall progress made over the
years since the old days of frequent inter-State wars,
Africa is still mired mainly in festering and active
conflicts, some of which, of course, have delicate
cross-border dimensions. This trend and the sometimes
fragile peace agreements reached unfortunately have a
great opportunity cost. Efforts to restore and rebuild
peace are without a doubt an endless drain on the already
scarce resources required to realize the socioeconomic
aspirations of our continent.

The double jeopardy situation we face is that as
a result, the African continent finds itself at cross-
roads of competing needs in simultaneously dealing
with conflict prevention, mediation, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding, in parallel with the imperative
to implement the United Nations 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the African Union's
Agenda 2063.

In that regard, my delegation wishes to reiterate
Botswana's commitment to the various initiatives
taken in that respect, which will go a long way
towards strengthening the international community's
response mechanisms in addressing issues of peace
and security, especially in Africa, including the
report of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations (see S/2015/446); the reform of the United
Nations Peacebuilding Commission; and the Secretary-
General's recent Action for Peace Initiative.

There is no doubt that United Nations peace
operations have proved to be a critical intervention
instrument in building and sustaining peace and
stability in conflict-affected areas. Important
cumulative lessons in countries such as Liberia and
Sierra Leone have shown that while a peacekeeping
mission cannot go on indefinitely, it can nonetheless
provide the countries affected a second opportunity to
re-establish peace and rebuild sustainable economies.

When interventions are better managed - through
proper phase-to-phase transitions from peacemaking
and peacekeeping to peacebuilding - the real end
result is indeed achievable. While preserving basic
principles such as consent by parties to a conflict, we
must nonetheless resist the temptation of presumed cost
savings through premature withdrawals, as history has
taught us that sometimes the cost of future redeployment
is even higher.

It is also important to note that as the Security
Council mandates the respective operations, the
Council must be mindful of the fact that while
situations may seem similar, there could be unique
characteristics in every case. In this context, close
cooperation and collaboration between the penholders
and the various key stakeholders, including the regional
blocs and potential troop-contributing countries that
may understand the situation better, must be ensured.

We agree with the recommendations arrived at by
the reports and several initiatives alluded to earlier,
but we wish to further highlight some critical areas
for reflection, particularly in relation to the effective
maintenance of peace and stability in Africa.

First, we share the view that in order to achieve
genuine and sustainable peace, the primacy of local
context and politics, as well as the underlying regional
dynamics, must be fully taken into account. Clearly,
peacekeeping contingents must support - and should
benefit from - homegrown solutions as a guarantor
for the required buy-in and future sustainability of the
peace when peacekeepers have withdrawn.

Secondly, it cannot be overemphasized that,
ultimately, the primary responsibility for absorbing
external peacekeeping assistance rests with the
national actors themselves. Apart from subsequent
ongoing long-term development and peacebuilding
support, peacekeeping is meant to be a temporary
intervention measure whereby the United Nations and
other international actors can support and facilitate
efforts in such areas as national dialogues for peace.
It is therefore within the purview of host countries'
responsibility to help address the underlying drivers of
conflict and meet the legitimate interests of their wider
populations in order to sustain peace.

Thirdly, at the local level, we believe that
peacekeeping and peacemaking processes must always
aspire to inclusive participation and to equitable
economic distribution of the peace dividend as a
pathway to building credible institutions and restoring
good governance, democracy and the rule of law,
bearing in mind the special interests of the most
vulnerable groups in our societies, such as the innocent
women and children who more often than not bear
the bigger brunt of these brutal conflicts. It is for this
reason that on the occasion of today's commemoration
of 20 November as Universal Children's Day, Botswana
has joined others who supported that noble initiative
in a letter addressed to the Secretary-General by the
Permanent Representatives of Qatar and the United
States calling for the prevention of the widespread
abduction of children in conflict and crises.

With a view to overcoming the many obstacles
to peace and security on our continent, Africa has
unquestionably demonstrated the determination needed
to provide both financial and personnel support to
peace operations. Alongside many other Non-Aligned
Movement member States, who collectively contribute
some 88 per cent of peacekeepers globally, our
delegation would like to take this opportunity to
commend our fellow African countries, especially
our now top contributor, Ethiopia, for taking this
collective responsibility seriously. But Africa and other
developing countries cannot do it alone, and it certainly
requires enhanced capabilities from the international
community. To borrow the Secretary-General's
own words,

"Enhancing African capacities is essential
both in the context of our collective response to
international peace and security challenges as well
as for the African continent's own self-reliance."
(S/PV8006, p. 2)

This statement, we believe, recognizes that African
countries and regional institutions such as the AU
currently face serious gaps in their capacity to
support their own peace operations. In that context,
it is worth recalling that the peace dividend we are
observing today in Somalia is in part the result of the
bold and unprecedented decision taken by the General
Assembly and its subsidiary Committees in 2009 to
make an exception by authorizing a United Nations-
funded support package for the African Union Mission
in Somalia. That deliberate act of true partnership
was a commendable step in providing critically
needed logistical and life support to the Ugandan and
Burundian peacekeepers who, among others, were part
of an AU-mandated mission at the time and braving a
vicious Al-Shabaab insurgency. The Somalia case is
therefore a good partnership success story, in that while
it is an exception to the rule that the United Nations
cannot provide direct financial support to operations
sanctioned by other regional bodies, similar support by
partner organizations should not be discouraged if it
can bring the desired result.

We noted with satisfaction the signing in April
2017 by the principals of the two organizations of the
Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for
an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, in
recognition of the nexus between peace and security
and development, and in January of the United Nations-
African Union Framework for the Implementation of
Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, as well as the 2017 Memorandum of
Understanding on Peacebuilding. We also welcome
partnerships such as that of the European Union with
the AU, as well as the growing bilateral collaboration
between individual member States, which will greatly
enhance the prospects for peace and security in Africa.
We see such joint efforts as indispensable to Africa's
capacity development, particularly in strengthening the
region's contribution to peace and security initiatives
on the continent. We also want to underscore and
express our appreciation for the United Nations support
to the AU Peace and Security Council initiative to
declare September of every year until 2020 to be Africa
Amnesty Month for the Surrender of Illegally Owned
Weapons and Arms, in line with the Silencing the Guns
by 2020 initiative.

Finally, the role of subregional organizations is
a very important pillar for the maintenance of peace
and security in Africa. We fully recognize the efforts
to bring peace to various parts of Africa by regional
economic communities and other entities such as the
Southern Africa Development Community (SADC), the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
the Economic Community of Central African States,
the Economic Community of West African States,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
the East African Community. Our experiences with
the SADC-mandated operations in countries such as
Lesotho confirm that the involvement of such entities
and their knowledge of local conditions and close
cultural and ethnic ties across boundaries make them
a main pillar of conflict resolution and management.

It would be remiss of me to end my remarks without
advocating for the full participation of women, in
particular, and of young people and other civil-society
groups, in the prevention and management of conflicts
on the continent. These groups, especially women and
children, are not only vulnerable but also bring unique
capabilities without which our attempts to effectively
address conflict would be undermined.

I would like to conclude by affirming Botswana's
unwavering commitment to continuing to play its
part and provide needed support to the international
community's collective efforts to promote and protect
international peace and security, particularly in Africa.
With our uninterrupted track record of stability, our
strong desire to see peace prevail on our continent
remains one ofthe main objectives ofBotswana's foreign
policy. We firmly believe that durable peace and stability
represent the key foundation for achieving sustainable
socioeconomic progress, including the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.

