Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you, Madam President, for
organizing this open debate on Afghanistan; we believe
that it is particularly timely. In the last few hours, the
military situation on the ground has made the role of
the United Nations in the search for an acceptable and
lasting political solution to the Afghan conflict even
more urgent and necessary.

In keeping with its strong commitment to the
maintenance of international peace and security and
regional stability, Argentina has been closely following
the consultation process on the future of Afghanistan
and fully supports the efforts being made by the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative,
Ambassador Lakhdar Brahimi.

We believe that, if it is to be legitimate, the new
political order to be established in Afghanistan must be
representative of the multi-ethnic composition of its
people and be open to all those willing to start a new
era of peaceful coexistence, tolerance and respect for
human rights. Only fanatics and extremists should be
excluded from the political arena.

We think that any realistic political arrangement
for Afghanistan must take into account the legitimate
security concerns of neighbouring countries.
Furthermore, we must help the new Government to
attain stability and security. The support of a security
mechanism with an international component may
therefore be necessary.

The United Nations has a central political and
humanitarian role to play in helping the Afghan people
and its leaders to agree on a viable political agreement.
Because of its universal nature and broad mandate, the
United Nations has the political legitimacy necessary
to enable it to assist in the creation of a transitional
Government. It is clear that this new Government must
belong to the Afghan people and that the United
Nations can help the different sectors to facilitate its
creation and consolidation.

The United Nations has played, and must
continue to play, with the support of the donor
countries, a vital role in the distribution of
humanitarian assistance. During the post-conflict stage,
it will have to provide assistance for the economic and
human development of Afghanistan. Development is an
essential component ofa stable and lasting peace.

Given its extensive experience in peacekeeping,
Argentina stands ready to contribute to the
reconstruction of Afghanistan by providing both the
military and civilian resources that are needed to
support the stability of a Government of reconciliation
and national unity and to provide humanitarian
assistance to the Afghan people. In that way, working
together with other States, within the framework of the
United Nations, we could contribute to the creation of a
secure environment for the reconstruction of
Afghanistan and the distribution of humanitarian
assistance to its long-suffering people.

