The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and recalls the
right of States parties, in conformity with Articles
I and II of that Treaty, to develop research,
production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes without discrimination.

"The Security Council notes with serious
concern the many reports and resolutions of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
related to Iran's nuclear programme, reported to it
by the IAEA Director General, including the
February resolution of the IAEA Board of
Governors(GOV/2006/ l 4).

"The Security Council also notes with
serious concern that the Director General's report
of 27 February 2006 (GOV/2006/15) lists a
number of outstanding issues and concerns,
including topics which could have a military
nuclear dimension, and that the IAEA is unable to
conclude that there are no undeclared nuclear
materials or activities in Iran.

"The Security Council notes with serious
concern Iran's decision to resume enrichment-
related activities, including research and
development, and to suspend cooperation with
the IAEA under the Additional Protocol.

"The Security Council calls upon Iran to
take the steps required by the IAEA Board of
Governors, notably in operative paragraph 1 of its
resolution GOV/2006/l4, which are essential to
build confidence in the exclusively peaceful
purpose of its nuclear programme, and to resolve
outstanding questions, and underlines, in this
regard, the particular importance of re-
the

establishing full and sustained suspension of all
enrichment-related and reprocessing activities,
including research and development, to be
verified by the IAEA.

"The Security Council expresses the
conviction that such suspension and full, verified
Iranian compliance with the requirements set out
by the IAEA Board of Governors would
contribute to a diplomatic, negotiated solution
that guarantees that Iran's nuclear programme is
for exclusively peaceful purposes, and underlines
the willingness of the international community to
work positively for such a solution, which will
also benefit nuclear non-proliferation elsewhere.

"The Security Council strongly supports the
role of the IAEA Board of Governors, and
commends and encourages the Director General
of the IAEA and its Secretariat for their ongoing
professional and impartial efforts to resolve
outstanding issues in Iran, and underlines the
necessity of the IAEA continuing its work to
clarify all outstanding issues relating to Iran's
nuclear programme.

"The Security Council requests in 30 days a
report from the Director General of the IAEA on
the process of Iranian compliance with the steps
required by the IAEA Board, to the IAEA Board
of Governors and in parallel to the Security
Council for its consideration."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2006/15.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.35 p.m.
