Mr. Singhara Na Ayudhaya (Thailand) (spoke in Spanish): Though I am the last speaker, I nonetheless
wish to tell you how very pleased I am, Mr. President,
to participate, and I would also like to welcome you,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, to New
York. By dedicating your very valuable time to deal
with this issue demonstrates that the Government of
Colombia attaches great importance to the question of
small arms.

(spoke in English)

I should like to commend you, Mr. President, for
taking the timely initiative of organizing this open
debate in the Security Council on the important issue
of small arms. It was only last month that the United
Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects was concluded
under the able chairmanship of Colombia, resulting in
the Programme of Action. This initiative drew the
attention of the international community to the
multifaceted problems associated with small arms and
light weapons and to the common threat that the illicit
trade in such weapons poses to mankind. I should also
like to thank Colombia for preparing the document
entitled "Issues for the open debate on the question of
small arms" (S/2001/732, annex), which serves as a
good basis for our discussion today.

The landmark United Nations Conference and the
resulting Programme of Action marked an important
first step in our common effort to combat the scourge
of the illicit trade in small arms. Although we have a
framework document that is realistic, achievable, and
comprehensive, there is a general view that the
Programme of Action has not fully met the
expectations of the international community,
particularly the expectations of the victims of the illicit
trade in small arms. Nevertheless, it is important to
recognize that we are at the beginning, rather than at
the end, of a long-term process of mobilizing the
international community to tackle this problem. My
delegation therefore pledges its support for the follow-
up work of the Conference and for ensuring effective
implementation of the Programme of Action.

As expressed in the statement by the President of
the Security Council of 24 September 1999, there is a
link between the destabilizing accumulation of small
arms on the one hand, and threats to international and
regional peace and stability on the other. The illicit
trade in small arms is also an important factor because
it enables such destabilizing accumulations to take
place more quickly. But what makes the problem of
small arms an even greater threat to international and
national peace and stability is its linkage with other
problems of national and international concern, such as
drug-trafficking, money-laundering and cross-border
terrorism, to name a few. It is when small arms are in
the hands of these groups of people that the threats to
international and regional peace and stability are
increased manifold. Thus, if one is to effectively
address the small arms issues, one will also have to
bear in mind these other associated problems and
undertake efforts to resolve them, including, when
necessary, by taking action within the Security Council.

The problem of small arms not only threatens
human security but also impedes sustainable economic
development, and with it the development of basic
social and public services for individuals. Easy access
to small arms and their use by non-State actors,
including drug-traffickers, make it very difficult for
individuals to lead a normal life, since the propensity
to armed violence is increased. The problem of small
arms thus has a strong negative impact on both
freedom from want and freedom from fear, pillars of
human security, and therefore needs to be addressed in
all relevant forums. Let us not forget that the root cause
of the problem of small arms is conflict itself, and the
demand for small arms arises from conflict. We
therefore urge the United Nations to continue its good
work towards conflict prevention and resolving
conflicts at their roots. In this connection, we are
pleased that the General Assembly has just adopted a
resolution to continue considering the report of the
Secretary-General on the prevention of conflict and the
recommendations contained therein. In addition, we
urge that differences and disputes be settled through
political dialogues, negotiations and other peaceful
means. This is an area where the Security Council has
an important role to play.

There is no doubt that the Security Council, with
its mandate of ensuring international peace and
security, has an important contribution to make in
addressing the problem of small arms, particularly in
countries or regions experiencing armed conflict. The
effective design and implementation of arms
embargoes, especially in conflict areas, is one area
where the Security Council can and does play a pivotal
role. But the Security Council should not replace other,
more relevant forums at the national and international
levels that have already undertaken many initiatives in
addressing various issues related to the problem of
small arms, issues such as the definition of small arms.
The development of norms and measures to tackle the
problem of small arms, including the illicit-trafficking
of small arms, are best addressed in forums where there
is greater universality of membership. This is to ensure
transparency and to give our States the opportunity to
contribute to the process. We look forward to
continued, close cooperation between the Security
Council and other relevant forums, including the
General Assembly and regional organizations, to
jointly address and find effective and practical
solutions to the problem of small arms, including the
implementation of the Programme of Action of the
recent Conference.

