Ms. King (Australia): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this debate. It is clear
from our discussion today that many are concerned
about the profound and pervasive impact that illicit
trafficking can have on security. It is ironic that the
very factors that should underpin peace, security and
development - namely, the free movement of goods,
services, people and finances - are being exploited by
transnational criminal networks, proliferators and
terrorists to undermine international peace, security
and development.

Illicit trafficking takes many forms that are often
viewed as separate phenomena. In truth, those criminal
activities can often feed off and reinforce each other.
Illicit trafficking thrives on and perpetuates organized
crime, corruption, weak governance, poverty,
unemployment and regional instability. I will focus my
comments today on four areas that we believe must be
part of the solution. First is the role of regions and
regional organizations. Prosperity and security,
including border security, begin with regional
partnerships.

In our region, the Asia-Pacific region, it is
regional initiatives and institutions that have forged
consensus on the application of global standards and
norms. Australia has prioritized the establishment of
such institutions as the Asia/Pacific Group on Money
Laundering and the Bali Process on People Smuggling,
Trafficking in Persons and Related Transnational
Crime, which we co-chair with Indonesia, because they
have a real impact on the ground.

But what has characterized the Asia-Pacific
response is the dynamism of its established regional
organizations, which have adapted their mandates to
tackle the threat to regional and economic security
posed by illicit trafficking. The Association of
Southeast Asian Nations Regional Forum, for example,
has established work plans for both transnational crime
and terrorism. In the Asia-Pacific region, an effective
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
will continue to play a vital role in addressing
transnational threats. Australia, together with New
Zealand, is funding the first regional transnational
organized crime threat assessment for East Asia and the
Pacific, to complement and build on the global
assessment by UNODC in 2010.

Australia wants to contribute to regional solutions
in other parts of the world too. We have been working
with the African Union on a series of transnational
crime guides to respond to the acute challenges in the
Sahel and Maghreb. We are working with the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) to
enhance border control capabilities. This week, we are
conducting a workshop with the East African
Community to enhance efforts on anti-money
laundering and terrorist financing. We support a
growing role for the United Nations in responding to
regional needs, bolstering the capacities of regional
and subregional organizations to develop regional
solutions and mobilizing international support for those
solutions.

The second important area is capacity-building.
The United Nations has a role to play in identifying
capacity gaps and coordinating the delivery of
technical assistance to build the capacity of border
protection and law enforcement agencies. We strongly
support the Security Council's model set by the
adoption of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004),
which separately established norms prohibiting illicit
trafficking and, importantly, created frameworks for
technical assistance to implement those norms.

Similarly, while the United Nations Programme
of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects is essentially a political agreement, we see it
foremost as a platform for technical assistance. Based
on that View, we provide bilateral and regional
assistance to countries in the Pacific, Africa and
Caribbean to strengthen controls against movements of
illicit small arms.

Likewise, a strong and robust arms trade treaty
(ATT), which includes small arms and ammunition,
must provide capacity-building mechanisms. We will
strongly support such provisions at the ATT conference
in July.

The United Nations should continue to facilitate
assistance through mechanisms that are simple and
coordinated. Improving access to capacity-building
should be a key aim of the Secretary-General's
assessment on the work of the United Nations to
counter illicit trafficking.
For us to be effective in tackling illicit
trafficking, we need to focus on prevention, based on
sound analysis. Resolution 1540 (2004) was
groundbreaking. Controversial at the time of its
adoption, the resolution has actually been very
effective in preventing proliferation and building
capacity. We need to think strategically about other
preventive measures.

We also need to incorporate measures to address
illicit trafficking into United Nations political missions
and peacebuilding activities. UNODC and CTED
expertise should be drawn on to support mission
planning and analytical work for the Security Council,
where relevant.

Finally, the United Nations and Member States
need to consider illicit trafficking and border
protection in the context of broader rule of law and
development objectives. Efforts to secure borders will
not on their own stem illicit trafficking, and must be
pursued hand in hand with strategies to tackle demand,
programmes to build institutions and strengthen
governance, and efforts to address the underlying
socio-economic factors such as poverty and
unemployment.

It is vital that the United Nations ensure that its
disparate programmes are integrated, efficient and
consistent in norm setting. The establishment of the
United Nations System Task Force on Transnational
Organized Crime and Drug Trafficking is a step in the
right direction. We welcome the Council's presidential
statement (S/PRST/2012/16) and look forward to the
report of the Secretary-General.

