Mrs. Jakubone (Lithuania): Ithank you, Mr. President,
for having convened today's debate, and all the briefers
for their important contributions and insights.

The protection of civilians was one of the main
priorities of Lithuania's membership on the Security
Council, on which we organized two debates and an
Arria Formula meeting focused on the implementation
of protection-of-civilians mandates by peacekeeping
operations, the protection of journalists in armed
conflicts, and human rights issues in peacekeeping
operations. We believe that the protection of civilians
should remain firmly embedded on the Council's
agenda.

Lithuania aligns itself with the statement made by
the observer of the European Union. In my national
capacity, let me touch upon early warning, prevention
and accountability in relation to the protection of
civilians.

With regard to early warning, more needs to be
done to alert the Council to potential crises, with the
aim of defusing conflicts before they erupt. United
Nations teams on the ground have an important role to
play in sensing the early signals of potential crises and
alerting the Secretariat. Positive steps have been taken
by the Department of Political Affairs in that respect,
such as informal briefings to Council members. In
our view, such briefings, as well as horizon-scanning
exercises, should remain part of the toolbox at the
Council's disposal.

Close interaction with the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights is essential in the
context of early warning, as human rights abuses and
discrimination of individual groups within a society
often signal more trouble to come. The Secretary-
General bringing specific situations to the Council's
attention is another important tool, which, in our
view, could be more actively used. The now prevalent
reluctance and taboo oftaking up situations before they
explode in the Council's face cost too many human lives
and destroy many others. The sooner issues are brought
to the Council's attention, the better the chances for
preventive action.

Stronger mediation capacity, the good offices ofthe
Secretary-General and early engagement with, and the
involvement of, regional and subregional organizations
are key. We appreciate the mediation work of the
Department of Political Affairs, and we call for better
and more predictable support for such efforts. As we
call on countries to ensure that women have a seat at the
negotiating table, we should also make sure that more
female mediators are actively engaged on the ground.
We therefore encourage countries to submit more female
candidatures for mediation rosters. Overall, a greater
presence of female peacekeepers, police officers and
protection advisers on the ground does matter. They
have better chances to establish communication and
trust with female victims, especially where customs
and taboos are rigid, and provide unique insights and
perspectives in adjusting mission protection mandates.
In the context of the review of peace operations, it
would be useful to consider how best to encourage
troop-contributing countries and police-contributing
countries to step up their efforts in that regard.

Prevention on the ground also requires a more
diverse array of physical tools in the hands of
peacekeepers. Here at the Council, force commanders
have spoken repeatedly about the utility of unmanned
aerial vehicles for preventive or salvage purposes.
Among other things, unmanned aerial vehicles, night
vision capabilities and the use of cellular or satellite
communications for early warning would enable better
protection and more lives to be saved.

Finally, let me turn to the issue of accountability.
The state of impunity for crimes and attacks against
civilian populations, humanitarian aid and medical
workers, schools, and journalists working in conflict
zones is shocking. In Syria, the worst humanitarian
crisis of the century - with barrel bombings, sieges,
the use of starvation as a method ofwar, killings, torture
and chemical attacks - is taking place with total
impunity. According to the World Health Organization,
the year 2015 in Syria was the worst-ever for attacks on
medical facilities, with Government forces responsible
for most of the attacks, including by double-tap barrel
bombing. Since September of last year, Russian air
strikes have compounded the damage and destruction
incurred by health facilities, medical staff and patients.
In the Central African Republic, more than 200 attacks
were perpetrated against humanitarian organizations in
2015, thereby hindering safe access to those in need of
immediate assistance. In Yemen last year, nearly 100
hospitals were attacked by the parties to the conflict.
Attacks on humanitarian and medical facilities and staff
have taken a heavy toll in Afghanistan, Libya, South
Sudan and elsewhere. In eastern Ukraine, occupying
mercenary forces created a climate of abysmal
lawlessness. Over 1 million people were forced to flee,
and some 30,000 people were wounded or killed.

In those and other conflicts, we cannot succeed in
protecting civilians, when those who commit abuses,
crimes and atrocities know that they can get away with
murder - literally. The Council has a critical role to
play in bringing the perpetrators to account by taking
a strong and systematic position on ending impunity
for war crimes, genocide, crimes against humanity
and gross violations of human rights. My delegation
reiterates the call to restrain the use of the right to
veto in situations where such crimes are committed.
Perpetrators of crimes against civilian populations and
those who attack and kill humanitarian and medical
workers and journalists must know that there is no
escaping justice. National and international justice
mechanisms, including the International Criminal
Court, have an important role to play in that regard.

Accountability must also be assured wherever
and whenever peacekeepers engage in the sexual
exploitation and abuse of the most vulnerable. While
the onus is on respective troop-contributing countries
to bring the perpetrators to account, the Secretariat too
has an array of tools to combat the situation, including
the removal of offending troops. The Secretary-General
should continue to report to the Council on the efforts
and measures taken to eradicate sexual exploitation and
abuse by peacekeepers.

In conclusion, no normative base, as perfect as it
may be, will in itself protect civilians if gaps remain
between the norm and the actions on the ground. We
have to use all of the available tools to ensure the
protection of civilian populations, including through
the Human Rights Up Front initiative. More broadly,
we have to redouble our efforts in implementing Goal
16 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/1), as the best chance
we have at prevention.

