Mr. Holbrooke (United States of America): Thank
you, Mr. President, for calling this public meeting on such
an important subject.

I want to express my appreciation, as the month
draws to an end, to you, Mr. President, and your whole
delegation for your outstanding work - not only in
making today's meeting possible, but in giving it a
symbolic reality by the earlier meeting with the Joint
Presidency of Bosnia, which illustrates precisely the role
the Security Council can and should play in conflict
resolution and prevention. That historic meeting, resulting
in the Declaration of New York, has already produced
benefits in Bosnia, and illustrates in specific terms what
we are trying to talk about in general terms here today.

I also want to thank the Secretary-General for his
statement and all that he has done personally to
strengthen the Security Council's role in preventing armed
conflict and dealing with its consequences.

The United States is pleased that the United Nations
and regional and other international groups have decided
to make conflict prevention a priority. We support these
efforts.

Before continuing, I would like to take this
occasion - with your permission, Mr. President - to
introduce an individual, seated behind me to my right, of
enormous importance to our efforts: Senator Bill Frist of
Tennessee, the Chairman of the African Affairs
Subcommittee of the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee. Senator Frist is not only an outstanding
member of the Congress and a member of the majority
party who has given so much of his time to issues
concerning Africa, but he is also a pioneer in open-heart
surgery and heart transplants. Indeed, he performed the
first heart-lung transplant in the United States.

I am not saying that because I think anyone in the
room might need this in the next hour, but, just in case,
I wanted all present to know that we will be more secure
as long as Senator Frist is with us.

As members know, I am leaving tomorrow for
Africa with Assistant Secretary of State Susan Rice and
with the ranking minority member in that Committee,
Senator Feingold of Wisconsin. Because Senator Frisk
could not make that trip with us, but to illustrate the
bipartisan importance we attach to Africa, he is spending
two days with us and has met already with many of the
Permanent Representatives here and with other members
of the United Nations. I thank him for joining us today as
a symbol - and I stress this - of the importance that
both branches and both parties attach to Africa.

 

Although the United Nations Charter clearly delineates
the respective role of United Nations organs in preventing
conflict, today's meeting provides us with a unique
opportunity to discuss the issue in more depth. I have just
returned from East Timor, where the Security Council's
actions helped stem a brutal conflict but could not prevent
it over the last 22 years. Tomorrow my trip will begin to
several African countries, including Angola, Rwanda,
Uganda, Namibia and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. While there, I will have the opportunity to assess
the United Nations work regarding conflict prevention as
well as other important efforts.

I have just returned, over the weekend, from Indonesia
and East Timor, and with your permission, Mr. President,
I would like to give you a quick situation report on that
area, because I think it is illustrative again, like Bosnia, of
how the United Nations can contribute to an area. It is clear
that in the month of September the Security Council actions
broke the back of a tragedy of over 20 years and opened
the door for a peaceful resolution of that problem.

In my trip to East Timor I saw evidence of the success
of the United Nations effort. First, I can report to you, Mr.
Secretary-General, that your personal selection as Special
Representative in East Timor, Sergio Vieira de Mello, is
doing a magnificent job with his understaffed and
overwhelmed team. They are deep into the planning for
transition to what will be the first new country of the
twenty-first century, and they are working effectively with
all sides.

I also want to single out the International Force, East
Timor (INTERFET) forces, under the command of General
Cosgrove of Australia, which have brought stability to the
region. We met at the border between West Timor and East
Timor to discuss opening the border for refugee flow, and
effected the first meeting between the Indonesian military,
the Australian leadership and the Commander of the
guerrilla forces at that border. That was well reported by
the media.

In East Timor I can report some impressive and
hopeful signs of progress among the debris of a city
needlessly torn apart by war. I cannot, however, give as
optimistic or upbeat a report about the situation in the
refugee camps in West Timor. Over 100,000 East Timorese
are still in those camps, being fed misinformation and
inaccurate stories by the militia and therefore are afraid to
return.

Money spent in those camps by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) would be better spent resettling those people in
East Timor or, if they are legitimately unwilling to go
home, to encourage Indonesia to resettle them in
Indonesia, which the Government has promised but has
not yet done, preferably by transmigrating them off West
Timor.

I regret to say that there has been a massive public
information failure on the part of the refugee effort in
West Timor. There has been no effective effort to counter
the propaganda that is being spread. I mention this in a
meeting on the issue we are here to discuss for a simple
reason: we can talk generalities as long as we want, but
here is a specific example of where the United Nations is
performing magnificently in East Timor, but, I regret to
say, has not yet done what it needs to do in West Timor.
We have worked closely with them, we tape-recorded
messages by Bishop Belo and Xanana Gusmao, which are
now being distributed in the camps, and I urge everyone
involved in this situation to work hard to get those camps
open. Those people should not remain in those camps,
otherwise all the good words spoken in this meeting today
will be meaningless in an area of the world where the
United Nations has undertaken massive responsibilities.

These challenges, like those in Kosovo, Sierra Leone
and many other war-torn places, remind us how common
war and Violence remain. As we approach the question of
how to prevent armed conflict, we must be clear on the
distinction between its causes and its consequences. Much
of what United Nations agencies such as the UNHCR do
is to deal with the consequences, as do most of the non-
governmental organizations. The Security Council deals
both with consequences and, I would hope, increasingly
would address conflict prevention by dealing with the
causes. In East Timor, this took over 20 years. In Bosnia,
the United Nations did not succeed, and it had to turn the
process over to other organizations.

It is our responsibility to address the underlying
causes of conflict. The international record has been less
than exemplary. I would, however, commend the
Secretary-General for the brave and courageous report on
Srebrenica, which illustrates both the tragedy and the
leadership of the United Nations, and its willingness to
deal honestly with what happened there.

Rwanda as well deserves to get similar examination,
as another recent tragedy where we could have, and

 

should have, done much more, much earlier, to prevent the
conflict and the horrendous bloodshed that followed.

Ultimately, government leaders must answer for their
actions. Those of us who have the ability to prevent
conflicts have a moral, political and indeed at times a
strategic obligation to do so. The risks and dangers of
acting do not justify simply doing nothing. Therefore, we
must focus on the tools needed to mitigate tensions and
commit ourselves to early, preventive action.

Above all, we need a comprehensive approach to
conflict prevention. The promotion of democracy, human
rights, the rule of law, equal economic opportunity and
market-based economic systems provides the surest path to
long-term global stability and development.

We have seen over the weekend a dramatic step
forward in the longstanding, ancient quarrels in Ireland
under this kind of patient, careful negotiations, encouraged
and stimulated in this case by my friend and colleague
George Mitchell.
Here at the United Nations, the Secretary-General
plays an important role in identifying and mitigating
potential conflicts. The United States continues to
encourage him to intercede in deteriorating situations as
soon he feels it is possible to do so and to keep the
Security Council informed of his actions, his views and his
recommendations.

The Security Council should also become more deeply
engaged. The lessons of East Timor, and in particular
Ambassador Andjaba's superb mission, in which he was
accompanied by several other people here, was instrumental
in coordinating the international response. The Security
Council should not hesitate to deploy similar missions to
other conflict situations, if we think they can make a
difference. And I would point out that when Ambassador
Andjaba's mission took off, no one thought it would do as
well as it did. And that leads me to make a rather
fundamental point, which is that sometimes one must take
chances to achieve peace, as my friend Mr. Andjaba and
his colleagues did two months ago. Having seen East Timor
today, I can say that he can be proud of what he started.

Both the complexity and volume of recent crises
demonstrate the need for coordinated and broader
responses. The United Nations cannot simply act alone. To
maximize effectiveness, we should augment existing efforts.

First, regional and subregional organizations in
Africa, Asia, Latin America and Europe have successfully
addressed local crises before they escalated into conflict.
Better coordination with the United Nations will only
strengthen the capabilities of these groups.

Secondly, international development and financial
institutions are playing a growing role in the planning and
implementation of conflict prevention activities. The
United Nations should inform the international financial
institutions of potential crisis situations so that they can
respond appropriately.

Thirdly, we should work together to enhance the
capability of the United Nations to recruit, train and
deploy international civilian police. Anyone here who has
been in Bosnia or Kosovo knows that no issue is more
important to the future success of those missions. The
same will be true in East Timor.

Equally important is the need for effective measures
to combat the illicit trade in commodities - such as
small arms and, especially in Africa, diamonds - that
helps to prolong these conflicts and that is cynically
promoted by regional warlords and local authorities.
Without prejudice to the right of legitimate self-defence,
we urge States to enact voluntary national moratoriums on
the sale of small arms and light weapons to conflict areas.
We invite our partners to work with us and with the
diamond industry to develop a certification mechanism to
combat the illegitimate trade in diamonds that has done so
much to fuel and finance conflict, particularly in Africa.

To fulfil its purpose and historic promise, the United
Nations must maintain a leading role in preventing wars
and other tragedies. To this end, the United Nations must
effectively tap into its expertise and its other resources,
and dedicate them to conflict prevention. And to this end,
the entire United Nations system, particularly the Member
States, should support the Secretary-General's efforts to
strengthen and mobilize resources for conflict prevention
activities. The United States will welcome a ministerial-
level meeting on conflict prevention during next year's
Millennium Assembly.

It is vital that the Security Council, the Secretariat
and all United Nations Members play an active role in
ongoing efforts to prevent international conflict. True, in
many places, particularly places such as the Balkans or
the Congo or Rwanda, it is tempting to argue that future
conflict is inevitable, that things have to get worse before
they can be resolved - and I do not deny the fact that

 

this was true in East Timor, Bosnia and Kosovo. But I hope
it is not always going to be the case. Here, I think
particularly of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
other areas in Africa, including Burundi.

Hatred often seems too deep, brutality too prevalent
and the memories of injustice too raw, which leaves people
with the feeling that nothing can be done. But we must not
give in to the seduction of moral disgust, followed by
neglect and then by empty posturing and hand-wringing.

