Mr. Staehelin (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
The Security Council is now called upon to tackle a
question of considerable import, and for that reason, I
am grateful to you, Mr. President, and to the other
members of the Council for giving me the floor.

The Council is discussing a peacekeeping
operation - one to which Switzerland, moreover,
contributes. But what is at stake goes well beyond that.
Let me explain. Peacekeeping operations are a
necessity. International peace and security depend on
them in a number of sensitive regions of the world. In
our view, the exercise of international criminal
jurisdiction is not in contradiction with the carrying out
of such operations - quite the contrary.

However, it is proper to prevent criminal cases
from being brought frivolously or for politically
motivated reasons. We share that conviction with all
those who have expressed it. We even think that
safeguards could be provided in that regard. However,
we must choose adequate means to attain that
objective.

The Security Council's adoption of a resolution
modifying a treaty that is in conformity with the
Charter of the United Nations is inconceivable as a
solution. That would be a serious development for the
future of international law and of the United Nations,
and it would directly affect the authority of the Council
itself. We fully share the views expressed on that
subject by the Secretary-General.

The Rome Statute itself and the rules developed
for its application embody numerous safeguards
introduced to take into account the reservations of
certain States. Clearly, the best way for a State to
render one of its nationals immune to the jurisdiction
of the International Criminal Court (ICC) is to exercise
its own criminal jurisdiction. I know that, despite all
this, concerns remain. In our view, they can be taken
into account in a fully satisfactory way by assuming an
approach that takes into account the specific
characteristics of every case. It seems to us that only
six peacekeeping operations may involve sensitive
aspects in terms of the ICC. Moreover, they raise
different issues.

Seeking a solution through a general resolution,
which would thus be applicable to all 15 United
Nations peacekeeping operations, would create more
problems than it would resolve. It should not be
attempted. The solution is to insert specific clauses into
the resolutions concerning the six operations to which I
have referred. For example, the case of Bosnia could be
resolved without much difficulty. The International
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia has
primacy in the exercise of international criminal
jurisdiction. The resolution could recall this in an
appropriate way.

Furthermore, the Rome Statute provides for
special arrangements to be concluded between
contributor States and third States. The ICC could not
proceed with the execution of a request for surrender
that was contrary to such a special agreement. We
wonder whether this option has been sufficiently
explored.

In conclusion, I wish once again to refer to the
right of the Security Council to bring about the
suspension of a criminal proceeding, pursuant to article
16 of the Rome Statute. We have no objection to the
Council expressing the intention to make use of it in
the future in specific cases of powers conferred on it by
article 16, provided it is done in accordance with that
norm. But generalized preventive usage of article 16
would be contrary to the Treaty.

