The topic chosen for this meeting could not be more relevant and timely. We thank the German presidency for convening this open debate. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is undoubtedly one of the greatest challenges the international community has faced since the establishment of the United Nations 75 years ago. Mexico welcomes the fact that, yesterday, the Council was finally able to adopt a resolution calling for an immediate cessation of hostilities to deal with the pandemic and supporting the efforts of the Secretary-General. We acknowledge, in particular, the efforts of France and Tunisia that led to that result. We hope that the adoption of resolution 2532 (2020) will be a first step towards meaningful and effective action by the Security Council in tackling the effects of COVID-19, particularly in countries in or emerging from conflict or facing humanitarian situations. At the same time, it is essential to start thinking about the most effective way to face future pandemics. Today more than ever, we must rethink the existing relationship between health crises, disease, public health and the different dimensions of security. In recent years, the Security Council has explored various aspects of emerging challenges to international peace and security, including the health crises caused by HIV/AIDS and the Ebola virus disease. In 2014, the Security Council determined that the Ebola outbreak in West Africa constituted a threat to international peace and security. Among the elements that led to this determination were such considerations as the rapid spread of the virus and its mortality rate, the inability of health systems to react in a timely manner and the negative socioeconomic impacts and peacekeeping challenges in the region. However, the pandemic we are facing today has different characteristics - all Member States have been affected in one way or another. Globally, there have been 10.5 million confirmed cases and, regrettably, at least half a million people have lost their lives. To prevent the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic from further exacerbating situations of armed conflict, Mexico calls for the Security Council to take steps, especially relating to sanctions implementation, to guarantee the continuous and effective distribution of humanitarian assistance and that humanitarian actors who must operate in such contexts are not criminalized. Another aspect that must be taken into account is the increase in racism and xenophobia caused by the pandemic, which drive conflict in our societies. The Secretary-General has pointed out in one of his reports that the stigmatization of those affected by the virus has increased and that migrants and foreigners have been blamed for the spread of COVID-19. We unequivocally condemn these acts of racism and xenophobia. As global problems, pandemics require global solutions. The international global health system, led by the World Health Organization (WHO), has successfully worked to eradicate such diseases as polio and smallpox, and the lessons learned from that work will help us now and in the future. To that end, we must ensure that, once a COVID-19 vaccine is developed, it is made a global public good. The General Assembly made progress in this regard with the adoption of resolution 74/274, introduced by Mexico and co-sponsored by 179 countries. We must take into account the lessons learned from previous health crises, as well as the current one, in order to generate effective multilateral solutions to global health emergencies. Mexico advocates the creation of synergies within the United Nations system that meet today's multidimensional threats. The creation of such synergies must be a joint endeavour based on science and evidence. The International Health Regulations have been a great tool, but we will have to redouble our efforts to ensure that all Member States have the capacities to fully comply with their provisions. There is room to improve information-sharing in the interests of global health. We could, for example, explore a pandemic procedure similar to that for influenza, whereby the degree of risk is continuously assessed on a scientific basis. Mexico supports the strengthening of the WHO and all tools, regulations or protocols intended to save lives. Prevention is a priority. In this regard, we recall the prerogative of the Secretary-General who, pursuant to Article 99 of the Charter of the United Nations, may bring to the attention of the Council any matter which in his opinion may threaten the maintenance of peace and international security. Effective action by the Security Council to tackle the risks that may arise from health emergencies of international concern will help strengthen the multilateral institutional architecture. The task is not to replace or to duplicate efforts, but to ensure that international cooperation, transparency and solidarity are the norm when we again, unfortunately, face a pandemic.
