Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): Let me begin
by thanking Under-Secretary-General O'Brien and the
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), Mr. Yuri Fedotov, for
their valuable statements concerning the specialized
anti-piracy courts in Somalia and other States in the
region. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report on the subject (S/2012/50).

The report presents a grim picture of the piracy
scenario off the coast of Somalia. It notes that, during
2011, there were 286 attacks against ships in the waters
off the coast of Somalia, of which 31 were successful.
As of 20 December 2011, 13 ships were held by
pirates, with a total of 265 hostages. Despite a
reduction in the number of successful attacks, the total
number of pirate attacks continues to be high. We also
note that the geographic spread of pirate activities has
expanded into the Red Sea, the Somali Basin and into
the western Indian Ocean. Pirates now operate in the
high seas at distances of up to 1,750 nautical miles
from the coast of Somalia, covering a geographical
area of roughly 2.8 million square miles. The pirates
have continued to deter action by navies through the
greater use of captured ships and dhows as mother
ships, often retaining the captured crews onboard as
human shields. Violence against seafarers continues to
be reported, and the safety and security of seafarers
remain a matter of very serious concern.

The report notes that consultations with Somalia
have indicated that the Somali authorities continue not
to favour the establishment of a Somali court outside
the territory of Somalia, preferring that any assistance

for new courts be implemented within Somalia. At the
same time, Somalia also faces challenges in relation to
the adequacy of the legislative basis for piracy
prosecutions and the level of training and
qualifications of Somali judges, prosecutors and other
legal professionals. These challenges need to be
addressed on a priority basis.

Given the continuation of the Somali authorities
not being favourably disposed towards the
establishment of a Somali court outside the territory of
Somalia, a fresh look at possible solutions is necessary.
Piracy off the coast of Somalia emanates from the
Somali problem, and the solution needs to have
Somalia's concurrence and the support of its
institutions. The imposition of external solutions will
not work in the long run, especially when the regional
States have a clear preference for the transfer of
convicted offenders to Somalia to enable them to serve
their remaining sentence there.

In this context, it is important to note that in view
of the continuing challenges facing the establishment
of an extraterritorial Somali anti-piracy court at this
stage, Working Group 2 of the Contact Group on
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia has discussed the
possibility of developing a regional prosecution center,
for example in Seychelles. Its purpose would be to act
as focal point for regional and international support to
the prosecution of piracy suspects and to provide a
location offering relative logistical ease for their
transfer by naval forces. As the regional prosecution
centre would be based in the national legal system of
Seychelles, it would be cost-effective and easy to set
up.

The views of the Somali authorities on this matter
should be obtained in consultation with the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and
UNODC. We also request the Secretariat to work out
the modalities of establishing such a focal point and its
likely impact on the overall prosecution and
punishment of pirates, as well as those involved in the
financing and laundering of the proceeds of piracy and
armed robbery at sea.

The Secretary-General has also suggested
detailed implementation proposals for the specialized
anti-piracy courts in Somalia, Tanzania, Seychelles and
Mauritius. Those implementation proposals are
important and need to be considered and further
discussed by the Council, as well as by UNDP and
UNODC. We fully support the Secretary-General's
view that, as a first step, an assessment - with the

assistance of the naval coalitions and other States
active in naval operations - is necessary to determine
the number of piracy incidents where the suspects are
apprehended but released and the reasons underlying
the releases. That assessment is a precondition for
assessing the required national and regional capacity
for prosecuting and incarcerating pirates. We also agree
with the Secretary-General's conclusion that such
information would assist the Security Council in its
consideration of the most effective measures to combat
piracy off the coast of Somalia, and regional States and
the United Nations in determining the likely
anticipated demand for prosecution capacity in the
region for the foreseeable future.

A decision from the budgetary point of View
would also be useful. Before coming to a final view on
the establishment of extraterritorial Somali courts,
there is a need to consider the estimated annual costs of
the establishment of such extraterritorial courts, in
consultation with the interested regional States and
concerned United Nations agencies. The need for
stand-alone premises and to assess associated security
costs; the salaries and other expenses of international
experts, including judges and prosecutors, including
from the Somali diaspora; and the sources of such
funding on a sustained long-term basis are important.

In conclusion, the Secretary-General's report
raises important issues and made valuable suggestions
that need to be further considered and developed. The
solution to the problem of piracy in Somalia lies not at
sea, but on land. It is important that the Transitional
Federal Institutions in Somalia follow the road map
with sincerity and commitment. We also support the
strengthening of national and regional capacities in the
drafting of national anti-piracy legislation and the
investigation, prosecution and sentencing of suspected
pirates. The prosecution of those involved in the
financing of pirate activities, and the cooperation of
States in the sharing of information and evidence
concerning such persons and activities, including in the
release of hostages, are equally important.

