Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation is grateful to the Bolivian
presidency of the Security Council for having a
organized this briefing on the International Criminal
Tribunals and the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals. I would like to thank in particular
Judge Carmel Agius, President Theodor Meron and
Prosecutor Serge Brammertz for their comprehensive
reports (see S/2017/434 and S/2017/436) and for their
briefings on the work of the Tribunals and on the
completion strategy for their work.

I take this opportunity to also wish the new
Registrar, Mr. Olufemi Elias of Nigeria, every success.
He is joining the Mechanism at a crucial juncture
in its transition and in the transfer of functions and
responsibilities from the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) to the Mechanism. My
delegation would also like to congratulate Ambassador
Elbio Rosselli, Permanent Representative of Uruguay,
and his entire team for their remarkable work as Chair
of the Informal Working Group on International
Criminal Tribunals.

In reading through the reports, we are very
satisfied to see the headway that is being achieved in
dealing with pending cases, particularly the fact that
a new trial will soon be opened in the case of Stanisie
and Simatovie, which should begin on 13 June. We
also welcome the fact that preparations are under way
for the appeal of Mr. Karadzic' and Mr. Seselj. The
beginnings of these cases and appeals is an important
step forward. Moreover, my delegation acknowledges
the importance of legal responsibility and welcomes
the adoption of a professional code of conduct for the
judges of the Mechanism, although we note that there
are no provisions for sanctions within that professional
code of conduct should a judge fall short of the content
therein. This shortcoming has already been pointed
out by the Office of Internal Oversight Services in its
2016 evaluation report of the ICTY and deserves to be
addressed quickly.

We welcome President Meron's decision to have
his Office review the possibility of establishing
an enforcement mechanism allowing for the
implementation of a code of ethics that will take into
account the evolution of international practice in this
area. However, we note that certain questions remain
pending, namely, that the issue of staffing, issues
related to cooperation and arrest warrants, the search
for fugitives found to be guilty by the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, the reintegration
of acquitted or released individuals after they have
served their sentences, the optimal use of financial and
administrative resources and the issue of the archives
have not yet been fully resolved. These are issues that
are of concern to all of us and deserve our attention.
We also appeal to States, particularly those in which
the fugitives might have taken refuge, to redouble their
efforts to apprehend them and to ensure that they can
stand trial.

Turning our attention now to the matter of Judge
Aydin Sefa Akay, we welcome the efforts of the Office
of Legal Affairs and the Informal Working Group to
seek a happy conclusion to this matter and we welcome
all cooperation lent by Turkey. We call upon all
parties involved to keep the channels of dialogue and
consultation open in order to find a swift solution to
this matter.

We acknowledge the key role played by the
International Criminal Tribunals and the work done by
the officials who lead them. We reiterate our support to
them. I also assure them of the tireless support of my
country to upholding the principle of the independence
of justice.

We would also like to pay tribute to the significant
contribution by the Tribunals to international justice
with regard to crimes against humanity, war crimes
and crimes of genocide, as well as to accountability and
reconciliation efforts. That is why Senegal is firmly
committed to being responsible for the eight cells that
have been refurbished by the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda in accordance with international
prison standards and to making them fully operational.
I would like to assure the Mechanism's authorities
that the related administrative procedures are in their
final stages.

