Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): The Kingdom
of the Netherlands supports the statement made by the
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom. I
wish to make three points.

First, the chemical-weapon attack in Salisbury
is unacceptable. Secondly, we fully support the
investigation led by the United Kingdom. Thirdly, we
call on the Russian Federation to fully cooperate with
this ongoing criminal investigation.

As to my first point, on the unacceptability of the
attack, during the previous meeting on this matter, on
14 March (see S/PV.8203), I expressed our shock at the
reckless attack with a military-grade nerve agent on
British soil. The Kingdom of the Netherlands strongly
condemned that attack, in the Security Council and on
many other occasions. The Kingdom ofthe Netherlands
stands in full solidarity with United Kingdom.

As to my second point, on our support for the
investigation, we underline that the perpetrators of
this heinous act must face justice. The authorities
of the United Kingdom are working, together with
the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW), to achieve that end. At the meeting
of the Executive Council of the OPCW in The Hague
yesterday, Director-General Uziimcii confirmed
that the United Kingdom had followed the correct
procedure in this regard. We reiterate that we do not
see any legitimate reason why anyone should try to
delay, sidetrack, second-guess or discredit the criminal
investigation being carried out by the United Kingdom
authorities. We fully support the investigation led by
the United Kingdom with the assistance of the OPCW.

As to my third point, on the need for Russian
cooperation, on 22 March, the European Council
condemned the attack in Salisbury in the strongest
possible terms. It agreed with the assessment of the
Government of the United Kingdom that it is highly
likely that the Russian Federation is responsible for
the attack and that there is no plausible alternative
explanation. We therefore call on the Russian Federation
to fully cooperate with the ongoing investigation and to
provide full disclosure of its novichok programme to
the OPCW.

In conclusion, any use of chemical weapons
constitutes an unacceptable threat to international
law, peace and security. I reiterate our call for full
accountability for this horrific crime.

