Mr. Owada (Japan): Allow me to begin my statement
by congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
December. The thanks of my delegation go as well to your
predecessor, the representative of Oman, for the excellent
manner in which he carried out his responsibilities in
November.
I should like to express the gratitude of my
Government for the opportunity given to me to address the
Security Council on this historic occasion. The Government
of Japan applauds wholeheartedly the signing of the
General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina effected in Paris on 14 December 1995 as a
truly monumental achievement. This epoch-making
development signifies that the conflicts in the former
Yugoslavia, which have caused unspeakable human and
material loss, have, after four years, finally come to an end.

I wish to take this opportunity to express the most
sincere appreciation of the Government and the people of
Japan to all those whose tireless toil and labour, protracted
over the years, have resulted in this breakthrough. For this
achievement, thanks are in order to the Secretary-General
and his Special Representatives, the Force Commanders, as
well as to the members of the Contact Group and other
countries which have contributed so much to this process,
in particular the United States.

Remarkable as the achievement is, we must remain
keenly aware that the peace that has come to prevail in the
former Yugoslavia is still a fragile peace. In order to ensure
that there be durable peace, it is essential that all parties
strictly abide by the terms of the agreement. They must
exercise maximum restraint so that this fragile peace may
not be broken. They must demonstrate an unfailing
determination to scrupulously honour the rights and duties
they have respectively accepted so that a genuine spirit of
reconciliation and cooperation may come to prevail in the
region.

While the conclusion of this peace agreement is a
monumental achievement, it is nevertheless but a first step
on a long and arduous road to reconstruction and
rehabilitation. For the purpose of realizing true and lasting
peace and stability throughout the region, the international
community will have to offer its full-fledged cooperation
for the full implementation of the agreement.

The Government of Japan, as a member of the
Steering Board, will be prepared to extend its utmost
cooperation for the reconstruction and rehabilitation of the

 

former Yugoslavia. Conscious of its responsibility in the
global context, Japan is determined to be an integral part
of this historic process on the basis of the agreement in
ways that are consistent with the basic stance of Japan as
a peace-loving nation. To carry out this responsibility,
Japan intends to dispatch a government mission to analyse
the local situation. In addition, in view of the importance
of promoting a transition to a market economy, Japan is
considering assistance in this area as well.

It should be emphasized in this connection that
assistance for humanitarian relief and for the complete
and safe return of all refugees and displaced persons will
have to be extended not only with respect to Bosnia and
Herzegovina but also with respect to the whole region,
including Serbia and Montenegro and Croatia. Extending
assistance to all the parties that play key roles in the
lasting peace of the region will be crucial to the durable
peace and stability within the region as a whole.

In this spirit, I wish to reaffirm the commitment of
Japan to providing humanitarian assistance for the
stability of the region. In fact, my Government has
already provided approximately $180 million since the
outbreak of the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia to
assist refugees and persons affected by war in the region.
Japan has now decided to make an additional contribution
of about $20 million to the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and other relevant
international organizations for the purpose of easing the
suffering during the severe winter months and in response
to the United Nations consolidated appeal. It will consider
further contributions to those organizations in accordance
with their needs.

I should like to conclude my brief intervention today
by urging the leaders of the parties concerned to continue
to strengthen the peace that has been wrought with such
difficulty. The efforts in this direction on their part will
have the full support and assistance of the entire
international community, including my own country.

