Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I align
myself with the statement to be made on behalf of the
European Union.

I wish to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Germany for his initiative to convene the Security
Council to consider the issue of children and armed
conflict.

This morning the Council is showing that it is
determined to ensure respect for the right to education
and health in armed conflict. Attacks against schools
and hospitals and their staff are prohibited under
international humanitarian law. During conflicts they
destroy infrastructure and wipe out the elite that are
vital for any country. Following conflicts such attacks
have a lasting impact on the country's reconstruction.

The Security Council is today sending a clear
message to parties to conflicts who commit such
attacks by deciding to act on the basis of information
provided by the Secretariat. That is significant
progress. It responds, first, to the increase in attacks
against schools and hospitals and their staff that have
been seen on the ground, as has been demonstrated by
the situations in Afghanistan, Pakistan and Syria. But it
is also a response to the awareness among the
international community that has followed the
presentation of the UNESCO report, The Hidden
Crisis: armed conflict and education, which showed
that 28 million children were deprived of basic
education in countries in conflict. That report also
evidenced the contribution made by the World Health
Organization.

In the absence of progress, we must not hesitate
to implement robust and targeted sanctions. The
Security Council's Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict is to consider this issue in order to
present specific recommendations to the Council
within a year. In the context of this exercise we
emphasize two aspects.

First is improving the overall coherence of the
sanctions systems architecture in order to enhance the
credibility of the Security Council's actions.

Secondly, with respect to enhancing the links
between the Working Group and the international
criminal justice system, we welcome the contribution
made by the International Criminal Court to combating
impunity, as evidenced by the ongoing trial of Thomas
Lubanga on charges of war crimes. We call on civil
society and non-governmental organizations to
continue to provide material for consideration by
States.

We also pay tribute to the work of the Secretary-
General and of his Special Representative for Children
and Armed Conflict. We endorse the analysis and the
recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General. We commend the personal
commitment of the Secretary-General to protecting
children in armed conflict as well as the work of his
Special Representative, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy.

We share the goal of the United Nations of
achieving a world without child soldiers within 25
years. That is an ambitious but realistic goal. It is
estimated that there are 250,000 child soldiers
worldwide, and UNICEF is contributing to the
reintegration of approximately 10,000 of them each
year. Major challenges remain in terms of addressing
the broad-ranging issues of sexual violence and the
killing and maiming of children. To facilitate the
implementation of resolution 1882 (2009), we call on
the Secretary-General to provide the necessary
resources to the monitoring and reporting mechanism
and for the dissemination of information, as well as to
take into account the cross-border aspect of certain
conflicts, as was done in the process of fighting against
the Lord's Resistance Army.

We commend the signing of the action plans in
Afghanistan and in Chad, and we call on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burma to
complete their own such plans, in coordination with the
United Nations.

With regard to the support provided by the
Secretariat to the Working Group of the Security
Council, we thank the Secretary-General for the
administrative support, and we look forward to the
continuation of country visits by the Working Group at
the current pace, following those to Nepal in 2010 and
to Afghanistan in 2011. We hope that such missions
will be financed as new measures under the regular
budget for 2012-2013, which will be adopted in the
fall.

Together with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
UNICEF and our partners in the steering committee,
we will convene the fourth ministerial follow-up
Forum on the Paris Commitments and the Paris
Principles, to be held on the margins of the ministerial-
level meeting of the General Assembly in September.

Finally, I should like to pay tribute to the
Ambassador of Germany, Mr. Peter Wittig, for his
outstanding chairmanship of the Security Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.

