Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation thanks you, Mr. President, for
convening this very important meeting. We welcome the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/394) on options
concerning the prosecution and imprisonment of persons
responsible for acts of piracy off the coast of Somalia.
We also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
Under-Secretary-General Patricia O'Brien for their
briefings on issues relating to piracy off the coast of
Somalia and on the report of the Secretary-General. We
also welcome the presence of Mr. Elmi Ahmed Duale,
Permanent Representative of Somalia, and thank him for
his statement.

Although recently pirate attacks off the coast of
Somalia have continued, threatening the safety of
international navigation, their success rate has started
to decline, reflecting the initial success of international
counter-piracy cooperation. At the same time, however,
the root causes of piracy off the coast of Somalia have
not been eradicated. The pirates remain and have
started to change their behaviour through more
elaborate organization and more treacherous methods
of attack. They have expanded their operations into the
Indian Ocean. This shows that the task of combating
piracy remains arduous and calls for further
comprehensive efforts by the international community
in order to eradicate both the phenomenon and its root
causes.

China supports the actions carried out to combat
piracy off the coast of Somalia, in accordance with
international law and the Council's resolutions. At
present, naval operations by the countries concerned
aimed at combating piracy and protecting navigation
are playing a positive role in ensuring the safety of
international navigation. At the same time, the issue of
how to prosecute pirates who have been apprehended
has come to the fore. China supports strengthening
international cooperation on prosecuting the Somali
pirates within the framework of existing international
law and appreciates the work of the countries
concerned, in particular the coastal States.
China also calls upon the international
community to provide the necessary support to the
coastal States to enhance their legal capacity. In that
context, China welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General and would join others in further studying the
legal framework. The use of measures such as
escorting vessels, arrests by military forces and the
judicial prosecution of pirates can only ease the
problem. In order to resolve the problem definitively,
an integrated solution should be adopted. China
believes that the international community should make
efforts in a number of areas, first of all promotion of
the Somali peace process. The endless internal conflict
and lack of governance in Somalia are fundamental
causes of the phenomenon. The international
community should promote dialogue among the parties
in Somalia to stabilize the situation and establish
effective Government control in order to forestall the
occurrence of this phenomenon. Not long ago, the
African Union decided to strengthen its peacekeeping
force in Somalia. That is conducive to the stabilization
of Somalia. The United Nations should continue to
provide support in that regard, as well as to explore the
possibility of deploying a United Nations force.

Secondly, Somalia's economic and social
development should be accelerated. The stagnant
economy and the deteriorating humanitarian situation
in Somalia are very important causes of the rampant
piracy, with the majority of young people being
unemployed and millions of people struggling to
survive. If all these economic and social issues persist
in Somalia, the problem of piracy cannot be eradicated.
Donor countries, international organizations and
non-governmental organizations should play a bigger
role and pool their human and financial resources to
improve the social and economic situation in Somalia.

Thirdly, a regional strategy to resolve the Somalia
piracy issue should be formulated. In order to eradicate
the problem, development and the peace process
should be promoted. That will require the cooperation
of countries of the region and of the international
community. That effort is already under way. The
coastal States surrounding the Red Sea, the Gulf of
Aden and the Indian Ocean have already begun to
cooperate. We support the development of that regional
cooperation. We also support arms embargoes, the
freezing of assets and other measures to sever the
supply of weapons and funds to Somali piracy.

