Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I would like at the outset to thank the Special
Envoy, Mr. Geir Pedersen, for his briefing and for his
tireless efforts.

The Council is meeting today, after eight years of
violence, with a glimmer of hope. A fragile glimmer
of hope, to be sure, but hope nonetheless. We cannot
overestimate the importance of the agreement between
the Syrian Government and the Syrian Negotiations
Commission to put together a Constitutional Committee
facilitated by the United Nations in Geneva.

First, this is the first time in the course ofthe Syrian
conflict that the United Nations has been able to facilitate
a direct agreement between the parties. And, secondly,
this is the first time in a very long time that the Syrian
people have received good news. We have reiterated on
many occasions that there can be no military solution
to the crisis in Syria; the solution is a political one. The
Constitutional Committee has the potential to be a key
that can open doors to other aspects of the political
process, as provided for by resolution 2254 (2015) and
the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex).

We recognize the important role that the Special
Envoy played in its establishment, and we support
his future role in ensuring the functioning of the
Committee. We also appreciate the role played by the
States members of the Council and others, in particular
the Astana process guarantor countries, for their
diplomatic commitment in support of the Special Envoy.

Today we are therefore optimistic, but cautiously
so. Belgium sees the Committee is a means to an end.
The fact that the parties can now undertake structured
discussions on the future of their country represents
significant progress in and of itself. Nonetheless, the
real progress will lie in the outcome of such talks. A
great deal of time has been lost, and it is now important
that the Committee get to work quickly and that tangible
progress be made as a first step towards a political
solution that is in line with resolution 2254 (2015).

This opportunity to work together towards a
Syria that meets the legitimate aspirations of all
Syrians carries with it obligations for all parties.
All parties must continue their engagement in good
faith, and Committee representatives will have to be
encouraged to speak freely and to conduct their work
in a favourable environment that is free of obstacles
or intimidation. The Syrian Government has a special
obligation to create a safe, stable and calm environment
in the country.
The violence in Idlib has to stop. It is difficult
to conceive of talks going on in Geneva even as the
violence continues. We reiterate our appeal for a
nationwide cessation of hostilities nationwide.

Lastly, let us not forget the thousands of Syrians
who continue to be arbitrarily arrested and detained.
We encourage the Special Envoy to redouble his efforts
on this important issue, and we fully support his appeal
to the parties to exchange prisoners on a large scale.
Most particularly, we call on Damascus to take into
account the crucial importance of this issue as a sign of
good faith towards the people of the country. Thousands
of Syrians continue to wait for news of their loved ones
who were arbitrarily detained or who have disappeared.

I cannot conclude without offering my
congratulations to the Russian delegation on
its presidency of the Council during the month
of September.

