Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): At the outset,
let me join previous speakers in thanking you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate on the
situation in Afghanistan. We would like to congratulate
Japan on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of August.

I would also like to express my delegation's
condolences for the loss of 17 Spanish peacekeepers in
last week's helicopter crash in Afghanistan.

Given that the Afghan people will be holding
parliamentary elections on 18 September, today's
debate is especially timely. Afghanistan has made
significant progress over the past three and a half
years. With the establishment of the Afghan Interim
Authority in December 2001, the reform measures
instituted by the Transitional Administration, the
holding of a constitutional Loya Jirga in December
2003 and the first-ever direct presidential election in
October 2004, which led to the inauguration of
President Hamid Karzai, the foundations have been
laid for democracy and a brighter political future. We
hope that when the parliamentary and provincial
elections are held next month Afghanistan will have
met all of the benchmarks set out in the political
agenda of the Bonn Agreement of December 2001.

Substantial progress has also been made on the
institutional agenda of the Bonn Agreement in such
areas as disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR), the establishment of the Afghan National
Army, police reform and the establishment of a human
rights commission. We are pleased to note that the
disarmament and demobilization portion of the DDR
programme ended last month with more than 63,000
troops of the Afghan military forces disarmed and that
the majority of them entered the reintegration process.
That success only reinforces our conviction that the
DDR process should be further intensified, with the
aim of achieving lasting peace and stability that
extends well beyond next month's elections.

My delegation attributes Afghanistan's
achievements to the steadfastness of the Afghan people
as they struggle to emerge from the devastation of
more than two decades of war, as well as to the
partnership between the international community and
the Afghan Government. We pay tribute to the Afghan
people and Government for their resolve to move
forward to the successful rebuilding of their country.

The progress so far in Afghanistan, the risks and
hard work that the Afghan people and the international
community have put into achieving that progress make
it all the more vital that we face the remaining
challenges squarely. Uppermost in our concerns are
continuing violence and terrorism, as exemplified by
the roadside bomb attack that took the lives of four
United States soldiers and wounded three others only
last Sunday. Another major concern is criminal drug
trafficking. Those ongoing challenges continue to
hamper both reconstruction and the implementation of
the Bonn process.

The Republic of Korea has been a strong
supporter of the reconstruction, development and
stability of Afghanistan. Since February 2002 a
medical unit and a reconstruction unit from the
Republic of Korea, together totalling more than 200
personnel, have been part of the multinational forces in
Afghanistan. In addition, since November 2001 the
Republic of Korea has contributed $57 million for
emergency relief and reconstruction. The bulk of those
funds have gone to building schools, hospitals and
vocational training centres, while $500,000 has been
dedicated to support for the upcoming election.

The Republic of Korea remains committed to the
successful reconstruction of Afghanistan and pledges
that its support will continue in the years ahead.

