Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): I would
like, at the outset, Sir, to express my delegation's great
satisfaction at seeing you presiding over the Security
Council, and to express the confidence and hope that
my delegation places in your effective and wise
leadership of its work in the month of April, when the
Council is facing so many challenges and when peoples
subjugated to foreign occupation are appealing to it to
render justice and ensure the triumph of the rule of law.

Our gratitude goes also to the representative of
Norway, whose leadership was needed until the very
last moments of his presidency because of scorching
and pressing events. Those events then forced the
Council, just three days after it had demanded Israel's
immediate withdrawal from the Palestinian territories it
had invaded, to meet again to consider the further
deterioration of a situation that cast into a horrendous
situation hundreds of thousands of Palestinian civilians
delivered up to an arbitrary army of aggression that
ignores the most basic norms of international
humanitarian law and that seems to have established
brutality as a code of conduct.

Indeed, it is as if the adoption of the Council's
resolution had freed that army from all constraints:
deaf to the Council's demands, it applied itself with
even greater fury to invading the remaining Palestinian
enclaves - most recently the Dura area, on Monday
night and into Tuesday, slaughtering dozens of
unarmed civilians who had nothing but their bare
chests to oppose it, destroying houses and
infrastructure, attacking the most sacred Islamic and
Christian sites and opening fire without hesitation even
on the Church of the Nativity.

In intolerable defiance of to the Council, the
Sharon Government, has, in effect, interpreted Security
Council resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002),
unanimously adopted, as authorizing it to complete its
terror campaign and not to begin the withdrawal of its
forces until all its objectives have been achieved.
Everything seems to have been conceived, planned and
organized with that in mind, and so that it could
continue its operations without a care in the world.

The Israeli leadership is demonstrating such
arrogance and is indeed humiliating the Security
Council, whose authority is now being openly
challenged. The Council must therefore respond and
must react firmly and with the necessary resolve to this
unacceptable attack on its credibility.

What tremendous courage is being displayed by
an Israel army drunk with power and with the military
superiority that is crushing an unarmed people under
the weight of bombs. But its brutal force will never
break that people's spirit or erode its faith in the justice
of its sacred cause.

It is so hypocritical, following suicide attacks on
which the Palestinian Authority has unambiguously
spoken out, scornfully to equate them with the
exemplary and heroic resistance of a people whose
children, whose childhood has been stolen, have been
reduced to fighting the most powerful army of
occupation in the world by throwing stones with a
courage that defies the imagination.

Rather, is it not the policy of systematic
terrorism, of blind violence against unarmed civilians
and even against the sick and the wounded and of
savage destruction of homes, schools and hospitals that
deserves to be called terrorism?

Where, then, is the sacred right of peoples to
struggle against the occupier, which has been
legitimized and immortalized by the heroic epics of
patriots, freedom fighters and resistance fighters who
live in the collective psyche of American, African,
Asian and European peoples? Or are we to understand
that a double standard is in operation here? Is there
now good resistance and bad resistance - good
terrorists and bad terrorists?
Today, the Security Council is called on to act
with a heightened sense of urgency. It cannot allow its
authority to be flouted, and its credibility diminished in
this manner. It cannot remain passive at a time when
unspeakable tragedy is unfolding in full view. It must
not allow the forces of evil, deaf to its injunctions and
indifferent to its appeals, to pursue, methodically and
with impunity, their destruction of Palestinian cities,
burying the last hopes raised by the Beirut peace
initiative. The credibility of the Council is at stake -
as is the entire system of collective security, of which
the Council is the pillar and cornerstone.

Before the Middle East definitively collapses into
irreparable horror, the Council must rise to its
responsibilities under the Charter, and bring Israel to
compliance and compel it to abide by international law
by fully, effectively and immediately withdrawing its
forces and strictly respecting the standards of
international humanitarian law, in particular the
provisions of the Fourth Geneva Convention, and
lifting the restrictions imposed on President Arafat. It
must ensure protection for the millions of Palestinians
who are exposed to the murderous folly of the Israeli
forces of aggression and substitute the momentum of
peace for the logic of war. That is the only way of
protecting that extremely sensitive region of the world
from catastrophe and the disastrous consequences for
all of Israeli irredentism.

