Mr. Kasoulides (Cyprus): Cyprus aligns itself
with the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union. I would like to make some additional
remarks in my national capacity.

The need to protect civilians in armed conflict
is obvious. However, despite the progress made, the
situation of civilians in armed conflict today remains
a major concern, as highlighted in the latest report of
the Secretary-General (S/2016/447). The lack of respect
for international humanitarian law and the persistent
impunity are among the reasons given for that situation.

The protection of civilians is an inherent obligation
in all United Nations peacekeeping operations and
is currently part of the mandate of 10 such missions.
Nevertheless, the role played by the United Nations
should not allow us to lose sight of the fact that the
protection of civilians is primarily the responsibility
of States.

Since 1964, my country has been home to
a peacekeeping operation, the United Nations
Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus, whose mandate
includes provisions on humanitarian activities.
Cyprus is grateful to the United Nations and to troop-
contributing countries for their support. Our experience
feeds into our understanding of the difficulties that the
implementation of a peacekeeping operation mandate
may be faced with.

Effectiveness is part of the mandate and must be
linked to political solutions and include viable exit
strategies and always be guided by the situation on the
ground. Mandates must be clear, consistent and concise,
with realistic provisions; they must be accompanied by
operational guidelines and include provisions on human
rights when relevant.

Furthermore, the need for training on the issues
related to the protection of civilians, including sexual
violence in conflict and the protection of children,
cannot be underestimated. Moreover, the staff of
a mission must also strictly abide by human rights
standards. In that context, we fully support the
Secretary-General's zero-tolerance policy on sexual
abuse in peacekeeping operations.

Relationships based on trust with local communities
and organizations can contribute to the prevention of
crimes against civilians and can enable us to address
the consequences of violations against civilians.
Peacekeeping operations can also help a host country
to implement its responsibility to protect and support
the work of the International Criminal Court when it is
involved in a host country.

Finally, States Members of the United Nations and
regional and international organizations also have a key
role to play that complements peacekeeping operations
in the areas of conflict prevention, early warning and
reaction. In that context, Cyprus committed itself at
the World Humanitarian Summit to using diplomacy
to prevent conflict and has lent its full support to the
Secretary-General's Human Rights Up Front initiative.
