Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): I thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and the Director of the Coordination Division of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham, for their timely and insightful briefings. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is delighted that, since assuming the chair of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014), the mandate of the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement has been renewed and that there have been efforts towards de-escalation. We wish to reaffirm our commitment to the peace process and agree with fellow Council members that the only solution is a political one, inclusive of all Yemenis. In that regard, we wish to stress the need for women to be included in the political process and for the process to reflect the aspirations of youth. That is the only way for us to achieve a durable solution. We must also emphasize the need for the Stockholm, Hodeidah and Riyadh agreements to be fully implemented. In that vein, we commend the efforts of the Government of Yemen and the Southern Transitional Council towards implementation of the Riyadh agreement, noting the deal reached by both parties, which provides for the withdrawal of forces from Aden within three weeks. We encourage further steps towards full implementation. Five years on, Yemen is still regarded as the world's worst humanitarian crisis. It is not our intention to begrim, nor do we wish to take anything away from the progress that has been made on the humanitarian front. However, more must be done, and it must be done as a matter of urgency. The Global Humanitarian Overview 2020 emphasizes that the number of people in need of humanitarian assistance will remain close to 2019 levels of 24 million. The influx of the migrant population has further compounded the situation. It is imperative that parties do not actively obstruct the work of humanitarian personnel. There is an urgent and critical need for unimpeded humanitarian access. For many people, that is literally the difference between life and death. We also underscore that the facilitation of unimpeded humanitarian relief is enshrined in international humanitarian law, and to deliberately obstruct it is an infraction of a well-established law of our rules-based system. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines strongly condemns any action that breaches international law and further condemns the act of obstructing humanitarian access. We call upon all parties to allow and facilitate full, safe and unhindered access of humanitarian personnel and the delivery of humanitarian assistance to all persons in need. To conclude, we wish to recall the recent open debate, during which we reaffirmed our commitment to upholding the Charter of the United Nations (see S/PV.8699 et seg.). The situation in Yemen does not exemplify those aims. If we sit by and allow large-scale suffering in Yemen to continue, the immutable principles of the Charter of the United Nations will become nothing more than hollow talking points ventilated in patent isolation and disconnected from a reality of ongoing struggle and hardship felt by too many. In that connection, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines reiterates its commitment to the principles of international law and stresses that they must be vigorously upheld. Our adherence must remain steadfast, as we endeavour to address global problems through collective collaboration. We hope that 2020 will bring peace to Yemen.
