Mr. Mazimhaka (Rwanda): I would like to make
a few final remarks on the debate which, I think, has
been very illuminating and very instructive for my
delegation on the thinking and the direction of this very
important investigation that the Council has undertaken
to institute.

We have tried today to reiterate to the Council the
historical reasons for our involvement in the Congo.
The security problems caused by criminal forces based
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to our
countries - Rwanda, Uganda and Burundi - are not
deniable. Examples are abundant. My colleague has
just mentioned some of the latest. These should be
addressed by the Council and ourselves through the
process that we have undertaken to return normalcy to
that region. This was one of our recommendations.

Unfortunately, before this meeting has even
ended, we have begun to see the fallout from some of
the problems that we think lie with the report. Member
countries that would not cooperate with the Panel have
used this occasion today to come and lambaste
everybody and proclaim their innocence in the
exploitation of the resources of the Congo. This was
the case in the speeches made by the representatives of
Namibia and Zimbabwe. They have used this occasion
to bring back debates that we thought we had put to
rest, debates of invited and uninvited parties to the
Lusaka Agreement. This is not very helpful at all, and
they take this courage from the report they thought was
the point of departure in this.

Even if this was the case, I do not believe that the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
invited Namibia and Zimbabwe to go there to loot. So
there cannot be any justification for feeling self-
congratulatory, because they did not cooperate with the
Panel.

My colleague did not say this, but I think it is
important for us to note that the intervention of the
President of the Sudan simply took up an issue that
Minister Mbabazi had raised about exposing unduly the
personalities in our region to abuse, and I believe the
courage and the occasion to do that were given by the
debate of an otherwise worthy cause, that is, the
investigation of the misuse of resources in the Congo. I
think we should take care that no other actions are
taken based on this report until we have seen a full
investigation and a fuller debate than what we have
held today.

I wish to reiterate in front of the Council that the
Government of Rwanda will once again cooperate with
the Panel when it is exercising its extended mandate.

