Ms. Colakovie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Jordanian presidency
for convening today's thematic debate and for its
concept paper (S/2014/30, annex). I also want to thank
the Under-Secretary-General for his briefing.

Today's debate offers an important opportunity to
review the Security Council's role in the maintenance of
international peace and security, which may enable the
Council to draw lessons through an understanding of
war, which is necessary in order to achieve permanent
peace.

After the First and the Second World Wars,
humankind has constantly reiterated the promise of
"never again". Unfortunately, even today, we continue
to witness conflicts and wars in various parts of the
world. Conflicts are followed by negotiations and
the settlement of the disputes, resulting in peace
agreements that represent an important first step in
long-lasting processes of achieving peace and stability.
In our statement today, we will focus on the phase that
follows peace agreements, namely, the long path to
achieving sustainable peace and stability.

The transition from the post-conflict period to a
functional, reform-oriented and modern country is
often affected by various side issues, obstacles and
complexities within society. Political dialogue aimed at
finding solutions to all open questions is an ongoing
process that should help a country to complete its
peacebuilding agenda, which is necessary in order for
the collective priorities needed to achieve sustainable
peace in the society to be set.

We reiterate that national ownership and national
responsibility are crucial for establishing sustainable
peace. With a view to ensuring national ownership,
the primary responsibility for identifying priorities
and strategies for post-conflict peacebuilding lies
with the national authorities. Institution-building and
governance, which provide citizens with security,
justice and economic stability, are necessary in order to
avoid repeated cycles of violence and instability.

However, in the post-conflict process, the transfer
of responsibility from the international community,
which is one of the stakeholders of the peace process,
to domestic actors and institutions is a very delicate
and extremely important task that should be carried
out in a gradual and timely manner. The establishment
of transitional administrative mechanisms by the
international community should go hand in hand with
enhancing the capacity of domestic institutions.

Coordinated, rapid action to support post-conflict
Governments in building credible and accountable
institutions is of critical importance for the success
of the peacebuilding process as a whole. If properly
executed, such action helps restore security, legitimacy,
accountability and effectiveness, thus delivering clear
peace dividends.

Post-conflict institution-building is a complex and
demanding process, involving multiple stakeholders
and the need to find a balance between achieving short-
term results and long-term capacity development. The
search for optimal solutions that achieve synergy in
that multifaceted endeavour never ends.

Post-conflict societies often suffer deep divisions
based on differing perceptions and interpretations of
the past. That is why I would like to stress that national
reconciliation and trust should be seen as additional basic
prerequisites for building a functional State and society.
Therefore, a necessary shared goal is to investigate
crimes that were committed and to adequately prosecute
the perpetrators of those crimes, regardless of who the
perpetrators are. The rule of law, the implementation of
existing human rights instruments and the sustainable
return and local integration of refugees and internally
displaced persons must be the priority of the country.
In addition, the promotion of regional cooperation is of
great importance to the process. All of those activities
and efforts are seen as necessary steps to achieve
national reconciliation. However, in the case of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, even 20 years after the conclusion of
the conflict, the reconciliation process is still ongoing.
Our experience is that reconciliation is a long-term
process that requires genuine and permanent partners
at the local, national and international levels. Allow
me to briefly inform the Council about our innovative
initiative to promote dialogue and reconciliation in this
phase of our post-conflict development.

The Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina
approached the Secretary-General last year with a
request for United Nations assistance to further advance
our peace and reconciliation process, conscious of the
Organization's long-standing expertise and comparative
knowledge in that area. The Presidency identified
education and culture as critical areas that could act as
a springboard for dialogue and reconciliation to take
deeper root in the country. Based on that request and
initiative by the Presidency, a joint project by the United
Nations country team, which includes elements from
the United Nations Development Programme, UNICEF
and UNESCO, has since been developed, entitled
"Dialogue for the Future". It seeks to strengthen the
local capacity for promoting coexistence, the peaceful
resolution of conflict and reconciliation through the
establishment of a dialogue platform that links senior
decision-makers such as the Presidency, citizens and
civil society.

The project also envisions the establishment of a
grant facility to fund local initiatives in the arts, culture
and education, with a focus on youth, which would
promote coexistence and respect for diversity through
civic and intercultural dialogue, and a communications
and outreach strategy to enhance public perceptions
of peace, reconciliation and respect for diversity. The
aim of the initiative is to catalyse further peacebuilding
processes and outcomes such as, first, strengthened
domestic capacities for promoting coexistence, the
peaceful resolution of conflict and reconciliation;
secondly, improved public perceptions of, and attitudes
towards, coexistence, the peaceful resolution ofconflict,
reconciliation and respect for diversity; and, thirdly,
increased engagement by citizens, in particular youth,
civil society and leaders in activities and initiatives on
intercultural dialogue and peaceful coexistence.

We also agree with the position contained in the
concept note on the need to enable the United Nations,
especially the Security Council, to draw lessons from
its understanding of war and of what is necessary to
achieve a permanent peace. The fact is that the Security
Council regularly considers issues of post-conflict
peacebuilding. However, in some cases, the United
Nations does not understand well enough how it can
help achieve reconciliation among ex-combatants and
their peoples based on an agreed or shared narrative
and a shared memory of the troubled past. That is one of
the reasons that it is important for the Security Council
to exchange views with those Member States that have
first-hand experience in crises and peacebuilding
processes. Such exchanges can help optimize United
Nations peacebuilding mechanisms and enhance our
common understanding of the current challenges we
face in peacebuilding.

We understand the message Jordan sent in
the concept note regarding this thematic debate
on the theme "War, its lessons and the search for
permanent peace". According to the Charter, one of
the fundamental purposes of the United Nations is
to maintain international peace and security. It takes
collective measures to prevent threats to peace and
stability in the world. The suggestion of the Security
Council presidency to mandate a small United Nations
historical advisory team or international historical
commission requires more attention and could be
addressed during General Assembly negotiations on
the reform of the Security Council and its working
methods.

