The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Bosnia and Herzegovina in which he requests to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite that representative
to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Misic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a place at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council deplores the rapidly
escalating military situation on the ground in the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and expresses its
deep concern about the plight of the civilian
population resulting therefrom.

"The Security Council demands that all the
parties involved in offensive military activities and
hostile acts in Western Bosnia cease them
immediately and respect fully the rights of the local
population. It stresses the importance it attaches to
intensified efforts to alleviate the plight of refugees
and displaced persons, and to the fullest cooperation
in this regard by the parties with the United Nations
Protection Force (UNPROFOR) and the international
humanitarian agencies. The Council reiterates that
there can be no military solution to the conflict in
the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and urges
all parties not to take military advantage of the
present situation. It once again expresses its full
support for the Geneva Declaration of Principles of
8 September 1995 (S/l995/780, annex II) which
provides a basis for negotiations with the aim of
achieving a lasting peace throughout the region.

"The Security Council furthermore deplores the
death of one Danish peacekeeper and injury to nine
others and expresses its condolences to the
Government of Denmark and to the family of the
peacekeeper who lost his life."

This statement will be issued as a document of the

Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1995/47.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present

stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the

matter.

The meeting rose at 7.05 pm.

