Mr. Baja (Philippines): We join previous
speakers in congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month. We thank other delegations for their words of
welcome to the new members of the Council, including
the Philippines.

In addition, we thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this public meeting and for presenting - in
your capacity as Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) - a comprehensive and substantive assessment
of implementation by Member States of the sanctions
measures imposed against Al Qaeda, the Taliban and
individuals and entities associated with them. We
welcome this open and public format as we highlight
the vital importance of international cooperation at all
levels, of exchanging information and of greater
coordination of States' actions in making the sanctions
more effective. In that regard, this public meeting may
once more impress upon all Member States the crucial
importance of submitting comprehensive national
reports to the Committee as one of the means to assess
the effectiveness of the measures and Member States'
compliance with them, even as it delivers a message on
the need for Member countries to be more forthcoming
in cooperating with the Committee's work.

My delegation also commends the 1267
Committee for the hard work that it has being doing -
under the leadership of its Chairman and with the
support of the Monitoring Group - to gather more
information on the ground from Member States to
further strengthen the Committee's capacity for
analysis and research. At the same time, the dialogues
conducted by the Chairman and by the Monitoring
Group have been opportunities to further clarify
implementation of the measures and to discuss such
concerns as human rights and due process.

Since the Chairman presented his midyear report,
in July last year, when some progress was reported in
implementing the measures - particularly with regard
to freezing terrorist assets and refining the consolidated
list - the world has experienced more deadly terrorist
attacks attributed to Al Qaeda and the Taliban in
various parts of the world. There have also been reports
of the Taliban's resurgence. Those events only
highlight the urgency of further strengthening and
refining the implementation of the measures.

As we are all aware, terrorism has its own
dynamics. As new measures are imposed or refined,
new modes of operation to circumvent them are
resorted to by terrorists to further their actions. Thus,
we need to be constantly vigilant in monitoring the
operations of terrorists to plug the loopholes that allow
them to commit more terrorist acts. In that regard,
cooperation by all Member States in sharing
information cannot be overemphasized.

Even as the Committee focuses on further
strengthening legal and administrative measures and on
enlisting international cooperation and coordination
towards that end, my delegation - without detracting
from that focus - wishes to invite attention to other
aspects that can be pursued, which are also referred to
in the report, with particular reference to South-East
Asia.

The first aspect is what the Committee cites as a
targeted approach. South-East Asia is a fertile area for
anyone wishing to understand post-ll September 2001
Al Qaeda planning, leadership and tactics. There are
reports of Al Qaeda enmeshing itself in local conflicts,
co-opting independence movements wherever they can
be found and helping so-called revolutionaries to fund,
plan and execute attacks. The Committee could analyse
and assess the complex web of terrorism and local
conflicts that Al Qaeda has been able to exploit. That
would require extensive ground reporting and an
accurate diplomatic and intelligence network. While
the objectives of Al Qaeda and the Taliban are
generally known, local individuals or entities who
cooperate and conspire with those groups could have
their own specific motivations for cooperating with
their cause. The more specific motivations and
objectives of such local individuals or groups could be
identified by Member States and examined by the
Committee. That approach would lead us to identify
the basic causes of terrorism and to develop even more
targeted measures - and fewer legal measures -
which could have more immediate impact and longer-
term effectiveness.

The second aspect is technical assistance. We are
grateful to note the Committee's recognition of the
need to have both technical capacity and the political
will to implement anti-terrorism measures. Technical
assistance could be in the form of building the capacity
of national border security institutions and of
dismantling terrorists' financial networks. Because of
the ease of travel within South-East Asia, terrorists and
terrorist groups have connected with one another in
fluid and shifting combinations. Moreover, financial
machinery is very important to the spread of terrorism
and its operations. The financial backbone of any
terrorist organization is the nerve centre of its activity.
We are gratified that the Committee is looking into new
and non-conventional modes of operation with regard
to the movement not only of people, but also of funds
and weapons, and also exploring technical assistance to
plug such loopholes.

The third aspect is the exchange of information.
Valuable lessons have been drawn from the Chairman's
dialogue with the European Union. My delegation sees
similar value in the Chairman's forthcoming dialogues
with other regional groups, aside from individual
countries. For example, a number of regional initiatives
to counter terrorism have been undertaken by the
Association of South-East Asian Nations. Some years
ago, the Philippines, Indonesia and Malaysia signed an
agreement on exchanging information and establishing
communication procedures to combat terrorism. That
agreement has since been acceded to by Brunei,
Cambodia, Thailand and Viet Nam. Exchanging
information brings down the barriers of distrust
separating individual agencies and enables them to be
aware of the extent and depth of terrorist networks.
Interaction and the implementation of the provisions of
this agreement has attended to local enforcement
officials. In addition, conferences and seminars on
maritime security and terrorist financing have also
been conducted in the region.

Not only the findings and recommendations
resulting from your trips, Mr. President, but also the
analysis and recommendations contained in the recent
report of the expert Monitoring Group, provide
valuable inputs for further refining the measures for
more effective implementation.

Those who have been observing terrorist acts
could provide inputs on what they mean and why such
acts were committed or how they are linked. The
likelihood of the success of terrorist organizations and
individuals is only as strong as the weakest link in the
web of cooperation among States will allow.

It is important to know what terrorists think, what
they used to think, what their organization is like and
what they used to do. Every arrest, every idea of
terrorists which is revealed, changes the way terrorist
groups operate, and they react and metamorphose into
something else.

In South-East Asia, it is important to know and
understand how Al Qaeda, the Taliban and other
individual groups related to them could unite disparate
groups across national and ethnic lines, using their
language and traditions. That is why my delegation
supports your intention, Mr. President, to be
transparent, responsive and proactive in your work.

