Mr. Dahlgren (Sweden): It is not difficult to say who
is to blame for the crisis between Iraq and the United
Nations, a crisis which has been such a large part of the
entire workload of the Security Council during the two
years that we have sat at this table.

It is the Government of Iraq that again and again has
refused to abide by the clear obligations which a unanimous
Security Council has decided upon. It is also clear that Iraq
has not fulfilled the promise it made to the
Secretary-General only a month ago: to cooperate fully and
without conditions with the United Nations weapons
inspectors.

This has provided a difficult challenge for the Security
Council, because the question of Iraqi compliance is indeed
a matter for this Council to deal with. We around this table
are responsible for ensuring the implementation of the
Council's resolutions. We are the ones who should decide
the course of action. And I can state tonight, as I have
before, that when Iraq seriously violates its obligations, and
when all diplomatic means have been exhausted, my
Government would even be ready to support a decision in
the Council on military action, as a last resort. But that
would be a decision for the Security Council.

Now, without such a decision, military action was
taken against Iraq a few hours ago. These air strikes were
carried out just as the members of the Council were
meeting in informal consultations, discussing the latest
report from the United Nations Special Commission
(UNSCOM) on Iraq's cooperation and also the Secretary-
General's letter, which he had sent to us late last night.

The Secretary-General said earlier tonight that this
was a sad day for the United Nations and for the world.
My Government regrets these air attacks and the
consequences they may have for civilians in Iraq. We also
regret the fact that the Security Council has been
presented with a fait accompli - that we did not even get
a chance to conclude our evaluation of the latest
developments before military action was a fact. We fear
that this will not be of much help in getting the
inspections going again, because the Council's overriding
aim must remain to rid Iraq of its programmes for
developing these awful weapons of mass destruction.

