Mr. Dauth (Australia): I begin by thanking you,
Mr. President, for bringing this meeting together today
and also by thanking my friends the Chairs of the 1267,
1373 and 1540 Committees for their briefings. Let me
demonstrate my thanks in a practical way: by being
brief and to the point.

Although, of course, I welcome the opportunity
to speak at the Council's second joint public meeting
on this item, as I did at the first such meeting in April,
I am very sorry to have to do so against the background
of the appalling terrorist attacks in London. Together
with all other right-thinking people around the globe,
Australians were shocked at the savagery of those
attacks. But in equal measure we are full of admiration
for the courage and determination displayed by the
British Government and the British people.

At such a time, and particularly when the United
Nations system is under unprecedented scrutiny, it is
appropriate that forums such as this one pay regard to
how United Nations bodies and mechanisms are
working to meet the challenge of terrorism. Australia
welcomes the efforts to date, in particular by the 1267
Committee, to engage more closely with Member
States, including through undertaking regional travel.
We also appreciated the opportunity earlier this month
for our Ambassador for Counter-Terrorism to brief the
1267 Committee on our counter-terrorism cooperation
and capacity-building efforts in the Asia-Pacific
region. I note with a certain measure of pride that we
are only the fourth Member State to take advantage of
that opportunity to date. We recall the emphasis placed
on capacity-building by the Secretary-General in his
comprehensive strategy to fight terrorism, and we
encourage all three committees to intensify their
engagement with Member States and regional bodies.

The time has come, however, for us to
acknowledge that more can, and indeed must, be done.
I personally recall - as I know others in this Chamber
do - that, in the terrible days immediately after
11 September 2001, we were seized with a grim

determination that saw the United Nations become the
focal point of the international response. That
momentum now risks being lost. Indeed, I would argue
that in many respects, that momentum has indeed been
lost. We note, for example, that the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate was due to become
fully operational by January 2005. It is vital that that
important body be able to finalize its staffing
arrangements and give full effect to its mandate at the
earliest possible date. Similarly, we would stress the
need to give effect to calls for better coordination
within the United Nations system on counter-terrorism
matters generally.

Much work is already being done by States,
including my own, at the bilateral and regional levels.
That is all to the good. But effective coordination by
the United Nations can help ensure that assistance is
directed to where it is most needed and to where it will
make the most difference. The committees can be
assured of Australia's continued support for those
efforts.

