Let me at the outset express our sincere appreciation to the Estonian presidency for having organized this important high-level meeting on the protection of civilians in armed conflict. We thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf and Ambassador Peter Maurer for their comprehensive briefings. More than two decades after the Security Council formally adopted resolution 1265 (1999), taking up the protection of civilians as an important thematic issue, civilians continue to suffer disproportionately from the devastating consequences of armed conflict. The United Nations reported more than 20,000 civilian deaths or injuries in 2019 alone as a result of armed attacks. Indeed, there has been some progress. The protection of civilians is now a key pillar of all peacekeeping operations mandates. The Council has also embraced the conceptual evolution of the protection-of-civilians mandates, taking concrete actions relating to the situation of religious minorities, missing persons and persons with disabilities in armed conflict, as well as the protection of civilians from hunger. There have also been efforts to advance the protection agenda through the development of policy tools and guidance at the United Nations and by Member States. However, those conceptual commitments are yet to be sufficiently translated into consistent implementation on the ground. The implementation of the Action for Peacekeeping initiative is serving as a vehicle to improve mandate delivery, including the protection of civilians. However, the following areas continue to require greater attention and more robust commitments. First, conflict-affected civilians, particularly women and children, continue to bear significant direct and indirect consequences. Their livelihoods, places of worship, schools, hospitals and civilian infrastructure continue to be targeted. Conflict-driven hunger is on the rise. These already vulnerable populations also have to cope with the dire consequences of climate change, including low productivity of subsistence farms, droughts, flooding and other natural disasters. Secondly, non-State armed groups are increasingly employing explosive devices to inflict incalculable suffering on populated areas, resulting in at least 17,904 civilian casualties in 2019. Terrorists such as Al-Shabaab and Boko Haram continue to recruit and forcibly abduct children to use in asymmetric warfare. Thirdly, sexual crimes and gender-based violence against women and girls are being deployed as instruments of war. Taken together, these changing dynamics of contemporary conflicts pose diverse and complex protection challenges for all peacekeeping operations. Unfortunately, these protection challenges have been further complicated by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. As countries turn inward to save lives and mitigate the socioeconomic impacts of the pandemic, armed groups are eyeing an opportunity to expand their reach and influence. The pandemic has also impacted the capability of States, including by weakening trust in institutions that are providing service to the general public. Digital technologies are being weaponized to spread misinformation, sow discord and incite violence. Despite the overwhelming support from States Members of the United Nations, the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire received mixed responses. In that regard, it is regrettable that the members of the Security Council are not able to reach consensus on sending the right signal. Furthermore, multilateral institutions and the rules-based international order are under increasing pressure. To keep pace with these changes, peacekeeping must continually evolve and adapt to the changing global situation as well as to conflict and security dynamics. That means that we must be willing and ready to go beyond rhetorical commitments. The Security Council, the Secretariat and troop- and police-contributing countries must work together in line with our shared commitments under the Action for Peacekeeping initiative to reinforce efforts towards a better protection of civilians and, most importantly, to ensure the full implementation of that solemn objective. That entails making sure that peacekeeping missions are properly resourced and sufficiently equipped to fulfil their mandates, including by removing caveats. Ethiopia attaches great importance to the protection of civilians in armed conflict. As a major troop-contributing country to United Nations peace operations and African Union-led peace support operations, Ethiopia places great emphasis on deploying troops who have been adequately trained, vetted, equipped and instructed. We are also committed to the full implementation of our obligations under international human rights and humanitarian law. As one of the signatories to the Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians, a set of pledges covering the whole gamut of peacekeeping - assessment and planning, force generation, training and equipping personnel, performance and accountability - we have incorporated the protection of civilians into the training modules for all contingents. All our peacekeeping activities are also being evaluated in accordance with the principles of the protection of civilians and the Kigali Principles. We have established a continuous feedback loop and use the experience from the field to proactively improve training modules. We are also taking concrete steps to increase the participation and leadership role of women peacekeepers. We believe that the protection of civilians, while important, cannot substitute for the primacy of politics to prevent the outbreak, escalation and recurrence of armed conflict. Building sustainable peace requires, first and foremost, addressing the root causes of conflicts such as poverty, socioeconomic marginalization and the exclusion of women, youth and minorities. I also wish to highlight that, as one of the largest refugee-hosting countries, Ethiopia continues to provide international protection to hundreds of thousands of refugees who have been forcibly displaced by grave violations resulting from armed conflicts. Our revised refugee policy, which grants refugees more rights and the opportunity to be better integrated into society, has been hailed by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees as one of the most progressive refugee policies in Africa and a model for other refugee-hosting countries. Let me conclude by reiterating Ethiopia's support for efforts to silence the guns in Africa and our firm commitment to fully implementing existing protection standards and strengthening compliance with international humanitarian and human rights law.
