Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Given the need to pursue active international
efforts towards a peaceful settlement to the armed
conflict in South Sudan and the important role in that
process being played by the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan, Russia decided today not to stand in the
way of the Security Council's adoption of the resolution
on the subject.

Nevertheless, we were unable to vote in favour of
resolution 2241 (2015), since it fails to take into account
certain serious concerns of the Russian Federation and
other members of the Security Council. Inter alia,
we cannot agree with the wording in the form of an
ultimatum regarding sanctions against South Sudan. The
use of such language in the resolution is inappropriate,
as the resolution's main purpose is to supplement the
mandate of the peacekeeping mission with tasks aimed
at facilitating the peace process, rather than to frighten
the parties with the "club" of sanctions.

In principle, it is unacceptable when, instead
of serious political and diplomatic work, certain
colleagues prefer to arbitrarily make use of Security
Council sanctions. A political settlement will not
be helped by that. The South Sudanese parties need
support and encouragement to implement the agreement
and to settle the conflict in South Sudan, whereas
the threat and use of sanctions will only harden their
positions. We are also unable to agree with the wording
regarding the Council's intention to formulate any
kind of assessment of the hybrid court in South Sudan,
since, under the peace Agreement and the decisions of
the African Union, the establishment and activities of
that judicial body are the exclusive prerogative of the
African Commission.

We are also against attempts to force South
Sudan to accept the use by the Mission of unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAVs), despite the repeated energetic
objections by the Government of that country. The
absence of Juba's consent could result in problems if
UAVs are deployed and operated. The wording in that
regard effectively undermines the State sovereignty of
South Sudan and is therefore unacceptable to a number
of Security Council delegations. Also inappropriate are
calls on the part of the sponsors of the resolution for
the Council to agree to those intrusive provisions just
because the Secretariat requests them. We do not think
that the recommendations of United Nations officials
represent an obligatory action manual for Member
States or the Security Council.
Finally, we have long had serious concerns about
the working methods of certain colleagues in the
Security Council who, in the furtherance of their
national interests, try to push through resolutions that
ignore the legitimate concerns and redlines of other
delegations. Such practice is at odds with the calls of
those colleagues for more democratization and greater
openness in the Council's work.

