Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I would like to thank Under-Secretaries-Generals Rosemary Di Carlo and Jean-Pierre Lacroix for their comprehensive updates. I welcome the presence of my dear friend the Permanent Representative of the Republic of the Sudan at this meeting. Viet Nam warmly welcomes a number of positive developments in the Sudan, in general, and Darfur, in particular, over the past few months. We commend the efforts of the transitional Government in promoting peace, stability and development in the country, as well as in responding to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. It is our sincere hope that the historic peace agreement initialled on 31 August between the Government and the Sudanese Revolutionary Front andthe Sudan Liberation Army-Minni Minawi faction will open a new chapter of peace in the country. We applaud the efforts of the parties in conducting negotiations largely through remote means, as well as neighbouring South Sudan's efforts in relentlessly mediating the peace process. It shows that COVID-19 cannot prevent genuine will to make peace. We would also like to reiterate our support for the work of the United Nations, the African Union and other relevant partners in contributing to the peace process in the Sudan. At the same time, we acknowledge that the Sudan continues to face many challenges. It is crucial that all the relevant parties in the Sudan continue to fully uphold their agreements, thereby contributing to long-term peace and stability in the country. Allow me to highlight the following points. First, the full implementation of the Constitutional Declaration and the peace agreement remain the most important tasks to achieve long-term peace and stability in the Sudan. We welcome the appointment of the interim governors in 18 states and call on the Government to make further progress on the transitional process. Furthermore, we urge the remaining armed groups in Darfur to engage in peace negotiations as soon as possible. We believe that more confidence-building measures should be supported in that regard. The support of the United Nations and the African Union, as well as the mediation role of South Sudan, can be further strengthened. In the light of the challenges of COVID-19, it is important to support the Government in maintaining dialogue with the relevant parties in Darfur, including via remote means. Secondly, we take positive note that the security situation in Sudan, in general, and Darfur, in particular, has become more stable. We urge the armed groups in Darfur to continue to exercise restraint. At the same time, inter-communal violence in Darfur remains an issue of particular concern. We note the efforts of the Government in addressing the recent incidents and call on the Government to find comprehensive and sustainable solutions to address the root causes of intercommunal violence in Darfur, including measures to promote dialogue and reconciliation among different tribes and communities. We also commend the efforts of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) in contributing to peace and stability in the region. As the mission is in the drawdown process, we encourage UNAMID to further engage in capacity-building activities for Government security forces. Thirdly, it is important to address the critical economic and humanitarian challenges in the Sudan. Viet Nam welcomes the commitment of relevant donors at the Sudan Partnership Conference on 25 June in support of the country. The international community should continue to support the Sudanese Government in addressing the COVID-19 pandemic as well as the current socioeconomic challenges, including food insecurity, natural disasters and climate change. As noted in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/912), the transition needs both financial and political support. The Sudan's access to international financial assistance, investment and debt relief in the short and medium term needs to be facilitated, not prevented. Fourthly, we commend the efforts and cooperation by the United Nations and the Sudan since June and look forward to the timely deployment of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in Sudan (UNITAMS) to support the Sudan's transition and development. We also strongly support the active role and participation of women in all stages of the transitional process, and therefore appreciate the efforts of UNITAMS to support the engagement of women in that regard. In conclusion, we fully share the view of the Secretary-General in his report: the question is whether the international community can afford not to support the Sudan as it strives to meet its formidable challenges. The Security Council simply cannot.
