Mr. Argiiello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Madame President, allow me at the outset to
congratulate you on assuming the presidency of the
10-43968
Security Council for this month, and to thank you for
the timely convening of this meeting.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict
continues to be a matter to which the international
community and my country attribute considerable
importance. It is unfortunate that the Security Council
must continue to consider this matter, as civilians still
suffer greatly from the consequences of armed conflict.
Thus the Council must continue its commitment to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict with the
fostering of full respect for humanitarian law and
international law and human rights, as well as the fight
against impunity.

My delegation has repeatedly underscored the
value and significance of the 1949 Geneva
Conventions, which represented a significant step
forward for the international community with respect
to the dehumanization through which it had lived. Six
decades later there are still conflicts. Unfortunately
there are still many situations in which civilians are
targets of attacks, resulting in unacceptable deaths
among the civilian population, situations in which
children are recruited as soldiers and girls are recruited
for purposes of abuse. Rape and every kind of sexual
abuse are daily occurrences, and thousands and even
millions of people are displaced. Access to
humanitarian support is rendered impossible or is
seriously hindered. Many such situations are
exacerbated by the lack of mechanisms that guarantee
justice and punishment for perpetrators - that is,
impunity prevails.

Parties in an armed conflict are subject to the
basic norms of international humanitarian law, which
stipulate that civilians must be protected from the
effects of conflict. As regards non-State armed groups
present in those armed conflicts that are not of an
international character, it is clear that common article 3
of the four 1949 Geneva Conventions contains specific
obligations that must be respected by the parties in
conflict. It also applies to a party or parties that are not
of a State nature.

Peacekeeping operations and the protection of
civilians are of direct concern to the Security Council.
As I have indicated on other occasions, my country is
convinced of the need to include protection activities in
mandates of United Nations missions and to develop
them with clarity and provide them the resources they
need in an efficient and timely manner. Interaction with

the contingents on the ground is essential for the
mandates to be not only clear, but also, and
fundamentally, appropriate to the circumstances that
the peacekeeping operation will face.

Regarding the composition of the contingents, it
is important to bear in mind the structure required to
meet the needs for the protection of women, in
particular, in matters of sexual violence. It is also
important to bear in mind the need to protect children
from being recruited as soldiers, and for their
rehabilitation.

Another critical aspect of the protection of
civilians is ensuring access to humanitarian assistance.
If parties to a conflict fail to fulfil their obligations
according to international humanitarian law, they must
at least do their utmost to ensure access of shipments
and materials and the delivery of support. Also,
persons fleeing combat areas must be allowed to safely
transit to areas where they can be safe from hostilities.

One delegation mentioned the possibility of
establishing commissions of inquiry. On this matter,
and in the matter of international conflicts, I would like
highlight a means for one or more parties to a conflict
not only to gain access to an investigation of facts that
could be serious violations of the Geneva Conventions,
but also to obtain the unofficial offices of an impartial
body that can allow full respect for the Conventions. I
am referring to the International Fact-Finding
Commission established in Protocol I to the Geneva
Conventions. We encourage States to keep that
possibility in mind, and we welcome the fact that, at its
sixty-fourth session, the General Assembly granted
observer status to the International Fact-Finding
Commission.

Being a victim of an armed conflict is a condition
that extends beyond the end of hostilities. In the
stocktaking exercise of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) that took place during the Review
Conference of the Rome Statute, held in Kampala,
there was an analysis of the victims and affected
communities. One element to underscore - as was
done at that event - is that the ICC has allowed
victims of serious crimes to speak for themselves and
that child soldiers were recognized more as victims
than perpetrators. It was also underscored that women
are usually subjected to sexual violence as a tactic of
war. In the case of both women and children it is clear
that they continue to be victims when they return to
their communities, often stigmatized and subjected to
reprisals.

In that context it is thus necessary to refer to the
role of justice, a matter to which my country attaches
the utmost importance. Perpetrators of war crimes,
genocide or crimes against humanity are responsible
for serious crimes, and they must be brought to justice.
Ensuring justice in relation to such very grave crimes
is more than an obligation of States; it is in the interest
of the international community represented in this
Organization, since justice contributes to alleviating
the wounds caused by the conflict and paves the way
for reconstruction and peace.

This Council established two international
tribunals: the International Criminal Tribunals for the
former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda. Currently we are in
transit towards a system for international justice for the
most serious crimes, including war crimes, based on a
permanent tribunal more than on an ad hoc tribunal.
Such a permanent tribunal is fully functioning - the
International Criminal Court, established by the 1998
Rome Statute.

It must be repeated once more that, in accordance
with international humanitarian law and the resolutions
of this Council, any kind of attack targeting civilians
and other protected persons in situations of armed
conflict - including obstructing access to
humanitarian assistance and the recruitment of
children - constitutes a violation of international law.
Therefore I wish to conclude by once more urging
strict compliance with the obligations arising from the
1899 and 1907 Hague Conventions, the four 1949
Geneva Conventions and their 1977 Additional
Protocols, general international law, and Security
Council decisions.

