Mr. Johansson (Sweden): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Nordic countries, Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Norway and my own country, Sweden.

At the outset, let me thank the Jordanian presidency
for taking the initiative to hold this timely high-level
debate and His Royal Highness Crown Prince Al Hussein
and Secretary-General Ban for their remarks earlier.

Let me first say a few words about the terrible
tragedy that took place in the Mediterranean last
weekend. On the night between Saturday and Sunday,
900 people, many of them in their youth, drowned. It
is now said that up to 1 million people are waiting in
Libya to try to cross the sea. These people drowned on
their way to Europe to find a better life.

I bring this up because I believe that this issue
is closely linked to what we are talking about today.
As Mr. Scott Atran said, we must offer young people
a positive personal dream with a concrete chance of
realization, or else some young people will turn to
radical religious or political movement. Others, I say,
will desperately try to go to other parts of the world,
searching for a better life, even if it means risking
their lives. These issues have common roots in more
ways than one. War and poverty lead to the migrant
situation that we now see, but war and poverty also lead
to political and religious radicalization.

In Europe, the European Council is meeting today
because of the disaster. We say that we must increase
our efforts to save lives at sea. We must fight the
traffickers who are sending people to their deaths on
these boats, but we must also take joint responsibility
for the migrant situation, based on the principle that
applying for asylum is a human right. The international
community must step up its efforts to end the war in
Syria and, more importantly than ever, to stabilize
Libya. If that is not done, I think many thousands
more people, many in their youth, will die in the
Mediterranean this year. The European Union has a
responsibility, but so has the United Nations in trying
to prevent this from happening.

To prevent radicalization, we must stress not only
the importance of peace but also the importance of
economic and social development. His Royal Highness
Crown Prince Al Hussein pointed out in his speech how
many young people there are in the world today. Today's
young people - at times called "millennials" - make
up 25 per cent of the world's population. Many have
faced the harsh realities of terrorist attacks, wars,
economic crises and ensuing unemployment. Millions
of young people are lone migrants, refugees or internally
displaced, uprooted from their homes and families. Not
content to be subjects without a voice, the politically
aware will strive for civil rights and for citizenship, as
they did during the Arab Spring, which appears to have
been a youth-driven movement.

But if the search for identity andbelonging-existential
needs of every human person - is not satisfied by
inclusion in a democratic society, frustrated young may
look for recognition elsewhere. Not invited to take part
in building a peaceful social environment, active young
people will find a context and search for a role where
they are allowed to perform, and sometimes this takes
destructive forms. It is therefore very important that we
strengthen the role of young people. Faced with Violent
conflict, young people can participate as agents of
positive change and, given the right educational tools,
young people can also be agents of peace.

Last year, the United Nations Alliance of
Civilizations and Education First once again brought
together 75 young people - a whopping 75,000 had
applied - for an international summer school, where
they learned about the United Nations and discussed
areas where it can better collaborate with youth
organizations to advocate for peace and security around
the world.

It is clear that we need to safeguard our democracy and
make our societies more resistant against radicalization
to violent extremism. This requires local efforts on a
global scale. We support Secretary-General's initiative
for a United Nations plan of action to prevent Violent
extremism. Against this background, it is important to
acknowledge that many young people already play a
role. With courage and dignity, they act as community
leaders in peacebuilding, reconciliation and post-
conflict reconstruction. However, this is often unseen
or simply overlooked. We need to do more to highlight
their existing contributions to peace. Peacebuilding
is a cornerstone of United Nations systemwide action
plan on youth, and the youth dimension needs to be a
cornerstone of the United Nations plan of action for
preventing violent extremism.

We must recognize young women, like their male
contemporaries, as key stakeholders in countering
violent extremism. They have unique knowledge,
experience and resources that are vital to our efforts.
We must understand the different roles that women play
in conflict, both as fighters and as peacemakers. This
means that young women and young men alike must be
included in analysis of extremism; otherwise, we will
lose important findings that can contribute to countering
extremism and promoting conflict resolution.

The very phenomenon of violent extremism has
served as a reminder to all of us on all continents
that exclusion can breed fanaticism among majority
and minority groups alike. We see Islamophobia and
anti-Semitism, as well as discrimination against
Christians. Young people from many different countries,
including from some of the Nordic countries, have for
various reasons been attracted by terrorist propaganda,
radicalized and turned into foreign terrorist fighters.
This is a serious problem. We need to strengthen
the legislation, for instance, by criminalizing travel
undertaken to fight for terrorist groups, as the Security
Council has called on all Member States to do. But that
is not enough; we need to do more.

The Nordic countries believe that our strongest
counter-narrative is our firm commitment to democracy,
human rights and equality as the most effective tools to
prevent radicalization into terrorism. In addition, we
emphasize that economic growth and resolute efforts to
manage rapid population growth alleviate the extreme
poverty that threatens global peace and prosperity. The
White House Countering Violent Extremism Summit
established an ambitious framework for our efforts
against violent extremism, and the Nordic countries
are taking an active part in the follow-up efforts. We
share a common interest in embracing and enhancing
the role of our youth in countering violent extremism
and promoting peace.

I would like to conclude by quoting a young,
second generation Swede who previously harboured
sympathies with radical groups but who has today
renounced these Views:

"From wanting to bring terror and chaos
to society, I now want to help others finding
themselves in the same situation as I was. I have
lots of experience. I know the circumstances. And
it is my duty to give something back to our society."
