Mr. Lambertini (Italy): Ijoin previous speakers in
thanking the Secretary-General for his briefing and for
his commitment to resolving such critical issues as the
famines in the four countries under discussion.

Italy remains deeply concerned about the devastating
levels of extremism, instability, violence and conflict
that currently exist around the world and have
resulted in famine conditions and starvation chiefly
in four regions - South Sudan, Somalia, Yemen and
north-eastern Nigeria - thereby affecting more than
20 million people. Let us say it clearly. This is perhaps
the largest humanitarian crisis that the world has ever
witnessed, with a particularly devastating impact on
the most vulnerable, including women, children and
persons with disabilities.

Since we last discussed those issues in the
Security Council - in the Arria-formula meeting
that Italy organized with other partners in June and
in the presidential statement adopted in August
(S/PRST/2017/14) - the situation has not improved.
On the contrary, despite the fact that the famine in
South Sudan has been contained, the number of people
suffering from food insecurity has reached a record
of more than 800 million around the world. There is
therefore no more time to lose if we wish to prevent
the worst effects of such crises and counter those that
are already going on. Italy has always believed in the
importance of a consolidated and multidimensional
approach to such issues.

First, it is clear that these famines are the result
of man-made, conflict-driven crises. However, as we
have long advocated, we believe that we should also
pay attention to the fact that the relationship between
conflict and food insecurity functions in both directions.
We have to realize that food insecurity can fuel even
more violence, prolong conflicts and bring about the
displacement of peoples. In particular, its role as a root
cause of forced migration was recently highlighted in
the World Food Programme report entitled "At the root
of exodus: Food security, conflict and international
migration". In that regard, we must step up our efforts
to strengthen the resilience of agriculture and food
systems at risk, so as to render them less vulnerable to
possible future shocks, honouring the commitment that
we made last May at the Taormina summit under Italy's
presidency of the Group of Seven. In that regard, I also
want to recall the seminar that we held last week in
Rome on conflicts and hunger, organized by Italy, the
Netherlands and Switzerland in partnership with the
Food and Agriculture Organization and the World Food
Programme, which was one part of a three-part cycle
of seminars aiming at highlighting the link between
conflicts and food security as key to tackling those
issues in a holistic and effective way.

Secondly, in terms of methodology, we are
convinced of the importance of ensuring the Council's
backing and engagement on these issues, through early-
warning mechanisms and real action, so that we can
break the cycle of violence and ensure full humanitarian
access and the immediate disbursement of pledged
funds. In the specific case of these four famines, I
would like to pay tribute to the spirit of initiative
and leadership shown by the Secretary-General, who
exercised his function of providing early warning to
the Council in his February and June letters. If we
have been able to provide some effective and timely
responses to the ongoing crises, we owe a great deal of
that to his initiative.

Thirdly, from a broader perspective, Italy believes
that the Security Council's growing commitment
this year to humanitarian issues is heading in the
right direction, as it clearly falls within its mandate,
given the wide-ranging implications of those issues
for international peace and security. We must take a
holistic approach when dealing with peace and security
issues, and we therefore encourage members to keep
those issues high on the Council's agenda. That should
also be the case in the future, with another possible
update to the Council by the Secretary-General coming
in the next few months.

Finally, I want to conclude with a thought I had
while I on my way to the meeting this afternoon. As
I was looking around at the city of New York, after an
excellent lunch, I was thinking that we were going to
come to this Chamber to talk about famine and hunger.
It felt like one of those wake-up calls that we who work
here in the Council sometimes have. It is true that we
discuss many crises here, but at the end of the day, this
is one area where we really can make a difference.

