Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would first like to
thank the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan for convening
this important open debate, and we salute and welcome
Crown Prince Al Hussein bin Abdullah II. We thank the
Secretary-General, Mr. Peter Neumann and Mr. Scott
Atran for their briefings. We are also very grateful for
the excellent concept paper prepared by the Jordanian
delegation to guide us in today's debate (S/2015/231).

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has given
special attention to this issue in the context of the fight
against the Violence and terrorism that are plaguing
the Middle East and major regions of Africa. We
categorically reject and condemn terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations. That is why we believe it
cannot be encouraged or aided financially or militarily
with the aim of destabilizing or overthrowing a
Government. There is no good or bad terrorism; its
culture is always one of death.

Young people constitute the most mobile sector of
society. They have always been politically mobile and
a barometer for the political ideas that change history.
If today we are acknowledging that young people in
significant parts of the world are mobilizing in support
of fascism, intolerance, racism and extremism, we must
also acknowledge that the problem is rooted in society
as a whole. These young people are the victims of a
sick system or society. Thus if we are to address the
root causes of young people's attraction to extremism
and their active involvement in terrorism, we must
make a comprehensive, critical assessment of the crisis
embodied in a way of life that is marked by violence,
exclusion, poverty and a profound spiritual void in the
face of the triumph of the material world.

According to the United Nations Population Fund's

State of World Population 2014 report, today there are
more young people - about 1.8 billion of them aged
between 10 and 24 years old - than there have ever
been. Young people constitute about a quarter of the
world's population. The report also states that about
500 million of those aged between 15 and 24 live on
less than $2 a day, and more than 74 million of them are
unemployed.

Since poverty and exclusion among young
people are a global phenomenon and a challenge
that every nation must deal with, we wonder why
the phenomenon of terrorism is worse in particular
regions such as the Middle East and Africa. On the
strange and incomprehensible world chessboard that
is the scene of the great Powers' struggle for their
interests, vast areas of conflict have been created,
sometimes bloody and tragic, as in the Middle East and
North Africa, and at others chronic and permanent,
as in central Africa. In those areas of conflict, the
great Powers, with their immense military, economic
and propagandistic communications resources, have
focused their extraordinary power on promoting war,
violence, sectarianism, hatred, religious intolerance
and extremism.

The experts on social behaviour undoubtedly
bring many more elements to bear in the study and
understanding of how such factors influence young
people. But what is clear is that from their earliest years
of life, when a person's world view and spirituality are
formed, the children who have grown up in and been
exposed to the brutality of war in Iraq, Libya, Syria,
Yemen and Palestine are now the most likely to be those
young people who are flocking to join extremist and
terrorist groups in large numbers. It is highly probable
that the children in some regions of Africa who have
lived in a permanent atmosphere of social Violence,
exclusion and severe poverty have become the young
people who, sadly, are joining terrorist groups today.
The hopelessness and lack of opportunity felt by the
millions ofyoung people living amid war, sectarianism,
colonialism or foreign occupation create the conditions
that enable extremism to appear, grow and develop.
The emergence of extremist and terrorist groups has
changed the face of societies that previously were
tolerant and amicable towards their ethnic and religious
minorities.

We should be asking ourselves in this debate how
it is possible that terrorist groups such as the Islamic
State in Iraq and Syria, Al-Qaida and the Al-Nusra
Front have the capacity to act that they do. So much
military capability. So many weapons. Such mobility.
Such communications capability. Who is funding
them? Who is arming them? Who is encouraging them?
If we want to protect young people from involvement
in extremism and terrorism, there can be no double
standards on this issue. All support to terrorist groups,
direct or indirect, must end. The flow of weapons must
be stopped.

Another aspect, no less important in addressing
the problem, relates to the institutional capacity of
States to prevent the propagation of extremism and
of terrorism among young people, especially in post-
conflict situations. The various State institutions
need to coordinate their work of incorporating young
people and introducing them to the possibilities of
political, economic and social participation. Inclusive
processes, literacy, education, work and attention to
their spiritual and social needs are fundamental in
combating hopelessness and emotional distress among
young people. Nation States and the United Nations
could coordinate across agencies, such as the UNESCO
and the United Nations Development Programme,
the promotion of zones of peace, tolerance, culture
and socioeconomic development with the active
participation of youth in the social fabric. That task is
much more urgent and important in those countries that
have developed or are exposed to armed conflict. In
war-torn areas where children and youths are exposed
to the trauma of violence and sectarianism, the absence
or weakness of State institutions in the countries leaves
room for extremism and terrorist groups.

Mrs. Kawar took the Chair.

Venezuela, like other countries in Latin America
and the Caribbean, is a zone of peace. The Bolivarian
Revolution led by President Hugo Chavez began, and
President Nicolas Maduro Moros has continued to
develop, a vast programme of inclusion of all sectors of
society, with particular emphasis on youth. A massive
literacy campaign in our country, which has allowed
UNESCO to declare Venezuela a territory free of
illiteracy, has developed missions of basic education
that include more than 850,000 young people who
had been outside the formal education system, and in
municipalities, more than 2.5 million young people
have had access to universities or higher education.
Furthermore, we have established the Ministry of
Popular Power for Youth, which directly serves the
needs and addresses the problems of that sector of
the country, and we have enacted laws specifically
designed to ensure youth employment. The inclusion
of young people as actors in society - their active
participation, their protection as a vulnerable sector and
their sociopolitical empowerment - are fundamental
elements to successfully develop in society a culture of
peace and tolerance that will triumph over a culture of
violence and death.

