The President: I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the representative of Viet Nam. I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his insightful briefing. I share the concerns of the Secretary-General about the continued delays in the implementation of the 2015 Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. It is also our particular concern that the security situation in northern and central Mali continues to deteriorate due to intercommunal violence, armed conflict and terrorist armed groups' operations. We condemn the recent terrorist attacks against the Malian security forces and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). We pay tribute to peacekeepers and members of the Malian armed forces who have sacrificed their lives for the sake of the peace and security of the Malian people. In the light of the findings and recommendations in the Secretary-General's report (S/2019/983), the letter on the situation in Mali and the work of MINUSMA, my delegation wishes to make the following observations. First, we are of the view that implementing the 2015 Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation should continue to be the key strategy for sustaining peace and security in Mali. In that vein, we welcome the conclusion of the inclusive national dialogue sessions held in November and December 2019. National ownership and the full participation of the parties concerned in the inclusive national dialogue in Mali should be encouraged so that all differences can be bridged. We also note efforts to push forward the process of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration in northern Mali. Secondly, we urge relevant parties to uphold their responsibilities to protect civilians in armed conflict, especially women and children. It is also necessary to increase the participation of women and youth in political and economic decision-making processes in Mali. Thirdly, we support the activities of MINUSMA. We welcome international efforts to sustain peace in Mali and support the role of the African Union and the Economic Community of West African States in making a contribution to peacekeeping, security and sustainable development in Mali. Lastly, we call on all regional and international partners to speed up the implementation of the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and its support plan. We welcome cooperation between France and the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel, reinforced at the Pau summit in France on 13 January, with the aim of protecting civilians and preventing the terrorist threatfrom spreading into bordering countries, in accordance with the relevant Security Council resolutions. I now resume my functions as President of the Council. I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Mali.
