Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): We wish to
thank Mr. Annabi for his presentation of the Secretary-
General's report. Given the fact that the representative
of Greece will make a statement on behalf of the
European Union, I shall limit myself to making a few
comments.

Kosovo has a huge challenge before it. Its
institutions have yet to demonstrate that they can
function normally and be truly representative.
Furthermore, recent incidents, such as the attack on a
bridge that took place a few days ago, recall images of
a past that is not entirely obsolete. The process of the
transfer of powers should be gradual and take into
account the capacity of institutions to assume
responsibilities. The basic idea is that the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government should be accountable
to the people of Kosovo in the provision of services
and to the Administration which they serve. These
responsibilities do not include the powers reserved for
the Special Representative in accordance with
chapter 8 of the Constitutional Framework.

Spain is greatly concerned by the fact that the
Kosovo Albanian leaders and the Provisional
Institutions publicly and continually promote positions
that run counter to resolution 1244 (1999), instead of
devoting themselves exclusively to the management
and administration of matters under their authority that
affect the entire population of Kosovo, including
refugees. The refusal to take the interests of minorities
into account and the decision of the Kosovo Assembly
to adopt a law on higher education violate the
Constitutional Framework and run counter to resolution
1244 (1999).

All the Kosovo communities should take part in
the provisional and municipal institutions. We therefore
condemn any attempt to create mono-ethnic institutions
and urge the dismantling of the parallel administrative
structures that continue to function.

The return of displaced persons and refugees is an
issue that remains to be resolved, despite the minimal
progress achieved with UNMIK'S intervention. We are
particularly disturbed by the fact that there are still
cases of violence, threat, intimidation and
discrimination against members of minorities. Kosovo
will be a democratic society only when the majority
respects the minority.

Finally, we appeal for dialogue between Belgrade
and Pristina within the framework of resolution 1244
(1999). The leaders of both sides should avoid creating
tension and work constructively. That will certainly be
to the benefit of all communities.

