The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity as the representative of Ethiopia.

We express our appreciation to Special
Representative Yamamoto for his comprehensive
briefing on the latest report (S/2017/783) of the
Secretary General on the situation in Afghanistan
and the activities of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). We would like
to thank the Secretary-General for the report, which
highlights the key political and security challenges
facing Afghanistan. We are pleased to have the Foreign
Minister of Afghanistan with us and to having had the
opportunity to listen to him.

We take note ofthe new political dynamic emerging
in the political and security sphere, particularly with
respect to the consolidation of authority within the
National Unity Government and the consensus reached
on various issues, such as on high-level appointments,
between President Ghani and Chief Executive
Abdullah. We also recognize the progress made by the
Afghan Government on its reform agenda, particularly
in the areas of anti-corruption activities - without
understating existing complications concerning the
political situation.

Political temperatures will certainly rise during
the next several months leading up to parliamentary
and district council elections in July 2018, which were
announced by the Independent Election Commission.
It is encouraging that many opposition groups are
motivated to take part in the upcoming election. It
will be absolutely important to establish the necessary
political atmosphere for the holding of peaceful and
credible elections. One hopes that the security situation
will not be a major obstacle to achieving that goal. What
the country is facing in that area is indeed formidable.
As the Secretary-General has said, the lack of
progress in negotiations between the Government and
Taliban remains a serious challenge. Conditions in rural
areas cannot be overlooked, where the Taliban appears to
have ratcheted up its activities. We appreciate UNAMA's
efforts to continue formal dialogue with the Taliban
and with three other local peace initiatives to seek a
political solution to the continued conflict. No doubt,
the long-term security and stability of Afghanistan can
be ensured only through a comprehensive and inclusive
Afghan-led, Afghan-owned political process. We agree
with the Secretary-General that a regional environment
conducive to an Afghan-led peace process is indeed
essential. The role of the countries of the region is
also very critical in creating the necessary conditions
for the fight against terrorism and the advancement
of peace efforts. In that regard, we take note of the
bilateral and multilateral engagement by the Afghan
Government with neighbours and other countries of the
region. The promotion of regional cooperation would
certainly advance peace, security and development in
Afghanistan and in the region. We also take note of the
incremental progress made with Pakistan. We hope that
it will be strengthened further.

Afghanistan faces enormous security, social and
economic challenges and, without continued inclusive
economic growth and development, sustained peace
and security cannot be achieved. That is why there is
the need to support the Government's continued efforts
to determine its development priorities in 10 national
priority programmes for 10 sectors, as envisioned
in the Afghanistan national peace and development
framework. The efforts of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in the promotion
of peace, reconciliation, dialogue and support for the
development efforts of Afghanistan, with full respect
for the country's sovereignty, as well as the leadership
and ownership of the Afghan Government, remains
very important.

Let me conclude by expressing support and
solidarity with the Afghan Government in its difficult
task of addressing the country's multiple challenges
with a view to promoting peace, reconciliation and
development. I also wish to express our appreciation
to UNAMA for its continued role in support of those
endeavours, as well as for efforts in carrying out its
mandate under difficult circumstances.

I resume my functions as President of the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Pakistan.
