Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
I would like to thank the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process for his briefing.

Last week the world witnessed, and the Security
Council appropriately condemned, a heinous terrorist
attack in Bulgaria. The target was innocent Israeli
tourists on vacation on the Black Sea. Five Israelis
and one Bulgarian were murdered, and scores more
were injured, including citizens of Bulgaria, Italy,
Slovakia and the United States. There is no justification
whatsoever for such attacks on innocent people. We
extend our heartfelt condolences to the victims and
their families, and to the people of Israel, Bulgaria and
all those countries whose citizens were harmed in that
awful event.

Turning to Syria, the Council has failed to respond
credibly to the Al-Assad regime's onslaught because
of vetoes by two of its members, the most recent
occurring last week. As Ambassador Rice said after
last Thursday's vote, "The Security Council has failed
utterly in its most important task on its agenda this
year". It is our hope, as she also said then, that the day
will come when the Council can assume its proper
role at the centre of the international response to the
conflict in Syria.

We continue to see a grave escalation ofthe regime's
attacks against its own people that continues to spread
instability well beyond Syria's borders. As we saw
with incidents over the weekend, the regime is losing
its grip over increasingly large swathes of the country.
The Syrian opposition now controls several crossings
on the Iraqi and Turkish borders. That is increasing
evidence that the Al-Assad regime will not remain in
power, and since the Council has failed to shoulder
its responsibilities, the United States will continue to
work with the friends of the Syrian people to increase
pressure on the regime, support the Syrian opposition,
marshal relief for the Syrian people and help prepare
for a Syrian-led democratic transition.

We are deeply concerned about the incident on
18 and 19 July in the area of operations of the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF),
as described in a letter from the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations to the Council last week,
in which nearly 500 armed soldiers from the Syrian
Arab armed forces entered the area of separation. Over
the past six months, Syria has committed multiple
violations of the key provisions of the 1974 agreement
that led to the establishment of UNDOF, but the July
incident constitutes the gravest breach of the agreement
in its nearly 40-year history. We strongly condemn
all violations of that disengagement agreement. Such
violations must cease immediately.

The ongoing violence in Syria continues to put
pressure on all its neighbours to support dramatic
increases in the number of refugees. We thank those
countries for providing the refugees with safe harbour.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) estimates that, on 18 and
19 July alone, 18,000 Syrians fled across the border
into Lebanon, meaning that the estimated number of
refugees in Lebanon increased by nearly 60 per cent in
just two days. More than 117,000 Syrian refugees have
registered with UNHCR in Jordan, Lebanon, Iraq and
Turkey. It has become a humanitarian crisis. The United
States has provided $64 million during the current
fiscal year to address the needs of those displaced by
violence, and we urge other donors to provide support.

Let me also reiterate what President Obama said
on Monday about one of the most worrisome aspects
of the Syrian crisis. The regime has now acknowledged
stockpiles of chemical and biological weapons.
President Al-Assad and those around him have been
duly warned that the world is watching and that they
will be held accountable should the regime make the
egregious mistake of using such weapons.

Lebanon has been particularly hard hit by
Al-Assad's aggression. The Syrian military forces
have repeatedly shelled Lebanese territory, resulting
in civilian deaths in several locations. We condemn
those acts and demand that the Syrian regime cease
such egregious violations of Lebanon's sovereignty. As
reiterated in the Council's 9 July press statement, the
international community is unified in its demand that
Lebanon's sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity
and the authority of the Lebanese State be respected, in
accordance with Security Council resolutions.

Despite those destabilizing external dynamics,
Lebanese President Sleiman continues to press ahead
with national dialogue talks - an initiative that we
welcome. We support the efforts of Lebanese political
leaders to remain focused on maintaining calm,
including safeguarding Lebanon from the effects of the
crisis in neighbouring Syria. In addition, we welcome
Prime Minister Mikati's 11 June announcement that the
Government of Lebanon had fulfilled its 2012 funding
obligation to the Special Tribunal for Lebanon.

I will now turn to our shared goals related to a
comprehensive Middle East peace. During Secretary
of State Clinton's recent trip, she met separately with
President Abbas and Prime Minister Netanyahu and
reinforced the message that the United States supports
the parties' continued engagement based on the leaders'
exchange of letters earlier this year. She underscored our
view that the status quo is unsustainable. She reiterated
that our goal remains an independent Palestinian State,
living in peace and security alongside the Jewish
democratic State of Israel.

During the visit, Secretary Clinton stated publicly
that "it is only through negotiation, not through
international venues or unilateral acts, that peace can
be and will be secured". We believe that unilateral
actions harm the peace process and only entrench
both sides. The use of international forums to force
decisions on final status issues that must be resolved
directly by the parties does nothing to tangibly improve
the daily lives of Palestinians, nor to foster the trust
between the parties needed to make progress towards a
two-State solution. It is incumbent upon both parties to
discontinue unilateral actions thatjeopardize efforts to
achieve peace.

The United States reiterates that it does not accept
the legitimacy of continued settlement activity and
opposes any effort to legalize settlement outposts. As
we work to put the parties back on the path of direct
negotiations, we must also address the realities on the
ground. The international community, along with the
Palestinian people, has invested a great deal in the
Palestinian Authority's institution-building efforts.

Sustaining that effort is now in jeopardy as the
Palestinian Authority faces its worst financial crisis
ever. Israel, the donor community and the Palestinian
leadership are all taking steps to address the crisis, but
the financial gap remains large and the consequences
of failing to close that gap are severe. More needs to
be done now to avoid a collapse of the institutions so
vital to providing for the daily needs, governance and
security of the residents of the West Bank.

We should all also focus our support on the United
Nations Reliefand Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA), particularly in this time
of financial crisis for that Agency. UNRWA provides
essential services to the Palestinian refugee population
in the West Bank, Gaza, Lebanon, Jordan and - it is
important to remember - Syria. UNRWA provides
education for more than 485,000 schoolchildren,
primary health care in 138 clinics and social services for
the most vulnerable Palestinian refugees, particularly
in Lebanon and Gaza.

Before concluding, let me reiterate that any further
rocket fire on southern Israel from Gaza is simply
unacceptable. We remind members of the paralysing
effects that such attacks have on the lives of innocent
Israelis and the threat that they pose to the peace
process and to the region generally. The international
community must stand united in opposition to such
threats.

