Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to express to the President that I am grateful
for her presence in New York and grateful to the
Colombian delegation for organizing this meeting on a
problem so important and urgent, as the Secretary-
General has said.

(spoke in French)

I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Mr. Kenzo Oshima for his presentation of the
excellent report of the Secretary-General and the
Director-General of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, Mr. Angelo Gnaedinger, for his extremely
interesting briefing.

As a country associated with the European Union,
Bulgaria fully supports the statement that will be made
shortly by the Danish presidency of the European
Union.

Today, we are observing Human Rights Day and
commemorate the creation of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights. This day is an opportunity to reflect
on what we have accomplished in this area and to
concentrate all our efforts on finding the resources to
fill the gaps remaining, including - unfortunately -
in the area of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.

Civilians constitute the majority of war victims in
many parts of the world. War is an everyday reality for
millions of people. Even as we speak, men women and
children are being killed, mutilated, raped, torn from
their lands, imprisoned and tortured. The report of the
Secretary-General (S/2002/ 1300) clearly and quite
rightly indicates that over the last decade, more than
2.5 million people have died as a direct consequence of
conflicts and that more than 31 million people have
been displaced and uprooted. Decisive, timely
measures are needed to put an end to the suffering of
innocent victims of war, especially the great number of
women and children.

Bulgaria recognizes the fundamental and
irreplaceable value of the aide-memoire of 15 March
2002. The objectives for protecting civilians that it
contains offer a real opportunity for the Security
Council to ensure that its mandates in conform with the
requirements of the humanitarian community.

We believe that the aide-memoire and the road
map annexed to the present report will enable us to
determine whether existing peacekeeping operations
can effectively protect civilians.

In our opinion, it would be useful to conduct
periodic reviews on the impact on civilian populations
of mandates created by the Security Council.

The workshop on the situation in the Mano River
region, held on 18 July 2002, helped us to assess the
effectiveness of the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone. I thank the delegation of the
United Kingdom for successfully carrying out that
exercise.

The progress made in several current United
Nations peacekeeping operations is in large part due to
the presence of advisers on issues concerning women
and children. However, we still have concerns. The
impact of insecurity and the lack of access for
humanitarian organizations are obvious in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Liberia,
Afghanistan and elsewhere.

The culture of prevention has not yet been fully
mainstreamed. The protection of civilians would be
better served if we could act further upstream. The
Security Council ought not to intervene only when
violent incidents take place on a large scale. It should
act proactively and collectively before these conflicts
spread.

The entry into force of the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court on 1 July 2002 is a beacon
of hope that finally we will be able to put an end to war
crimes and crimes against humanity and, in particular,
to end impunity. It is shocking to see how widespread
is the impunity that has accompanied flagrant
violations of human rights, in particular against
civilians, in time of war. Bulgaria is determined to
work for the success of the Court, which we feel is a
turning point in the history of humanity's efforts to
prevent war atrocities.

Observation, monitoring and verification of
respect for human rights were always important aspects
of the implementation of civilian protection
programmes. The Department of Political Affairs, the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and other United Nations bodies that
deal with protection should cooperate more closely to
see to it that peace agreements that are negotiated have
very broad scope and, within a political context,
encompass humanitarian principles and priorities
relating to human rights.
