Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): The move
by the United States to seize the Council of protests
in Iran by some of our citizens for their legitimate
grievances - some exacerbated by none other than
the United States itself, in dereliction of its obligations
under the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action - is an
abuse of its power as a permanent member and an abuse
of the Council itself. It is unfortunate that, despite the
resistance on the part of some of its members, the
Council has allowed itself to be abused by the current
United States Administration in holding a meeting on
an issue that falls outside the scope of its mandate,
putting on display the failure of the Council to fulfil its
real responsibility in maintaining international peace
and security.

It is to the discredit of the Security Council to take
up a matter that is of a purely domestic nature while
failing abjectly to lift a finger when it comes to genuine
issues, such as the long-lasting occupation of Palestinian
territory - to which this item is dedicated - and
the indiscriminate bombing of Yemen over the past
three years, which has so far resulted in the deaths of
thousands of human beings and brought hunger, disease
and destruction to the Yemeni people. All such failures
of the Council are all attributable to the obstructionist
approach of the United States delegation, and the list
goes on and on.

This is nothing but another desperate attempt by
the United States Administration to escape forward,
as it has lost every shred of moral, political and legal
authority and credibility in the eyes of the whole
world. Following the acts of disruption undertaken
by the United States Administration, such flouting
international law and disrespecting the practices of
civilized behaviour in international politics, it is now
desperately reaching for any straw to keep it afloat.
There is a long history of United States bullying at
the United Nations, but this is a preposterous example.
The purely internal affairs of a nation - in this case,
protests that the Iranian Government has addressed with
the utmost respect for the rights of protestors and made
every attempt to deal with peacefully, despite violent
infiltrators and direct encouragement by foreign forces,
including the President of the United States - cannot
be the subject of debate by the world's most important
security organ.

I would be remiss ifI also failed to mention, for
those who may not remember, the United States long
history of intervention in the internal affairs of Iran.
A continuous pattern of disruption in the course of the
democratization process in Iran can be traced back
to the coup staged by the United States against Iran's
democratically elected Prime Minister in 1953. Hostile
acts intensified once the Iranians rose up to overthrow
their dictator ruler, who was, unsurprisingly, loved by
the United States Government. Since then the United
States has, among other things, backed attempted
military coups and acts of sabotage in Iran; imposed
illegal and inhumane unilateral sanctions against
ordinary Iranians; unconditionally supported Saddam
Hussein in his eight-year destructive war against the
Iranians, including by providing him with chemical
weapons; and even directly engaged in military
confrontation with Iran in defence of Saddam. I would
also refer to the 290 innocent lives lost - including
66 children - on board Iran Air flight 655, which was
shot down in July 1988 by the United States Navy in
the Persian Gulf. It would be a remiss of me not to
recall that the United States shamelessly decorated the
Commander who gave the order to fire.

While President Trump may be enamoured of
the fact that no protesters demonstrated against his
presence while he was in our neighbourhood a few
months ago - he may be unaware that they have no
right to protest - the fact is that in every democratic
country citizens will, from time to time, take to the
streets to protest one thing or another, and Iran is no
exception in that regard. In every country the security
forces - be they police, national guards or others - are
present to ensure that protests remain peaceful, and
Iran is, again, no exception. However, while the United
States accuses Iran of suppressing protests, one can
only gasp at the hypocrisy when viewing images
of Occupy Wall Street protestors being beaten and
dragged by American policemen; or, to go back in time,
when National Guardsmen fired on and killed peaceful
student protestors at Kent State University; or when
watching film of the protests outside the Democratic
National Convention in Chicago in 1968.

More recently, we can rewind to the 1992 Los
Angeles riots over the brutal beating of Rodney
King by policemen. The killing of innocent African-
Americans at the hands of law enforcement continue
unabated, as we all know, when the California Army
National Guard, the 7th Infantry Division and the 1st
Marine Division were called in to restore order. A total
of 63 people were killed during the uprising; 2,383
were injured and more than 12,000 were arrested. I do
not recall any member of the Security Council calling
for debate on that issue when the United States military
was involved in suppressing domestic unrest. Nor
was there debate in 1993, when the Federal Bureau of
Investigation raided the Branch Davidian headquarters
in Waco, Texas, after a 51-day standoff, killing 83 men,
women and children, the vast majority of whom were
entirely innocent of any crime. It would behoove the
United States Ambassador - who perhaps was busy
with other priorities at the time of their occurrence - to
read up on these travesties ofjustice on American soil
before condemning others for far less.

But it is not just the United States that has an
unenviable record in dealing with protestors. In 2005 in
France, then Interior Minister Nicolas Sarkozy declared
a zero-tolerance policy towards protests emanating
from the deprived suburbs of Paris and other major
French cities, referring to demonstrators - largely
poor immigrants - as "scum". With almost 3,000
arrests and several deaths, the unrest was quelled only
to re-emerge in multiple other forms, most recently in
2017, when the police rape of a young French citizen of
African origin once again triggered protests. I do not,
however, recall the Security Council being summoned
for a debate on this.

In 2011 in the United Kingdom, then Home
Secretary Theresa May utterly condemned the
violence amid protests in her country, saying that such
disregard for public safety and property would not be
tolerated. Meanwhile, Prime Minister David Cameron
warned rioters,

"You will feel the full force of the law. And if you
are old enough to commit these crimes, you are old
enough to face the punishment."

In the span of merely a few days, some 3,100 arrests
were made. The authorities having been told that they
could ignore existing sentencing guidelines, two young
men who had promoted riots via Facebook, with the
proposed disturbances not having been attended by any
other people, were handed four-year sentences. I do not
recall any country among the self-described civilized
democracies bringing any of these reactions to protests
to the attention of, let alone opening a debate at, the
Security Council.

We have hard evidence of the violence in Iran
committed by a handful of the protestors, in some
cases resulting in the deaths of policemen and security
officers, having very clearly been directed from
abroad. These violent elements surfaced in the crowds
as early as Friday evening last week, at the inception of
the protests. At that point, the hands of elements from
outside Iran, including instigators based in the United
States and Europe, began to be visible. The incitements
to violence included encouraging and training people
to use Molotov cocktails, seize ammunition depots and
stage an armed uprising.

One United States resident took to social media to
order the killing of 120 members of our security forces,
threatening that those to be included among the killed
were their families in their homes. This same United
States resident publicly stated to United States media,
with a complete sense of impunity, that they should
burn down Government mosques and police stations. It
was clear enough not just to us but also to third parties
that Telegram Messenger executives decided to block
some ofthe violence-inciting channels, citing a line one
should not cross.

All ofthis is also well documented in the mainstream
media. In one case, a man with an extensive criminal
record captured a fire engine and ran it over a car,
murdering the driver and his 12-year-old son. In some
other cases, hooligans became involved and looted
shops and banks. Altogether the peaceful, legitimate
protests - which my Government has emphatically
confirmed are a constitutional right that has been
respected since the Islamic Revolution - were abused
and hijacked to stage vandalism, hooliganism and, in
several cases, the firing of weapons.

President Trump and some other United States
politicians have enjoined the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham (ISIS) and its patrons in our region to openly
incite and encourage violence. It is the ultimate irony
that the country whose Head of State has thrown his
lot in with those visiting violence and destruction on
Iran should have its United Nations Ambassador, who
has a history of ignorant and belligerent comments
against my country, bring it as an issue for debate to the
Security Council.
If anything, it is Iran that should be demanding
a debate and investigation into how and why foreign
elements are allowed with impunity to encourage
and support unrest and violence in another sovereign
and founding State Member of the United Nations.
For example, let us debate why the United States has
failed, in spite of repeated official requests, to stop
the incitement to violence and the murder of innocent
civilians from its territory, or why some European
countries continue to provide safe haven to terrorists
who are inciting violence and armed rioting as we
speak. Why are social media sites that promote and
teach the use of Molotov cocktails and boast about
people using arms to kill in Iran operate freely in their
territory, in spite of clear evidence? These are the real
issues that need to be addressed.

In order to make this farce into something more
than a mere waste of time, let us discuss something else
that the Council has not but should deal with. The free
flow of information has brought with it the spread of
fake news and other forms of information wars. These
threats are common to all free and sovereign nations.
We are not alone in finding it necessary to formulate
solutions to these challenges. Recently, French President
Macron also lauded efforts to increase transparency
about the ownership of websites, including their foreign
funding, and the further empowerment of Government
agencies to fight against any attempt at destabilization
by television stations controlled or influenced by
foreign States. He also suggested countering social
media channels used as propaganda by introducing
laws to disclose the source of funding for particular
sponsored content.
Such measures are needed not simply to fight back including ISIS. That fight is not zero sum; we will
against fake news, rioters and electoral interference, but either Wi" together 0" 1033 together.

also and more ominously in the fight against terrorists, The meeting rose at 4.45 pm.
