Mr. Melkert: I would like to thank you, Sir, for
this opportunity to brief the Council on the
implementation of the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) and the situation
in Iraq. As indicated in the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2011/213), while notable progress was
made during the past four months, particularly with the
formation of a new national partnership Government,
many challenges remain.

The unfolding events in the region to which Iraq
belongs and the persistent calls for change are of major
significance. While Iraq has made remarkable strides in
its democratic transition in recent years, which
included the adoption of a Constitution, credible
national elections, a broad national partnership
Government and an opening environment for media
and civil society, the people of Iraq are now demanding
the dividends that were promised by their leaders. At
the core of the protests that have been taking place
across Iraq since 25 February are legitimate concerns
about better employment opportunities, the delivery of
basic services and accountability. Unless these
2
demands are addressed, the political and democratic
gains made thus far may seem hollow to many ordinary
Iraqis, and this will be no easy task for the Government
of Iraq.

How to create opportunities and respond to the
aspirations of young people will be key. An estimated
78 per cent of Iraq's population is under 35 years of
age, and 43 per cent is under 15. Youth constitute over
50 per cent of the total unemployment rate, about 1
million people. In addition, less than 40 per cent of
children are enrolled in school after their primary
education, and only 21 per cent are enrolled in the last
two years of secondary school. These statistics paint a
picture of a young population with few prospects for
the future.

Iraqi elected officials are taking these issues
seriously and have shown a renewed determination to
act decisively. Prime Minister ai-Maliki has tasked
Cabinet ministers with ensuring that, within 100 days,
viable plans are introduced to achieve tangible progress
in the key areas of job creation and service delivery.
Other initiatives have also been announced, including
cuts in defence expenditures and Government salaries,
as well as in tackling corruption.

Together with Deputy Special Representative for
Humanitarian, Reconstruction and Development
Affairs Christine McNab, on behalf of the United
Nations country team, we initiated discussions with the
Prime Minister on how the United Nations could
further support his Government's efforts. Subject to the
Government's approval and co-financing support, we
proposed to implement a list of projects that could
rapidly be expanded and fast-tracked to address, in
particular, youth employment, health and nutrition,
solid waste management, the public distribution of
food rations and access to water. Specific initiatives
were also proposed to support the dialogue between the
Government of Iraq and civil society, with an emphasis
on the promotion of human rights. In addition, next
month, bilateral donors, the World Bank and the United
Nations will meet with a Cabinet delegation to review
the policy recommendations relating to Iraq's
economic and social development and institutional
capacity-building, which were presented to the
Government by the Iraq Partners Forum in the so-
called "Iraq Briefing Book".

Pending issues from the Government formation
still require attention. The appointment this week of the
11-29308
Minister of Planning will hopefully contribute to
fostering progress on the social and economic front. I
remain concerned, however, that agreement on key
security ministerial portfolios has yet to be reached.
With the announcement by Mr. Ayad Allawi, on
3 March, of his decision not to chair the proposed
national council for higher policies, it is as yet unclear
how power-sharing agreements reached during the
Government formation negotiations in November 2010
will be effectively followed. I would therefore urge
political leaders to set aside their differences and bring
the Government formation process to a close. This
should help the Government of Iraq to live up to its
promise to those who voted in March 2010.

While developments in Iraq are no longer at the
forefront of international media coverage, Iraq's
stability is still under pressure. The targeting of various
communities and terror attacks on Government
structures, such as the one of 29 March against the
Salahaddin provincial council building, which killed at
least 76 people and injured almost 100 others, continue
to remind us of destructive minds and agendas at play.
Furthermore, the possibility that some may try to
exploit some of the developments in the region to
inflame sectarian tensions should not be discarded.
While the overall trend in security incidents in recent
months suggests a downward slope, an average of 25
incidents per day were still reported over the past
month. Yet the Government, security forces and society
continue their efforts to make decisive progress
towards stability and normalization. As United States
forces prepare to leave, Iraq should not be forgotten,
and the international community should stand ready to
continue its support.

The call for change in Iraq also reflects people's
demands for stronger and more systematic observance
of fundamental human rights. While the Government
has explicitly upheld the principle of the right to
demonstrate, violent incidents have taken place in
different parts of the country, resulting in the deaths
and injury of many Iraqi citizens. On a number of
occasions, restrictions were placed on effective
participation in demonstrations and on free reporting
by the media. I hope that the relevant authorities will
look into these incidents and take steps to ensure that
these basic rights are protected. For its part, UNAMI is
working closely with the Council of Representatives
and the Government towards the establishment of an
independent high commission for human rights. As the
11-29308
law is already in place, we have now been requested to
assist with the recruitment of members and to advise
on best practice.

As I speak, UNAMI is concerned about reports of
recent violent incidents in Camp Ashraf, which have
resulted in deaths and injuries. I reiterate that efforts
are needed to stop violence and aim to peacefully
resolve all issues. I would like to call on the
Government of Iraq to enable a UNAMI mission to
monitor the situation on the ground.

Stability and long-term prosperity in Iraq will
also depend on progress made with respect to national
reconciliation and, in particular, the resolution of
disputed internal boundaries and the status of Kirkuk.
In that regard, I would like to bring to the attention of
the Council some of the recent events that have taken
place.

As described in the report of the Secretary-
General, following a day of demonstrations in Kirkuk
province on 25 February, the Kurdistan Regional
Government (KRG) deployed about 5,000 Peshmerga
forces into the province, effectively encircling the
disputed city of Kirkuk. KRG authorities later
explained that this was in response to the alleged threat
of attacks against Kurdish citizens by former regime
elements and extremist groups in the province. This
movement of troops was not coordinated via the
combined security mechanism established between the
Iraqi Army and Kurdish Peshmerga forces under the
auspices of the United States Forces in Iraq. In a
meeting with President Barzani, I expressed my
concern about this action and the fact that it occurred
outside the framework aimed at preventing tensions on
the ground along the disputed boundaries. On the basis
of the most recent information, it appears that efforts
from many sides have indeed led to the Peshmerga
forces returning to their original positions.

Those events underscore the need for discussion
on the future of the triangular combined security
mechanism and the process to resolve the country's
disputed internal boundaries. In line with the call by
the Security Council on 15 December 2010 (see S/PV.6450) for intensified efforts to move towards a
negotiated political agreement, UNAMI is exploring
with Government and political leaders possible
modalities to ensure such a process of dialogue.
Building on the work of the high-level task force,
which has led to better understanding on issues related
to property, language and detainees, as well as on the
protection of minorities, I am pleased to report that
some encouraging preliminary progress has been made.

With our assistance, on 27 March, an agreement
was reached by Government officials and
representatives of the main political parties to work
with UNAMI on key outstanding issues through a
standing consultation mechanism that would provide a
forum for preventive multilateral consultation in cases
of potential conflict. It was also agreed that further
meetings in April and May would be held to discuss
Kirkuk, Ninewa, the national census and the combined
security mechanism. With respect to the future of that
mechanism, if requested by the parties, I believe that
UNAMI could play a possible liaising and facilitating
role between all the parties with a View to maintaining
peace and stability and in line with its mandate to
develop "processes acceptable to the Government of
Iraq to resolve disputed internal boundaries"
(resolution 1770 (2007), para. 2 (a) (iii)).

Turning to the situation between Iraq and Kuwait,
I would like to recall the importance of the resolutions
adopted by the Council on 15 December (resolutions 1956 (2010), 1957 (2010) and 1958 (2010)), which
accelerated the normalization of Iraq's standing within
the international community. The Council's decision
served as a strong incentive for Iraq and Kuwait to step
up efforts to resolve outstanding issues between them.
On 12 January, the Prime Minister of Kuwait, Sheikh
Naser Al-Mohammad Al-Ahmad Al-Sabah, visited the
Government in Baghdad, the first such visit since
1991. During my visit to Kuwait on 1 February, I felt
strongly encouraged by the commitment expressed by
the Emir of Kuwait, His Highness Sheikh Sabah
Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, and Government
interlocutors to advance progress and the resolution of
issues with Iraq as part of a full normalization of
relations between the two countries, both of which
recognize that they stand to gain from cooperation in
all areas. Following that visit, I shared with both sides
identical suggestions for a road map to address
outstanding issues, in line with the guidance by the
Secretary-General and the Views expressed by Council
members in December.

On 16 February, Prime Minister al-Maliki paid a
historic visit to Kuwait, which provided an opportunity
for an in-depth exchange of views on all issues relevant
to both parties. Further evidence of a new chapter in
the relations between the two countries was provided
by President Talabani's attendance at the fiftieth
anniversary of the creation of the State of Kuwait and
the twentieth anniversary of its United Nations-
mandated liberation, in 1991. Importantly, members of
Iraq's Parliament and representatives of its business
community, media and civil society have joined hands
with their Kuwaiti counterparts in looking ahead
towards a brighter future. On 27 and 28 March,
Foreign Ministers Sheikh Mohammad Al-Sabah
Al-Salem Al-Sabah and Hoshyar Zebari headed the
first meeting of the joint ministerial committee
established to look into all issues concerning the two
countries, with the resolution of the outstanding
Chapter VII issues as a priority. I have received reports
from both Governments that the atmosphere of the
meeting was quite positive and that the discussions on
highly sensitive issues for both sides were constructive.

I am confident that the expected reaffirmation of
the land and maritime boundaries pursuant to
resolution 833 (1993) by the Government of Iraq is
now Within reach. In turn, there is now a basis for
achieving full mutual understanding of the principle of
unimpeded maritime access to Iraqi ports. I have
expressed the hope that both parties will now seize this
unique opportunity to show leadership in settling a
complex and painful conflict, at a time during which
the region is searching for new perspectives of
cooperation and development as a substitute for
conflict and stagnation.

Allow me to express my appreciation for the
support that the General Assembly has provided in
approving a substantial increase in UNAMI'S budget to
enable us to respond to the huge operational challenges
we face. To become self-reliant, we need to generate a
full range of logistics, security and life-support
resources. We are doing so in close cooperation with
the Government of Iraq and the Iraqi security forces.

However, there are many uncertainties, and at
times cumbersome procedures, that may stand in the
way of a seamless and timely transition. The situation
confronting us is unprecedented, and further
complicated by the urgent need to ensure the continued
safety and security of our international and national
staff. To that end, we look forward to, first, the
continuation of Member State support through the
provision of additional United Nations guards;
secondly, final approval for the enlargement of our
compound in Baghdad, which is a more cost-effective
and quicker alternative to the original plan for new
11-29308
construction, as a basis for the future one UN-house;
and, thirdly, the construction of UNAMI premises in
Kirkuk and Basra. I am pleased to report a generally
productive level of cooperation with and support by the
Government of Iraq, and we look forward to further
results of our presence in the near future.

Finally, I would like to once again thank the
Security Council for today's opportunity. On a personal
note, I would like to add that while living and working
in Baghdad, I have observed the start of the removal of
endless lines of concrete T-walls over the past months.
It is symbolic of considerable progress to overcome the
years of war, conflict and sanctions that have plagued
the country, and to bring normality to Iraq's
international standing and the daily life of its people.
Increasingly, the prospect for Baghdadis and residents
of other parts of the country to regain the space and
beauty of their cities no longer seems a dream of the
past. With determination and decisiveness in Iraq, the
United Nations is committed to assisting in building a
better future for its people.

