Mr. de Riviere (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President,
for convening today's meeting and for leading our very
successful visit to the African Union (AU) headquarters
last week. I would also like to thank the two briefers
for their statements. I would now like to highlight
three points.

My first message is that the partnership between
the United Nations, the African Union and African
subregional organizations is of strategic importance for
preventing and resolving crises in Africa today. France
is staunchly committed to supporting that partnership
in the framework of Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations. We also wholeheartedly support
the development of trilateral cooperation between the
United Nations, the African Union and the European
Union. A great deal of progress has been made under
the leadership of the Secretary-General and the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, and
that partnership has already borne fruit.

In the area of prevention, the efforts of the
African Union, supported by the United Nations, the
Southern African Development Community and other
partners, including France and the European Union,
brought increased transparency and credibility to the
presidential elections held in 2018, specifically those in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Madagascar.
More recently, the African Union and Ethiopia have
helped to bring about an agreement in the Sudan, with
the support of the United Nations and the Friends of the
Sudan contact group.
In the area of conflict resolution, the work of the
African Union and the United Nations in the Central
African Republic led to the signing on 6 February of the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic between the Government of
the Central African Republic and 14 armed groups. Since
then, the African Union and the United Nations have
been working in close cooperation to ensure successful
implementation of the Agreement. In the Sahel, the
joint action of the United Nations and the African
Union is essential to achieving full implementation of
the Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.

In the fight against terrorism, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali is providing logistical support to the Joint Force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), whose
role will be strengthened by the initiatives adopted
in September in Ouagadougou by the Heads of State
and Government of the Economic Community of West
African States, with a view to curbing the spread of the
terrorist threat. It was in that context that we proposed
establishing a new partnership for security and stability
in the Sahel, a Franco-German initiative that was
launched in conjunction with the current President of
the G5-Sahel, President Kabore of Burkina Faso, at the
Group of Seven summit in Biarritz.

My second message is that the strategic importance
of the partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union is also due to the growing strength of
African peace operations, which respond to a real need
and enable rapid intervention in crisis hotspots before
they escalate. We therefore support the sustainable
and predictable development and funding of those
operations by the African Union and the United Nations,
including through mandatory contributions. We will of
course continue to take into account the views of our
partners in the African Union and the three African
members of the Security Council in order to arrive at
solutions that respond to operational needs and can
achieve consensus in the Council. In that context, we
believe that the efforts of the United Nations and the
African Union should be continued on several other
tracks - budgets and finance, human rights compliance
and reporting between the two organizations. France is
ready to provide full support in that regard.
My final message is that a broader approach
to crisis response is necessary, both upstream and
downstream. In terms of prevention, tangible results
have already been achieved, as I mentioned earlier.
But we must do more, particularly with regard to
synergies between African Union mechanisms such as
the Network of African Women in Conflict Prevention
and Mediation and those of the United Nations, such
as the High-level Advisory Board on Mediation. Other
aspects are our ability to develop a common vision
on the issues affecting the continent, and the annual
consultations between the Security Council and the
AU Peace and Security Council, which took place just
last week and which play a very useful role. I would
also like to emphasize the role of the three African
members within the Security Council as a bridge
between the two Councils, and lastly, the joint efforts
we can make to ensure that crises are not repeated in
future, particularly by investing in the education of our
younger generations and by taking meaningful action
to counteract climate change.

Before concluding, I would like to stress the
central role of the French-speaking communities in
growing the partnership between the United Nations
and the African Union, and the need to strengthen
that role in both organizations, since the heart of those
communities is in Africa and is therefore key to a better
common understanding of the challenges facing the
African continent.

