Mr. Diop (Mali) (spoke in French): I would like to
begin, Mr. President, by offering you my congratulations
and those of the Malian delegation on the accession of
your country, Sweden, to the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of January 2017. The people
and the Government of Mali greatly appreciate the
contribution of Sweden to the stabilization efforts of
my country. At the same time, I would like to express
our great appreciation to the delegation of the Kingdom
of Spain for the outstanding work it did during its
presidency of the Council last month. Allow me also
to thank the Secretary-General of our Organization,
Mr. Antonio Guterres, for his vision of the United
Nations and for his renewed commitment to support the
ongoing peace process in Mali, which is a guarantee
of lasting stability in our region. I extend once again
the best wishes of the President of the Republic of
Mali, His Excellency Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar Keita, to
Mr. Guterres for success in his new role.

Before going further, I would also like to wish the
new members of the Security Council every success
and to assure them of the full cooperation of the Mali
delegation here in New York. I would also like to
welcome the presence here today of the Ambassador
of Algeria, whose country, headed by His Excellency
Mr. Abdelaziz Bouteflika, played an extremely
important role in restoring peace and stability in Mali,
and I want to thank Algeria also for all the sacrifices
it has made for peace in Mali and for stability in
our region.

The peace process in Mali is difficult, complex and
marked by many obstacles. This morning, the Malian
people were once again torn apart by a suicide attack,
as was mentioned earlier, against the cantonment site
of the Operational Coordination Mechanism in Gao,
which is one of the mechanisms provided for in the
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, an
outcome of the Algiers process. Unfortunately, the
attack caused dozens of deaths, more than 60 wounded
and significant material damage. As we wait to know
the exact circumstances of this criminal, cowardly and
barbaric attack on elements of the Malian armed forces,
elements of the Platform coalition of armed groups as
well as elements of the Coordination des mouvements
de l'Azawad, grouped together for the launch of mixed
patrols, the Government of Mali immediately and
firmly condemned the attack and expressed its deep
condolences to the bereaved families and wished a
quick recovery to all the wounded. The Government
also delared three days of national mourning. The
perpetrators and accomplices of this criminal attack
will be prosecuted and brought to justice. This point
was made earlier by Under-Secretary-General Herve'
Ladsous. It is very clearly an attack whose sole
objective is to undermine peace, focusing as it did on
stakeholders in this same peace.

I believe that it is in these most difficult oftimes that
Malians, be they from the north, the south, the east or
the west of the country, come together in their mourning
and renew their determination to continue defending and
promoting peace wherever it is necessary. This attack
must therefore not distract us from our desire to move
forward, promote peace and refute the will of those
who only want to sabotage the peace process. I wish to
repeat it once again: the Government of Mali remains
committed to implementing the peace Agreement and to
fulfilling all its commitments, because this Agreement,
as it was again brought to our attention this morning, is
the only framework today that allows us to bring peace
and stability back to our country.

The delegation of Mali takes note of the
report (S/2016/ll37) of the Secretary-General
under consideration and congratulates the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Mahamat
Saleh Annadif, on the contribution of his Office
in preparing it. We would more particularly like to
congratulate and thank Under-Secretary-General
Ladsous for the excellent introduction he has just
made of the contents of the report. I am pleased that
the report acknowledges the progress made by Mali
in the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation, highlighting the efforts made by the
Government of Mali under the leadership of President
Keita, whose commitment and determination in the
implementation of the Agreement cannot be questioned,
and this I repeat once more before you and the Council,
Mr. President.

The Government of Mali is also of the view that
restoring State authority throughout the country
remains an important challenge to be addressed in order
to put an end to the security vacuum and the absence of
administration, which is an essential condition for the
provision of basic social services to Malian populations
in need. Furthermore, the Government of Mali shares
the Secretary-General's view that the situation in the
centre and north of the country remains worrisome
owing to the persistence of asymmetric attacks by
terrorist and extremist groups against the civilian
population, the Malian security and defence forces and
international forces. These factors constitute the main
obstacles to the implementation of the Agreement, as
called for on all the parties involved in the process, both
the Malian parties and the international community
symbolized by this body.

The security situation in the centre of the country is
of concern to the Government of Mali, which is carrying
out several initiatives to contain the terrorist threat,
promote coexistence and national reconciliation between
the nomadic and settled populations, but also to take into
account the aspirations of young people in the centre of
the country within the framework of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) process.

The Government of Mali, under the authority of
President Keita, is aware of the impatience of Mali's
partners with regard to the delay in the implementation
of certain provisions of the Agreement. However,
cognizant of its commitments under the Agreement, the
Government side has spared no effort in intensifying
its actions over the past three months to advance the
peace process. That determination has yielded excellent
results despite the very difficult context. Accordingly,
under the rubric of institutional policy reform and in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the peace
Agreement, the process of constitutional reform is well
under way. A draft revised constitution, which is now
ready, has been submitted to a series of consultations
with political parties, signatory armed groups, civil
society organizations and traditional leaders. After its
adoption by the national representatives, the revised
constitution will be submitted for the approval of the
Malian people by referendum, which is scheduled for
later this year.

Similarly, the Government has appointed the
members of the interim authorities and transitional
electoral colleges, as well as special advisers to State
representatives in the northern regions. In that regard,
as Mr. Ladsous reminded us, the Government is
working to facilitate discussions among the parties to
the Agreement to appoint the officials of the interim
authorities and the transitional electoral colleges.
On 20 November 2016, the Government organized
peaceful local elections, which were held in 644 of the
country's 703 communes. The participation rate for
those elections stood at 52.51 per cent, in comparison
with 51.39 per cent in 2009 and 48.67 per cent in 2004,
which proves that citizens have become more interested
in local elections. I commend the assistance provided
by the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and
Operation Bharkane forces to the Malian defence and
security forces in the run-up to elections.

The Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission
is already operational and it has opened regional offices
in all regions of Mali, with the exception of Kidal.

In addition, working alongside MINUSMA, the
Government has development criteria and deadlines in
order to facilitate an assessment ofthe progress made by
the signatories in the implementation of the Agreement,
in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 12 of
resolution 2295 (2016), of 29 June 2016. I would like
to assure the Council that Malian authorities will fully
shoulder their responsibility in implementing those
benchmarks, which will provide new momentum to the
peace process in Mali.
With regard to the issue of defence and security,
during the election period, the Chairs and members
of the National Disarmament, Demobilization and
Reintegration Commission, the Commission on
Integration and the National Council for Security Sector
Reform were nominated. The national strategy for the
security sector was also developed during that period.

I would like to underscore that the Government
of Mali is determined to launch mixed patrols, as we
mentioned earlier. Regrettably, that process has not yet
started because of the many demands put forward by the
other parties to the Agreement, such as, in particular,
the request for the adoption of a decree that recognizes
the various ranks of those to be included in the mixed
patrols prior to their deploymnet. The response to such
demands lies in the implementation of the integration
programme provided for in the Agreement.

The fragmentation of armed groups is an additional
challenge. Mr. Ladsous addressed the rivalry between
armed groups, which increases the number of
interlocutors and complicates the implementation of
the Agreement. That, in turn, has a negative impact on
deadlines, which must then be postponed.

In addition to those political and institutional
defence and security measures, I would like to emphasize
that the Government has continued its development
activities on the ground, when security conditions
allow, through project and programmes already under
way, such as the emergency development programme in
the north of the country and the economic recovery and
reconstruction programme. The Government has also
developed a specific strategy to develop regions in the
north of Mali, which is yet to be approved, and proposed
a draft law to create a sustainable development fund
aimed at financing that strategy. Once again, we call
upon friendly countries and partner organizations that
pledged contributions during successive conferences
on the development Mali to honour their commitments
and assist us in implementing the Agreement.

Efforts to implement the Agreement are ongoing.
To build on the progress that I have just mentioned,
President Keita, who is fully committed to the process,
has decided to make 2017 the year to implement the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali from
the Algiers process. In his address to the nation on
31 December 2016, the Head of State announced key
measures to restore peace and security and achieve
national reconciliation. The President also informed the
country that interim authorities would be operational
during the first quarter of 2017 in all areas in which
it was not possible to hold communal elections. Once
concluded, that operation will make it possible to speed
up the redeployment of the administration and facilitate
the restoration ofbasic social services. It will also allow
for a more efficient return and reintegration of refugees
and displaced Malians.

The Head of State also announced the holding of
the National Accord Conference to be held in March
2017, in accordance with the provisions of article 5 of
the Agreement to create an environment for in-depth
discussion among all Malian stakeholders on the root
causes of the conflict. The goal of the discussion is
to develop a charter for peace, unity and national
reconciliation. In that regard, an organizing committee,
chaired by a high-ranking Malian official, Mr. Baba
Akhib Haidara, as mediator, has been established.

As the Council can see, the actions undertaken
and measures announced illustrate the Government's
determination, under the leadership of the President, to
achieve the effective and comprehensive implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in
Mali. We call upon all Malian parties to show greater
commitment and good faith now that we are at a decisive
juncture in achieving peace. Our population, having
suffered enough, continues to hope for peace dividends.
I invite the international community and the Agreement
Monitoring Committee to play their role as guarantors
of the commitments made by all the parties, while
clearly shouldering their responsibilities, in accordance
with the provisions article 54 of the Agreement.

With regard to the implementation of resolution
2295 (2016), I would like to point out that new elements
have not yet been implemented on the ground. Once
again, therefore, I ask the Security Council once again
to provide MINUSMA with the adequate resources
to enable to fully discharge its stabilization mandate
and assist the Government of Mali in gradually
regaining control of the country. That is our desire.
We will remain committed as a State and will make
every human and material effort necessary to assume
our responsibility. The Malian defence and security
forces will make the necessary sacrifice. Regrettably,
we cannot face the challenges alone; we will need the
support and assistance of our partners. But meeting
those challenges are ultimately still our responsibility.
We recognize that.

I draw the Council's attention to the urgent need
to strengthen cooperation on the ground between
MINUSMA and the Malian defence and security forces.
Efforts are under way but must be enhanced. Today's
events recall the need to move even faster because our
enemies are also determined to do the same.

The process of cantonment and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, which remains a
prerequisite for stabilization in Mali, should be sped up.
This is an ideal opportunity for us to thank all partners
that took part in the donors DDR round table held
on 8 December 2016. I call upon them to honour the
agreements they made in order to move this important
process forward.

Let me make a few comments on the report of the
Secretary-General with regard to the human rights
and humanitarian situation. With regard to the human
rights situation, the report mentions 104 documented
cases of human rights abuses and violations between
September and December 2016. That reveals a decline
in human rights violations and abuses for the period in
question compared to the previous report (S/2016/819),
thereby showing a considerable improvement of the
human the rights situation in Mali. It is to be noted that
the great majority of documented cases are the work of
armed or terrorist groups and were committed in areas
in which legal or investigative services are essentially
lacking because of insecurity. During this period,
the Human Rights Division of MINUSMA attributed
approximately 10 cases of human rights violations to
Malian authorities because of a lack of prosecution
or illegal detention. I can assure the Council that all
documented cases were processed in the legal system
either through opening an investigation or judicial
actions. No one will be allowed to enjoy impunity
in Mali.

Concerned with further improving the human rights
situation, in November 2016 the Government adopted an
ambitious national policy on human rights accompanied
by an action plan as well as a law protecting defenders
of human rights. In the same vein, the Minister for
Justice and Human Rights organized together with the
Human Rights Division of MINUSMA, which I would
like to thank, a training workshop for Malian judges in
Bamako. That kind of training will be extended to other
actors within the legal system.

With regard to the humanitarian situation, it should
be noted that the Government of Mali carried out
several actions in areas affected by the crisis during the
period covered by the report. Those actions took the
form of distributing food assistance to the populations
of the Mopti, Timbuktu, Gao and Kidal regions, as well
as to Malian refugees in Burkina Faso, the Niger and
Mauritania. The Government also rehabilitated, built
and equipped administrative services, health centres,
schools and water infrastructure in the Timbuktu, Kidal,
Gao, Menaka and Mopti regions. Similary, within the
framework of economic renewal, income-generating
actions were financed for the benefit of the displaced
and repatriated populations in the Timbuktu, Gao,
Kidal, Mopti and Se'gou regions. Furthermore, schools
were opened in Kidal for the 2016-2017 school year, and
the State effectively returned to all regional capitals of
the North and the district administrative seats with the
exception of Kidal.

The situation in Kidal is of particular concern
to the Government of Mali because terrorist groups
are trying to establish a safe haven there while they
continue their abuse of the civilian population and
illicit activities facilitated by the criminal economy.
The presence of armed and terrorist groups in the area
are an obstacle to providing humanitarian assistance
and basic social services. I take this opportunity to
call on the international community through you, Sir,
to exercise the necessary pressure on all parties in
Mali, in particular the Coordination des mouvements
de l'Azawad, to honour their commitments under the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, known
as the Algiers Agreement.

In conclusion, I reiterate the thanks of the
Government and the people of Mali to the United
Nations; the countries and institutions that are
members of the Agreement Monitoring Committee;
the troop-contributing countries; and the international
community, in general, for the sacrifices that they have
made in order to permanently and sustainably settle
the crisis in Mali. I also pay tribute to all the victims
of the crisis: the civilian, military, foreign and Malian
victims who have fallen for the cause of Mali, and, with
whom I wish to include the victims of this morning's
attack in Gao. I also commend the outstanding work
of the women and men of MINUSMA and the French
Operation Barkhane in the stabilization process of Mali.
Today, thanks to their support to Mali's defence and
security forces and the enormous sacrifices made by
the Government and the people of Mali, our country is
progressively returning to stability as was shown by the
holding of the twenty-seventh Africa-France summit
in Bamako only a few days ago that was unanimously
hailed as a success.

Lastly, I wish all the members of the Council a
Happy New Year.

