Mr. Strommen (Norway): I would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his frank report, and the
Special Representative for his interesting briefing on
the situation in Kosovo. We have been looking forward
to this first meeting with Mr. Steiner in the Council.
The presence of Deputy Prime Minister Covie and his
presentation here today are also greatly appreciated.

Norway would like to reiterate its full support for
the Special Representative's mission priorities related
to economic development, the fight against crime and
violence, and the creation of a fair and safe society for
all communities. Furthermore, we commend his efforts
to develop the benchmarks, as circulated today. We
welcome the progress made on the formation of the
political and administrative structures of the
provisional self-government institutions. This is
essential to the successful implementation of resolution
1244 (1999), which presumes both a possibility and a
willingness of all communities to participate in the
Kosovo structures.

The agreement securing the Povratak Coalition's
participation in the institutions is another example of
the benefits to be gained through close cooperation
between UNMIK and Belgrade. We commend the
efforts of Mr. Steiner and Mr. Covie in this regard.

A democratic and efficient government structure
in Kosovo also requires a multi-ethnic civil service.
But the recruitment of minorities remains hampered by
security concerns. It is unacceptable that the lack of
security for minorities should continue to have
negative implications for the normalization of everyday
life, as well as for the implementation of resolution
1244 (1999). Concerted efforts are needed to overcome
these obstacles.

Norway condemns the recent violence in northern
Mitrovica and the attacks on representatives of
UNMIK police and KFOR. The situation in Mitrovica
is complex. Extremists cannot be allowed to undermine
cooperation among the people of Kosovo and the
international community. UNMIK and the Kosovo
institutions should strengthen cooperation with
democratically elected moderate forces on the Kosovo
Serb side. Belgrade can play a constructive part in this
regard.

Respect for law and order in Kosovo must be
enhanced. This is not only a minority issue, but a civic
issue affecting all segments of the population. We urge
Kosovo's elected leaders to publicly reject hate speech
and other incitement of ethnic intolerance and violence.

Sustainable security, freedom of movement and a
multi-ethnic society can in the final instance be created
only by the people of Kosovo themselves.

Norway fully supports the measures taken by
Mr. Steiner in order to more efficiently combat
organized crime in Kosovo. Such crime, including
trafficking in human beings, narcotics and weapons,
continues to be a source of considerable concern, not
only as regards Kosovo, but for the region and Europe
at large.

The return of displaced persons and refugees
remains an important challenge. Necessary conditions
for sustainable return have yet to be created. This is
also a question of political leadership and courage.
Norway would like to emphasize the importance of the
work carried out by the Housing and Property
Directorate in Pristina. Its efforts to resolve property
disputes will greatly facilitate returns, and it deserves
financial and political support from the international
community.

Norway welcomes Belgrade's adoption of a law
on cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia. We expect the necessary
measures to implement the law to be taken as quickly
as possible. Reconciliation and mutual tolerance
depend on a willingness to face the past. The recent
presentation in Belgrade of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe report, As Seen, As
Told, represents a positive step in this respect. This
report documents crimes and violations of human
rights committed in Kosovo from October 1998 to
October 1999.

Norway firmly believes that close cooperation
between UNMIK, the provisional self-governing
institutions and the authorities in Belgrade is of the
utmost importance for the implementation of resolution
1244 (1999). This relationship must be further
strengthened, including through further progress on the
issues covered by the Common Document. Norway
welcomes Belgrade's recent transfer of Kosovo
Albanian detainees. We now expect all those involved
to intensify efforts to trace the large number of missing
persons.

As regards the wider, regional context, Norway
would like to reiterate that developments in Kosovo
cannot be seen in isolation from developments in
neighbouring countries. We therefore welcome further
efforts to strengthen regional dialogue and cooperation
between Kosovo, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and neighbouring countries, including with regard to
the fight against organized crime.

