Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania): We
wish to express our appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for convening this joint briefing. We thank the
Chairpersons of the Al-Qaida/Taliban sanctions
committee, the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the
1540 Committee for their enlightening presentations on
their work.
Permit me to reiterate our condemnation of the
recent heinous terrorist attacks in the city of London.
As we condemn those cowardly acts, we wish to stress
the importance of these joint public briefings in
increasing the awareness of, and resolve to address, the
enduring threat to our collective security.

With regard to the mandates of the three
committees, our delegation wishes to urge them to
cooperate and to coordinate their activities for optimal
results of their work. That could include sharing of
information prior to and after a Visit to a Member State,
establishing a common data base, identifying technical-
assistance requirements of States, and identifying
donors willing to offer such assistance to Member
States in need. It is also imperative that the three
committees study jointly and carefully the root causes
of the perennial problems of non-reporting and of
reporting fatigue. What is often presumed to indicate
lack of commitment happens to be lack of capacity.

Ambassador Mayoral has worked relentlessly to
raise the awareness of Member States concerning the
changes in the modus operandi of Al-Qaida networks
and to address some of the concerns of Member States.
We commend him for that. At present, the Council is
considering a new draft resolution to augment the
existing sanctions mechanisms. Our delegation is
optimistic that it will present the Council with an
excellent opportunity to address some of the persistent
concerns of Member States, such as the need for due
process and transparency in the listing and delisting
procedures. It is pleasing to note that four States have
appeared before the 1267 Committee for in-depth
discussions on the implementation of the sanctions
regime. We believe that such interactions are beneficial
both to Member States and to the Committee.

Allow me to commend Ambassador Loj and the
other members of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
and the Committee's Executive Directorate for making
remarkable progress in the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). We call for more expeditious
consideration of national reports to make it possible to
identify and meet in a timely manner the technical
assistance requirements of States.

We wish to express once again our approval of
the best practices related to combating the financing of
terrorism that have been developed by the Financial
Action Task Force. It is our hope that Member States
will utilize the Task Force's special recommendations
on terrorist financing to deal effectively with unlawful
financial activities.
Our delegation cannot even contemplate the
possibility of terrorists acquiring the wherewithal to
carry out a nuclear, biological or chemical attack,
owing to the ominous consequences of such an attack.
However, we regret to note that terrorists have
professed a desire to obtain such dangerous weapons.
In View of that, we commend Ambassador Motoc and
the entire 1540 Committee for taking the necessary
measures to consider national reports and to take
account of the needs of States in strengthening their
domestic legislation and their law enforcement systems
to prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and to deny non-State actors access to such
weapons.

Finally, I should note that Tanzania has itself
fallen Victim to a terrorist attack. We will leave no
stone unturned in denying terrorists the breeding
grounds and means they need to operate effectively,
through the strict implementation of all United Nations
resolutions against terrorism.

