Mr. Hague (United Kingdom): I, too, thank the
Secretary-General of the United Nations and the
Secretary General of the League of Arab States for
their words, and I am grateful to you, Mr. President,
for proposing this debate on peace and security in the
Middle East.

Over the past 18 months, the Arab Spring, as we
have come to call it, has taken a different path in each
country of the region. In some countries revolutions
have been relatively swift. In Syria, as we know,
horrifying violence continues to engulf the country
almost a year and a half since protests began. In other
countries, peaceful reform is under way. We respect the
right of each country in the region to find its own path
to reform, based on its unique cultures and traditions,
but we will always stand up for our belief in the
universality of human rights and freedom that is at the
heart of democracy.

Indeed, that historic change has been driven by the
people of the region demanding the greater political
and economic freedom that is their legitimate right.
History has shown that those Governments that draw
their legitimacy from the consent of their people are
best placed to deliver lasting peace and security. Where
the social contract between citizen and State is based
on trust and accountability, societies are able to flower;
where it is based on fear, violence and the denial of
rights, conflict and insecurity arise. That is why the
Arab Spring is a moment of huge opportunity to build
peace, security and prosperity for the region and, by
extension, the world.

Alongside open inclusive, national structures,
lasting peace and security also rely upon effective
international and regional institutions. That is a lesson
we ourselves have learned the hard way, reflected in
the very history of how this body was created. And
over the past 18 months, the League of Arab States has
showed resolve and perseverance in working to achieve
regional security and stability. I warmly commend the
clear leadership it has demonstrated. It was decisive in
calling for a no-fly zone in Libya. It has taken the lead
in responding to the Syrian crisis, including efforts to
mediate between the Syrian opposition and regime,
as well as to apply political, economic and diplomatic
pressure on the regime to end the violence.

The decision to appoint a Joint Special
Representative of the United Nations and the League
of Arab States for Syria is a clear indication of the
growing positive cooperation between the United
Nations and the Arab League. We strongly support the
work of Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi and we do our utmost to
support his efforts to resolve the crisis in Syria, just as
we supported his predecessor, Mr. Kofi Annan. I fully
support efforts to strengthen further the relationship
between the United Nations and the League of Arab
States, and welcome the deepening of cooperation
between those two bodies. That is important as there
are urgent challenges at hand for which the United
Nations and the League of Arab States bare a shared
responsibility.

As the Syrian crisis continues to deepen, the risk
of broader regional instability and conflict increases.
Addressing such crises is exactly what the Security
Council exists to do. That the Security Council has
failed to act on its clear responsibilities in the case of
Syria is inexcusable and shocking, as Mr. Fabius said
earlier. It is a terrible indictment of the Council that
over 22,000 people have died since it first failed to
agree on a resolution to stem the violence. It is long
past the time for the Council to use its collective weight
to require the Syrian regime to end the violence and to
impose serious consequences ifit does not.

With regard to the Middle East peace process, I am
also deeply concerned by developments on the ground,
including continued settlement activity. I call on both
sides to avoid steps that undermine the prospects of
peace and to resume direct talks. We have long been
clear that a Palestinian State is a legitimate goal, and the
best way of achieving that is through a comprehensive
agreement between Israel and the Palestinians. We
want to see a solution to this conflict that gives the
Palestinian people the State they need and deserve
and the Israeli people long-term security and peace.
Without that, lasting peace and security in the region
will remain elusive.

It is remarkable how much has been achieved in the
Middle East and North Africa since the Arab Spring
began. In Libya, Egypt and Tunisia, citizens have voted
in free elections for the first time in decades. Change
has been led by the people of the region, and it is not
for anyone else to impose their vision on the region.
However, there is a crucial role for the international
community to play in supporting peaceful reform.
The United Kingdom is doing this through our Arab
partnership by providing diplomatic and practical
support to strengthen the political and economic
participation of citizens in the Middle East and North
Africa. We must act together to ensure that hard-won
freedoms and rights are protected and that those still
fighting for their legitimate rights receive our support,
laying the foundations for lasting peace and security
in the region. We must continue to work to ensure
that the United Nations acts as a bridge for effective
international cooperation to provide that support to the
region. The people of the region deserve that promise
and we must not fail them.

