Mr. Aho-Glele (Benin) (spoke in French): We
thank you, Sir, for having convened this meeting to
enable us to exchange views on the publication of the
final report of the Independent Inquiry Committee,
established by the Secretary-General to look into
allegations of embezzlement related to the oil-for-food
programme.

My delegation congratulates Mr. Volcker and his
entire team on presenting the report, in which Benin
takes great interest. Now that the report has been
issued, United Nations Member States should study it
with all due attention so that they can draw lessons
from it and undertake the necessary reform of the
relevant United Nations structures. While we believe
that the report must be studied closely, it is currently
available only in English. We hope that it will shortly
be available in all other United Nations languages.

Thus, my delegation is not in a position to
express its views on the substance, but at this
preliminary stage, Benin would like to pay tribute to
the Secretary-General for the far-sightedness and the
courage that he demonstrated in first commissioning
the Independent Inquiry Committee and for his
determination throughout the process to act in a
transparent fashion with respect to this matter, which,
we must acknowledge, is highly sensitive.

Benin also welcomes the initiative of the
Secretary-General to promote a new ethic in the
management of the Secretariat. The failings revealed in
the functioning of the structures concerned and in the
coordination and cooperation among the various organs
of the United Nations provide lessons that justify the
reforms now under discussion. Measures advocated by
the Secretary-General and the President of the General
Assembly in that regard are very encouraging.

We welcome the invaluable contribution of the
programme to alleviating the suffering of the Iraqi
people under the weight of economic sanctions. That
key objective having been achieved, Benin believes
that we must now all seek appropriate solutions to the
shortcomings identified and avoid diverting our
attention from the imperatives of democratizing and
strengthening our Organization.

