The President: After consultations among
members of the Security Council, I have been
authorized to make the following statement on behalf
of the Council.

"The Security Council reaffirms the
purposes and principles enshrined in the United
Nations Charter and bears in mind its primary
responsibility under the Charter of the United
Nations for the maintenance of international
peace and security.

"The Security Council remains deeply
concerned by the devastating humanitarian,
political and economic consequences of armed
conflicts, and stresses the overriding political and
moral imperatives to prevent the outbreak and
escalation of armed conflicts and humanitarian
crises, and the benefits therein for peace and
development and friendly relations among all
States.

"The Security Council acknowledges the
importance of helping to prevent future conflicts
through addressing their root causes in a
legitimate and fair manner.

"The Security Council reiterates the
importance it attaches to the promotion and
urgent restoration of justice and the rule of law in
post-conflict societies and in promoting national
reconciliation, democratic development and
human rights. The Council recognizes that ending
impunity is important in peace agreements and
can contribute to efforts to come to terms with
past abuses and to achieve national reconciliation
to prevent future conflict. The Security Council
recalls that it has repeatedly emphasized the
responsibility of States to end impunity and bring
to justice those responsible for genocide, war
crimes, crimes against humanity and serious

violations of international humanitarian law.

"The Security Council further recognizes
the increasing importance of civilian aspects of
conflict management in addressing complex crisis
situations and in preventing the recurrence of
conflict and acknowledges the importance of
civilian-military cooperation in crisis
management. When approving a United Nations
operation, the Council should take into account
the essential role of military and civilian police in
assisting the stabilization of crisis situations and
the maintenance of security. At the same time, the
Council acknowledges that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, assisted
by civilian advisers, could play a key
coordination role in the provision of humanitarian
assistance, the re-establishment of public order,
the functioning of public institutions, as well as
rehabilitation, reconstruction and peacebuilding,
which lead to long-term sustainable development.

"The Security Council stresses the need to
ensure adequate and timely financing for
peacebuilding priorities at all stages of the peace
process, and stresses the need for sustained
financial investment in peacebuilding over the
medium to longer-term period of recovery. It
recognizes the importance of rapid initiation of
peacebuilding activities to meet immediate needs
and encourages the building of capabilities that
can be incorporated rapidly.

"The Security Council takes note with
interest of the important proposal by the
Secretary-General to establish a Peacebuilding
Commission and shares the objective of
improving United Nations capacity to coordinate
with donors and troop contributors and to
perform peacebuilding activities, in particular
from the start of peacekeeping operations through
stabilization, reconstruction and development.
The Security Council recognizes the important
role that this body could play to bridge the gap
between maintenance of international peace and
security and the work of humanitarian and
economic development assistance.

"The Security Council acknowledges that in
post-conflict societies successful peacebuilding
rests on the premise that protection of civilians,
the promotion of the rule of law and transitional
justice, disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation, reintegration and rehabilitation of
the

former combatants, security sector and
democratic, economic and social reform are
integrated elements and that national ownership
plays an important role which should be
supported by the international community,
including the regional organizations.

"The Security Council emphasizes that
security sector reform is an essential element of
any stabilization process in post-conflict
environments, underlines that it is inextricably
linked with promotion of the rule of law,
transitional justice, DDR and the protection of
civilians, among others, and acknowledges the
need for more adequate preparation, including
mobilization of necessary planning resources, and
more coherent approaches by the United Nations
and the international community in addressing
these issues.

"The Security Council acknowledges the
need to give adequate attention to security sector
reform in the future, drawing on best practices
that have been developed in this area. The
Security Council stresses also the need seriously
to consider the promotion of the rule of law and
transitional justice, the DDR process and security
sector reform, their interlinkage and the
availability of adequate resources, when
approving the necessary mandates for United
Nations operations."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2005/30.

There are no further speakers on my list. The

Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.35 pm.
