Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (interpretation from Arabic): I should like to convey my gratitude and
appreciation to all the members of the Council who

 

supported the draft resolution contained in document
S/ 1997/241, which was submitted by Egypt and Qatar on
behalf of the States members of the League of Arab States.
We are fully aware that this support was not easy.

Today, the United States of America exercised its veto
power for the second time in less than two weeks and for
the third time in less than two years, and with regard to the
same issue: the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories, and in particular in occupied East Jerusalem.
Consequently, the Security Council has, for the second
time, failed to carry out its responsibilities and duties for
the maintenance of international peace and security, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.

This comes at a time when Israel, the occupying
Power, is continuing to violate international law and
relevant Security Council resolutions and is persisting, at
the end of the twentieth century, in the continuation of its
settlement system, which combines classic colonialism and
horrid apartheid-like arrangements. It persists in its
unrelenting pursuit of changing the legal and demographic
status of Jerusalem, ignoring the natural and historical
rights of the Palestinian people there and scorning the
feelings and interests of Arabs, Muslims and Christians the
world over. This is also taking place at a time when Israel
is violating the agreements reached with the Palestinian side
within the framework of the Middle East peace process and
is undermining the very foundation of this process, posing
a serious threat to its accomplishments thus far and its
potential to continue and succeed.

It is extremely regrettable that this veto has been cast
today in the aftermath of Israel's actual commencement, on
18 March 1997, of the building of the new settlement in
Jabal Abu Ghneim, to the south of occupied East
Jerusalem; and in the aftermath of General Assembly
resolution 51/223, which reflected a decisive and near-
unanimous position of the members of the international
community; and in the aftermath of the escalating tension
in the region and the increasing sense of outrage and anger
among the Palestinian and Arab sides as a result of Israel's
conduct and policies, as well as the statements made by
Israeli officials.

It is difficult to accept that this veto has been cast to
protect the peace process. It is also difficult to accept that
the bilateral negotiations are the only solution, at a time
when one of the two parties is imposing new facts on the
ground - an action that is the exact opposite and antithesis
of negotiation. The bitter reality is that this veto has been
cast to shield Israel from the will of the international
community and to exempt Israel from the provisions of
international law and of the Charter of the United
Nations. Using the veto as a matter of "principle",
regardless of the text of the draft resolution submitted,
seems to elevate to an official position the suspension of
the functions and powers of the Security Council with
regard to Israel and the situation in the Middle East. We
believe that this seriously violates the provisions of the
Charter and is definitely not in the interests of the
Security Council and its credibility, or in the interests of
the peace process and its continuity.

The existence of bilateral agreements between the
parties on the nature of the interim stage, as well as the
postponement of negotiations on important second-stage
issues, do not, and should not, negate the provisions of
international law or those of Security Council resolutions.
It is the duty of the international community to reject any
attempt to exploit the peace process to neutralize the law
and leave the Palestinian side subject to the occupier and
the existing imbalance of power on the ground.
International legitimacy is our only weapon, apart from
our faith in God, the will of our people and our
confidence and trust in our brothers and friends. We will
resist any attempt to set international legitimacy aside,
and we affirm that any such attempt is illegal, illegitimate
and even immoral, and will not succeed.
We believe that the members of the Security Council
must try to solve this serious problem, which has been
highlighted today, in accordance with the provisions of
the Charter and on the basis of respect for the Charter.
For our part, we will remain persistent with regard to the
necessity for the Security Council to exercise its
responsibilities. We hope that it will do so, because we
will not vanish; indeed, we will return to the Council in
the future, whenever the situation so requires. At the same
time, we will resort to other United Nations bodies,
particularly the General Assembly, as - we must not
forget - it was the General Assembly that partitioned
Palestine, and it will bear special responsibility for it,
within the framework of the permanent responsibility of
the United Nations with regard to the question of
Palestine, until the issue has been resolved in all its
aspects.

I should like to say a final word to the Israeli
Government, our assumed partner in the peace process:
do not misunderstand what has happened today, as you
may have done in the past. The 13 votes cast for the
second time have great importance and deep significance.
They reflect the honest position of the Council. In

 

addition, the international position has been expressed, and
it will also be expressed in the General Assembly in a
democratic and decisive manner.

The Palestinian and Arab position will not yield.
Despite everything, we are still committed to the peace
process, to the agreements reached and to the need to work
for their implementation. At the same time, however, we
are more determined to protect our historic and legal rights,
particularly in Holy J erusalem/Al-Quds al-Sharif - the first
of the two kiblahs and third holy sanctuary - and on every
inch of our land, in accordance with the historical
reconciliation between the two sides. If you are committed
to this reconciliation, so are we.

In a further development, another bombing took place
this morning in Tel Aviv. Our policy in this regard is
crystal clear: we reject and condemn such acts, and we
believe that they do harm to the interests of our people and
to the peace process as a whole. At the same time, we do
not believe that the occurrence of such acts can be isolated
from the tense circumstances and grave situation that have
been created by the policies and actions of the Government
of Israel. In particular, we point to the grave consequences
of the statements made by some Israeli officials, which
were full of fabrications and irresponsible positions.

