The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Members of the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of Djibouti
and Eritrea, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Olhaye
(Djibouti) and Mr. Desta (Eritrea) took seats at
the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/25, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by France.
Members of the Council also have before them
document 8/2008/602, which contains a letter dated
11 September 2008 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council.

I wish to draw the attention of members to
document S/2008/766, which contains the text of a
letter dated 4 December 2008 from the Permanent
Representative of Djibouti, and to document
S/2009/28, which contains the text of a letter dated
12 January 2009 from the Permanent Representative of
Eritrea.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Austria, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, France, Japan, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mexico, Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Viet Nam


The President (spoke in French): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1862 (2009).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.25 a.m.
09-20769

