Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your country's accession to the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of May. I also thank
you for having organized a meeting on this important
topic. The presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs
is a powerful testament to Indonesia's critical role in
the maintenance of international peace and security.

I thank the Secretary-General for his statement,
which reflects his firm commitment to peacekeeping.
I also thank all previous speakers for their statements
on the topic.

This debate is indeed timely, being held at a
moment marked by the momentum created by the
Secretary-General's Action for Peacekeeping initiative.
The resulting Declaration of Shared Commitments on
United Nations Peacekeeping Operations recognizes
the importance of training for performance, safety
and security. I take this opportunity to commend
the presidency for having proposed the presidential
statement that was issuedthis morning (S/PRST/2019/4).

Morocco welcomes this opportunity to share
its views on the issue from the perspective of a
troop-contributing country, and highlights the
following points.

First, we stress that the responsibility of providing
quality training commensurate with United Nations
standards lies with troop contributors. But like all
elements that contribute to the success of peacekeeping
operations, that responsibility is shared, particularly
with the Secretariat, through the provision of modules
and doctrines adapted to the realities of each mission.
We welcome the Secretary-General's commitment to
that end.

Secondly, it is recognized that well-trained troops
are better able to defend themselves and their mandates,
which impacts their performance. However, when we
refer to the complex notion of performance, we should
not focus exclusively on that of the troops. Performance
depends on a multitude of factors, of which training,
while important, is but one of many.

Thirdly, in his report to the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping, the Secretary-General informed the
Members States about the Secretariat's new training
strategy, which focuses on three elements: developing
and disseminating training standards, enhancing the
capacity-building of troop- and police-contributing
countries for quality training, and verifying that
training is up to United Nations standards and that
only properly trained personnel are deployed. Those
commitments go hand in hand with those of the troop-
contributing countries and will undoubtedly have a
positive impact in the medium and long terms.

Fourthly, the various existing processes, such
as Peacekeeping Ministerials and summits of chiefs
of staff and police have enabled Member States to
announce substantial commitments in several areas,
including training and capacity-building. Those many
commitments must be managed appropriately and
consistently, particularly through the establishment of a
light coordination mechanism in order to bring together
countries that offer training with those who need it. We
welcome its imminent implementation in cooperation
with the troop-contributing countries.

Fifthly, as part of our collective commitment to
promoting the participation of women in peacekeeping,
we must ensure that they can benefit from all the
necessary training.
Morocco is convinced that it can make a
meaningful contribution in the area of training
and capacity-building. Through its participation in
peacekeeping operations since the 1960s, my country
has acquired a recognized and valued expertise in the
area. In that regard, it was the first troop-contributing
country deployed in cote d'Ivoire, as well as in the
Central African Republic. Moreover, through military
cooperation agreements, Morocco is involved with
more than 30 African countries in hosting all categories
of soldiers pursuing training in every military specialty,
including predeployment training.

In the light of that experience, Morocco stands
ready to respond positively to any request from another
troop-contributing country. In addition to the principle
of South-South cooperation, which remains a priority
of its foreign policy, Morocco is convinced that troop-
contributing countries in need of training or capacity-
building will benefit from the peacekeeping experience
of the country providing the training.

Given current needs, as well as new methods of
cooperation, the Kingdom of Morocco will shortly
host two critical training courses in the medical and
engineering areas within the framework of triangular
partnerships. Those training courses will be mainly
intended for Francophone countries, given that a glaring
lack of training courses persists in such countries,
although many missions are deployed in the French-
speaking world. I stress the importance of triangular
cooperation among troop-contributing countries, the
Secretariat and the Security Council. We firmly believe
that the strengthening of such cooperation will have a
positive impact on all aspects of peacekeeping

In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity to
pay special tribute to all civilian and military personnel
deployed in United Nations missions, who often work
in difficult conditions, while risking their lives.

