Mr. Moreno-Ocampo: I welcome this
opportunity to update the Council on the activities
undertaken by my Office since my last report in
December.

In adopting resolution 1593 (2005), the Council
affirmed that justice and accountability are critical to
achieving lasting peace and security in Darfur. This
position is reinforced in resolution 1674 (2006), which
concludes that the prevention of armed conflict
requires a comprehensive approach and that ending
impunity, through appropriate national and
international mechanisms, is essential to ensuring the
non-recurrence of abuses.

My Office is committed to contributing to this
comprehensive approach by investigating and
prosecuting crimes within the jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Court (ICC). My Office will, in
due course, select those to be prosecuted on the basis
of the evidence collected and will present its
conclusions to the judges. The judges will make the
final decision as to who will be tried by our Court. In
accordance with our rules and policies, we will make
such a presentation only when we have gathered
comprehensive and solid evidence of individual
responsibility for crimes committed in Darfur and
thoroughly analysed the admissibility of our cases.
That will guarantee both fair and expeditious trials.

Given the scale of the alleged crimes committed
in Darfur and the complexities associated with the
identification of those individuals bearing greatest
responsibility for the crimes, my Office currently
anticipates the investigation and prosecution of a
sequence of cases, rather than a single case dealing
with the situation in Darfur as a whole.

The gravity of the crimes is central to the process
of case selection. My Office looks at factors such as
the scale and nature of the crimes, as well as the impact
of ICC investigations and prosecutions in the
prevention of further crimes. In the context of Darfur,
particular attention will be given to investigating
crimes currently affecting the lives and safety of the 2
million displaced civilians in the region, in an effort to
improve conditions for humanitarian assistance and to
protect Victims from further attack. The Office needs to
gather sufficient information on these crimes to meet
the evidential standards in the Statute.

My Office is collecting all available information
from outside Darfur and has managed to make progress
in its work despite serious obstacles. I wish to
emphasize, however, that we are now entering a new
phase in which unconditional cooperation will be
essential to expeditiously complete the investigation
and identify those most responsible for crimes

Sll'V.5459

 

committed in Darfur. Our speed will depend on the
cooperation received.

The full cooperation of the Government of the
Sudan and other parties to the conflict is, of course,
vital. Furthermore, the cooperation of those
organizations with a significant presence on the
ground, such as the African Union and the United
Nations, is and will continue to be essential.

My previous reports to the Council have
highlighted the slow progress of cooperation between
the African Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS) and
my Office. Since December 2005, we have engaged on
a number of occasions with AMIS and the African
Union, seeking to expedite cooperation. I have also
offered to brief the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union on our activities and on the importance
of reinforcing mutual efforts to ensure justice and
accountability. Representatives of my Office have also
met with AMIS in Khartoum and have delivered a
detailed request for information relevant to the
investigation.

I welcome the recent statement of the Peace and
Security Council of 10 March 2006, supporting
cooperation between the African Union and the Court
in Darfur. I have also received confirmations in writing
from both Ambassador Konare and Ambassador
Kingibe of the commitment of the African Union to
cooperate fully with the ICC and of the Union's
determination to assist in the fight against impunity. In
addition, I have been invited to brief the African Union
Peace and Security Council in the near future on
progress in the context of resolution 1593 (2005).
Those are signals that cooperation will now be
forthcoming. It is important to reiterate that the
assistance of the African Union remains a component
fundamental to progress in key aspects of the
investigation.

In December 2005, the Office of the Prosecutor
reported to the Security Council on a series of
cooperation requests that had been made to the
Government of the Sudan. These included a request to
visit the Sudan to assess national proceedings relating
to Darfur and a request to conduct several interviews of
officials identified by my Office. Those officials,
owing to their positions, functions and experience,
could provide insights into the events in Darfur, the
activities of all parties to the conflict and the manner in
which the Government of the Sudan sought to address
the situation.

Pursuant to the first request, a delegation of the
Prosecutor's Office, with the objective of assessing
national proceedings, visited the Sudan in February
2006 for an extensive programme of meetings with
judges, prosecutors and representatives of the police
force and other Government departments. The
Government of the Sudan cooperated with the Office in
allowing access to the requested officials in meetings
that were formally video recorded. In addition to the
interviews of officials requested by the Office, the
Government facilitated meetings with the Governor of
South Darfur and with representatives of the
Commission demarcating nomadic routes, offering
further information on the situation in Darfur.

During this mission and throughout this reporting
period, the Office has gathered significant amounts of
information to determine whether the Government of
the Sudan has dealt with, or is dealing with, the cases
that my Office is likely to select for prosecution. The
Government of the Sudan has also provided significant
amounts of information relating to the conduct of
traditional tribal reconciliation mechanisms in Darfur.
These are not criminal proceedings as such for the
purpose of assessing the admissibility of cases before
the International Criminal Court, but they are an
important part of the fabric of reconciliation for Darfur,
as recognized in resolution 1593 (2005).

In previous reports, the Office of the Prosecutor
has highlighted the fact that the admissibility
assessment is a case-specific assessment, not a
judgement on the Sudan justice system as a whole.
Once I identify cases for prosecution, I must determine
whether or not the national authorities are conducting
or have conducted national proceedings genuinely in
relation to those cases.

It is clear that the national authorities face
significant challenges to the conduct of effective
criminal proceedings in Darfur. The special courts
appear to remain relatively inaccessible, with judges
performing other duties in Khartoum, awaiting the start
of trials in Darfur. Limited resources and specialized
expertise, with reliance on existing infrastructure for
investigations, are also hampering progress. Some
efforts have been made by the Government of the
Sudan to rectify those deficiencies, but these efforts

S/l'V.5459

 

have also reportedly been restricted by the lack of
security on the ground.

Many of the investigation mechanisms are
reactive to complaints, but there is a reluctance or an
inability on the part of witnesses and victims to come
forward with complaints, and in some cases there are
allegations of intimidation and harassment of
complainants. That is particularly prevalent in the
context of rape allegations. The lack of any system for
the protection of witnesses is also a strong disincentive
for complainants and presents a serious obstacle to the
conduct of any effective national criminal proceedings.

On the basis of our current assessment, it does
not appear that the national authorities have
investigated or prosecuted - or are investigating and
prosecuting - cases that are or will be the focus of our
attention, in such a way as to render those cases
inadmissible before the ICC. We reinforce the point,
made in previous reports, that this assessment is
ongoing and that a final determination will be made
when specific cases are selected for prosecution. That
will require the continued cooperation of the
Government of the Sudan in providing access to
proceedings, officials and institutions, including in
Darfur.

With respect to the request to conduct other
interviews related to activities undertaken in Darfur, I
reported in December that we had agreed with the
Sudanese authorities that, in preparation of the
interviews, the Ministry of Defence would cooperate in
establishing and submitting in advance a
comprehensive report on matters specified by my
Office.

At the start of May 2006, the Government of the
Sudan submitted a written report responding to
questions from my Office. This report provides
information on the various phases of the conflict from
the Government's perspective, on matters relating to
the military and security structures operating in Darfur,
the activities of other parties to the conflict and the
legal system governing the conduct of military
operations. The written report was supplemented by an
oral exchange in a meeting between representatives of
my Office and military officers in Khartoum last week.

The requested interviews that were to follow up
on the report had not yet taken place. However, the
Government of the Sudan has recently agreed that they
can start in August 2006. These interviews are

extremely important in order to establish a
comprehensive and complete account of events in
Darfur since July 2002. In accordance with the Rome
Statute, we are obliged to investigate not only
incriminating but also exonerating circumstances.
Because my Office is conducting its investigation from
outside the Sudan, access to all parties in the conflict
will be extremely important to allow us to fully test
and corroborate the numerous accounts and allegations
of crimes.
In addition to the moral duty, my Office is under
a legal obligation to protect victims and witnesses. The
absence of a functioning and sustainable system for
their protection continues to prohibit an effective
investigation inside Darfur. The investigative activities
of the Office therefore continued in several countries
outside Darfur, including Chad, until April 2006, when
they were suspended as a result of clashes between
Government and rebel forces. Operations are expected
to resume soon.

The Office has already gathered significant
amounts of information and evidence on crimes
committed in Darfur. The International Criminal Court
has jurisdiction over crimes against humanity, war
crimes and genocide. Various allegations have been
made that some of the groups involved in the
commission of crimes in Darfur did so with specific
genocidal intent. This issue remains the subject of
investigation. I have not, and I will not, draw any
conclusions as to the character of the crimes pending
the completion of a full and impartial investigation.

Identifying those persons with the greatest
responsibility for the most serious crimes in Darfur is a
key challenge for the investigation. The complexity of
the conflict in Darfur exacerbates this challenge, given
that it involves multiple parties and varies over time
and across different states and localities. As stated in
previous reports, the list of 51 names provided by the
International Commission of Inquiry for Darfur is, of
course, not binding on my Office, and I will keep this
list confidential.

My Office has also noted the developments in the
work of the United Nations sanctions committee and
the listing of individuals for the purpose of sanctions.
This list is in no way connected to the process of
identification of individuals for possible prosecution by
the ICC. It is important to reinforce the fact that the

Sll'V.5459

 

mandate and activities of the sanctions committee and
the ICC are distinct.

My Office will not present evidence or identify
suspects to the media or other institutions. We are an
independent body bound by the Rome Statute and by
rules of due process, including specific evidentiary
standards. The best contribution of the ICC to a
meaningful and lasting solution in Darfur will be to
fulfil its judicial mandate in accordance with those
rules and standards.

My Office will, in due course, identify those to be
prosecuted on the basis of the evidence collected and
present its conclusions to the judges.
The ICC is a complementary international
mechanism for the delivery of justice for the most
serious international crimes. The concern of the ICC is
to see that effective justice is delivered to the victims
of the crimes in Darfur. That can be achieved either at
the national level where the domestic authorities are
genuinely willing and able to prosecute those most
responsible for the most serious crimes, or by the ICC,
or by both. In the coming phase, the Office will seek to
complete the investigation of the first case and will
continue to assess, on an ongoing basis, the
admissibility of selected cases.

I have stressed throughout this presentation the
need for cooperation in order to ensure accountability,
not only for past but also for present crimes within the
jurisdiction of the Court that continue to affect the
displaced population in Darfur. Our justice effort
should contribute to their protection and to the
prevention of further crimes. We need more
information on groups that continue to attack the
displaced population or to impede the latter's access to
humanitarian assistance.

We turn to this Council to assist us in obtaining
this and other types of cooperation essential to
implementing resolution 1593 (2005).

