The President: As this is the first public meeting
of the Council for the month of June, I should like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to Her Excellency Ms. Raimonda Murmokaite,
Permanent Representative of Lithuania, for her service
as President of the Council for the month of May. I am
sure I speak for all members ofthe Council in expressing
deep appreciation to Ambassador Murmokaite and her
delegation for the great diplomatic skill with which
they conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991

International Criminal Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide
and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory
of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed
in the Territory of Neighbouring States between

1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994

Letter dated 15 May 2015 from the President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2015/340)

Letter dated 15 May 2015 from the President
of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2015/341)

Letter dated 15 May 2015 from the President of
the International Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations
of International Humanitarian Law Committed
in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia

since 1991, addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2014/342)

The President: In accordance with 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia,
Rwanda and Serbia to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Judge Theodor
Meron, President of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia and President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals;
Judge Vagn Joensen, President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda; Mr. Serge Brammertz,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia; and Mr. Hassan Bubacar J allow,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda and Prosecutor of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to documents S/2015/340 and S/2015/342, respectively
containing letters dated 15 May 2015 from the President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda addressed to the
President of the Security Council.

I also wish to draw the attention ofCouncil members
to document 8/2015/341, which contains a letter dated
15 May 2015 from the President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals addressed
to the President of the Security Council.

I now give the floor to Judge Meron.


