Mr. Mutaboba (Rwanda): May I, first of all, join
other speakers in congratulating you, Mr. President, for
leading this Council through its fruitful deliberations. I
would also like to extend my congratulations to your
predecessor, the representative of Namibia.

Thank you for giving us the floor to address the
Council for a second time this year on a topic of great
importance to us. As much as we were worried about child
soldiers or children in armed conflicts at the time of the last
open debate, civilians as a whole should be given even
greater attention in armed conflicts so as to minimize
social, physical and psychological casualties.

Rwanda is yet another example of a place where
innocent civilians were victims of armed conflict in
different forms from the early 1960s until very recently.
Civilians were targeted by politicians and their soldiers or
militias on the basis of who they were and where they were
born. They were used by Government forces and authorities
as human shields during the liberation war as far back as
1990 and until 1994.

When our troops stopped the genocide in July 1994,
the same evil forces crossed into the former Zaire and into
Tanzania. Members will remember how heavily armed they
were and remain. My delegation would like to remind the
world that efforts to reconcile the interdependent but often
quarrelsome imperatives of assistance and protection to
refugees and displaced people offer a vivid example of the
need to retain neutrality, apply principles, respect local
views, and devise new policy formulas to deal with
unprecedented challenges.
The classic contemporary example of this dilemma
was observed in the Rwandan refugee camps in what was
then eastern Zaire and is now the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, where the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
faced the historic problem of separating combatants from
bona fide refugees. The Security Council and the then
Mobutu Government, which was host country to the
Rwandan refugees and militias, denied the UNHCR that
option. As a result, the key architects of the 1994 Rwandan
genocide kept control of the bulk of the Rwandan refugees
and were relied upon by humanitarian agencies for the
distribution of humanitarian assistance to the civilians who
were really in need. The ever-free militia resorted openly to
intimidation and force to stop refugees willing to return
home. They and former Rwandese Government forces
possessed arms, and this marked the beginning of many
cross-border attacks by militia members who were
unlawfully enjoying refugee status and humanitarian
assistance.

Civilians were threatened, attacked and killed for
expressing the wish to return to Rwanda. The militia
carried out summary executions and other acts of physical
violence in broad daylight. Most of the administrative
leaders of the former Rwandan genocidal regime had fled
with their administrative apparatus to Zaire and Tanzania,
where they could easily control the camps. Tanzanian
authorities, with our many thanks, did their best to disarm
those who were armed, but the authorities of the former
Zaire and the humanitarian bodies - including,
unfortunately, United Nations bodies - failed to do so,
thus leaving innocent civilians to their own fate. This has
to be avoided in the future.

However, the Rwandan Government at that time
warned on many occasions that unless the broader
international community was able to regain political and
military control over the camps, it would be helping the
Rwandan genocidal forces to come and finish the job they
had started in 1994. In the following two years, United
Nations agencies and international non-governmental
organizations continued to feed and support the so-called
refugee camps that were the military bases from which
those who had perpetrated genocide pursued a murderous
terrorist campaign, targeting survivors of the 1994
genocide and those in the local population who refused to
collaborate with them. The attackers were armed and the
victims were civilians.

Faced with no alternatives and noticing the lack of
political will by the international community to dismantle
the camps that had, against the Council's resolutions,
become the biggest depots of sophisticated weapons
supplied by some of those who had failed to stop the
genocide and who chose to close one eye and watch with
the other, the Rwandan people had once again been left
to their own fate. However, this time such complicity and
idleness could not be tolerated and left to be nurtured.
The Rwandan Government, its army and its people
collectively refused to be victimized by another genocide
and decided to do the job themselves. We rescued our
people, civilians and soldiers alike, from the grip of the
architects of the 1994 genocide, some of whom are still
active in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is the
Council's responsibility to deal with those criminals.

As a result, in late December 1996, it took less than
one week for Rwanda to cease being depicted by the
world community as a refugee-producing factory. Over

 

800,000 Rwandans had been successfully repatriated after
the Rwandese Patriotic Army dismantled the Rwandan
refugee camps. Had the same cameras and humanitarian
assistance facilities followed the returnees home, the world
would not feel ashamed of truly learning a lesson from the
Rwanda experience. This lesson does not seem to have
been learned by many, unfortunately, and we deplore that.
Nevertheless, it is never too late.

The Rwandan experience has proven that with political
will and commitment, the task of separating combatants
from bona fide refugees can be done - even by the so-
called weakest cockroaches on Earth. The major lesson to
be learned is that this is even more feasible when serious
screening to distinguish between those who really merit
refugee status and those who do not is done early enough.
We cannot allow innocent civilians to be left to themselves
due to our lack of consistent policies and timid, unclear
positions.

Before I conclude, my delegation wishes to strongly
welcome the Secretary General's report and this Council's
presidential statement of 12 February this year. We hope
the world can be offered better chances of enjoying life
through appropriate and timely decisions.

The refugee crisis in the Great Lakes region and the
ongoing crisis in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
stemmed from bad leadership, but also from lack of action
to address the culture of impunity. I would like to remind
the Council yet again of the existence in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo of active, armed renegade forces,
though the Lusaka ceasefire agreement urged their
dismantling, disarming, repatriation and rehabilitation.
Unless this Council takes appropriate action to disarm these
genocidal forces, there is a risk that the fragile peace will
be jeopardized by these unpunished forces, at the expense
of civilians who it is our duty to protect. If this cycle of
impunity is tackled by all of us, and if it is broken by
addressing the real root causes of the rampant problems in
the region, then we may see a better future for civilians and
soldiers alike. But we have to work hard to make sure that
no one and nothing holds us back.

