Mr. Liu J ieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): The current
situation in Ukraine is highly complex and sensitive
and has regional and international repercussions. The
international community should together engage in
pushing through a political solution to the crisis in
Ukraine so as to truly maintain peace and stability in
the region. What we are seeing Ukraine today is the
result of a complex intertwinement of historical and
contemporary factors. The situation in Ukraine, which
seems to be accidental, has elements of the inevitable,
and therefore calls for a comprehensive and balanced
solution.

China always respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of all States. Those are long-standing and
fundamental elements of China's foreign policy. At the
same time, we note that foreign interference is also a
significant factor, giving rise to violent clashes on the
streets of Ukraine and resulting in the crisis in the
country.

The failure to implement the 21 February agreement
has further exacerbated the turmoil in Ukraine, with
serious social and economic consequences for the
country. We condemn and oppose all extreme and
violent acts.

The key to resolving the crisis in Ukraine is to
act within the framework of law and order, seeking an
early solution to the differences through dialogue and
negotiations, with due respect for the legitimate rights
and interests of all those in the various communities
and regions. All parties should move forward in the
overall aim of maintaining regional peace and stability
and of protecting the fundamental interests of all the
communities in Ukraine in order to keep calm, exercise
restraint and prevent a further escalation of the tension,
while resolutely seeking a political solution so as to
find a specific way out as soon as possible.

China has been calling for constructive efforts
and the good offices of the international community
to de-escalate the situation in Ukraine. We note
the new developments and proposals in that regard.
Drafting a resolution at this juncture will only lead to
confrontation and further complicate the situation. It is
not in line with the common interests ofboth the people
of Ukraine and the international community. On the
basis of the above, we could only abstain in the voting
on the draft resolution (S/2014/189).

China holds a fair and impartial position on the
issue of Ukraine. We will continue to mediate and to
promote dialogue so as to play a greater contructive role
in seeking a political solution to the crisis in Ukraine.
To that end, we would like to make three proposals.

The first proposal is the establishment as soon as
possible of an international coordination mechanism,
comprising all the parties concerned, in order to explore
means for the political settlement ofthe Ukrainian crisis.
Secondly, in the meanwhile, all parties should refrain
from taking any action that may further escalate the
situation. Thirdly, international financial institutions
should start to examine how to help to maintain the
economic and financial stability of Ukraine.

