Mr. Richardson (United States of America): The
international community has watched in horror as the
situation in Sierra Leone has deteriorated. The ray of
hope that we all felt when President Kabbah and his
Government returned to Freetown in March was quickly

 

overshadowed by the terrible atrocities committed by
fleeing junta and rebel forces. We are extremely concerned
by continuing fighting in the countryside, the massacres and
maiming of civilians, reports of weapons flowing over the
border to the rebels and the large numbers of refugees and
displaced persons. The humanitarian situation urgently calls
for our attention and resources to address the multiple
needs for food, shelter and medical care. The United States
will contribute over $55 million in assistance to Sierra
Leone and refugees in neighbouring countries. More is
needed from the international community; we will do our
part.

In this human tragedy, the Monitoring Group of the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOMOG)
carries the hopes of all the people of Sierra Leone who
wish to live in peace under a democratic Government.
ECOMOG has performed admirably in its efforts to provide
security for the Government and the people of Sierra
Leone. Adequate security is essential for humanitarian
assistance, disarmament, demobilization, national
reconciliation and development to be successful. We
commend the leading role that the Economic Community of
West African States, especially those countries that have
contributed troops to ECOMOG, has taken to help a
neighbour restore democratic order and regain basic
security.

However, ECOMOG faces a bigger challenge than
anyone expected, and it needs our help. ECOMOG must
have additional troops, better transport and greater logistical
support to continue to protect civilians from the ravages of
the rebels and the former junta. We urge all the friends of
Sierra Leone to assist ECOMOG as it continues to support
the crucial task of re-establishing security to a fragile State.

Today's draft resolution is a vital part of that
assistance. The United Nations military observers we are
authorizing will augment ECOMOG by monitoring the
disarmament and demobilization of former combatants,
assessing the security situation and reporting on both
military operations and human rights. The presence of
United Nations observers should build confidence in the
demobilization process. That process will be limited at first,
given the current security situation, but the draft resolution
provides flexibility in the deployment of the observers. As
ECOMOG expands new secure zones, demobilization can
take place in those areas of the country.

The relationship between ECOMOG and the United
Nations observers will be cooperative, as it was in Liberia.
We hope the Secretary-General will quickly conclude the
status of mission agreements with the Government of
Sierra Leone and the Economic Community of West
African States. We applaud ECOMOG's commitment to
partnership and protection of the United Nations Observer
Mission.

This draft resolution reinforces our serious concern
at reports of cross-border arms flows and support to the
rebels in Sierra Leone, and it reiterates the arms embargo
that the Council first authorized last October. The
neighbouring States have responsibility for implementing
that embargo. We welcome the Secretary-General's
personal engagement on this issue, and were pleased by
the meetings between Presidents Taylor and Kabbah in
Abuja on 1-2 July. We join Presidents Taylor, Kabbah
and Abubakar and Secretary-General Annan in deploring
the atrocities carried out in Sierra Leone. Those
responsible for such acts should be brought to justice. We
demand an immediate halt to outside support to the rebels
and former junta, from whatever source.

The United States has reservations about the
proposal for border monitors under current circumstances.
Preventing cross-border arms flows is a worthy idea. The
unfortunate reality is that ECOMOG is already
overstretched and does not have the capability to take on
this responsibility. We believe the current priority should
be to channel additional support for ECOMOG into its
central function of providing security in Sierra Leone
rather than monitoring the border or providing security for
other monitors.

The draft resolution highlights the role of the
Secretary-General' s Special Representative in coordinating
United Nations programmes in Sierra Leone. The Special
Representative and his staff will advise the Government
of Sierra Leone on the reform and restructuring of the
police force and on human rights and international
humanitarian law. We support the efforts of the Sierra
Leone Government and the Secretary-General's Special
Representative for Children in Armed Conflict to make
Sierra Leone a pilot project for addressing the needs of
children in post-conflict peace-building.

As the Secretary-General's report on conflict in
Africa outlined so well, coordination and planning among
a variety of agencies and entities is critical to the success
of conflict resolution and peace-building efforts. We hope
that the successful model of international coordination
among the United Nations, the Economic Community of
West African States, regional States, non-govemmental
organizations and the donor community that assisted

 

Liberia in its election and democratic transition last year
will be further developed for Sierra Leone.

We welcome the United Nations plans to hold a
special high-level conference on Sierra Leone later this
month to coordinate planning for peace and security,
support for ECOMOG and humanitarian assistance. We
expect that significant steps will be taken at that conference
towards addressing the many urgent needs in Sierra Leone.

