Mrs. Martinez Gramuglia (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Joachim Rucker, for his
briefing and his comments on the latest developments
in Kosovo. We welcome the President of the
Coordination Centre of the Republic of Serbia for
Kosovo and Metohija, Ms. Sanda Raskovic-Ivic. We
also welcome Prime Minister Ceku as part of the
delegation of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). Let me
also echo the gratitude expressed in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2006/906) to the men and women
of UNMIK for their steadfastness and their
commitment to the values and principles of the
Organization as they carry out their daily tasks.
Argentina has been participating in UNMIK with
police, military and diplomatic personnel since the
very beginning of the Mission, and we will continue to
support its work in its upcoming phases as well.

The report gives an account, once again, of
sustained progress on standards implementation, with
special emphasis on the 13 priorities identified by the
Contact Group last June. We would like to underline
the willingness of the Provisional Institutions to
implement the standards programme. Without any
doubt, this contributes to strengthening the Kosovo
Institutions. Standards implementation is also a sine
qua non condition for making Kosovo's European
perspective a reality, and it must continue to be the
core of the efforts throughout the future status process
for Kosovo, and even beyond.

However, it is disappointing that the positive
effects of implementation do not fully benefit the
Kosovo Serb community, due primarily to their own
reluctance to cooperate with the Pristina authorities.
We urge the Kosovo Serb community to act with the
maturity necessary to assume their responsibilities in a
truly multi-ethnic society. The leaders of the Serb
National Council must end their boycott of contacts
with the Provisional Institutions, while Belgrade must
remove without delay all impediments to such
participation.

For their part, the leaders of the Provisional
Institutions must persist vigorously with standards
implementation if they are to accomplish the aim of

06-6573]
laying the foundation of a multi-ethnic and democratic
society in which all communities live in dignity and
security. All groups that compose Kosovo's society
must display wisdom at this critical moment for the
future of Kosovo, and their leaders must seize this
opportunity to promote reconciliation and dialogue.

Mr. Riicker has indicated that the political
situation in Kosovo is dominated by the future status
process. It is undeniable that there are differing
expectations regarding the outcome, but we believe
that it is necessary to maintain the momentum in the
process under way, because uncertainty could result in
greater instability. On the contrary, the primary aim of
this process should be to ensure that all those who live
in Kosovo can have a safe, decent, peaceful and
dignified life.

To achieve this, it is essential that any agreed
approach be based on negotiations between the parties,
and not something imposed internationally. This, in our
view, is the basis for any sustainable agreement and we
believe that it should be a priority for the international
community. Any solution must contribute to regional
stability, with a realistic, viable, sustainable agreement
that is in full compliance with Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999). It must also be based on and
consistent with the Guiding Principles for the
settlement of Kosovo's status, formulated by the
Contact Group and endorsed by the Security
Council - in particular, full respect for the territorial
integrity and internal stability of regional neighbours.

Argentina considers that there can be no
prosperous and peaceful future for Kosovo without
complete respect for the diversity of its people. It is
key to stability and to social and economic
development, both in Kosovo and in the entire region,
that the status process concludes satisfactorily, with an
outcome that is acceptable to the majority and at the
same time respects and protects the rights of
minorities.

We call on the leaders of both parties, who have a
historic opportunity in their hands, to demonstrate the
vision and the political will to achieve a settlement that
will enable Kosovo to enter a new phase of its history
and will enable the international community to
continue to support a sustainable solution for the
Kosovo issue in full respect for the principle of
territorial integrity.

06-6573]

