Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Ambassador Delattre for France's efforts to ensure
that the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) has the mandate to address the evolving
situation in the Central African Republic. It has been a
challenging year for MINUSCA, as evidenced by the 12
peacekeepers who lost their lives in the cause of peace.
We want the peacekeepers to know that their efforts
have not gone unnoticed. In particular, I would like to
highlight MINUSCA's efforts to protect the thousands
of internally displaced Muslims who were trapped on
the grounds of a church in Bangassou.

MINUSCA remains focused on what we believe
are core principles of peacekeeping. It has a clear exit
strategy, the consent and full support of the Government
of the Central African Republic and is making notable
progress on its mandated tasks, including helping to
advance a political solution. Today, the Security Council
reaffirmed that it is invested in the peace and security
of the Central African Republic, and we believe that
MINUSCA is headed in the right direction. The United
States considers each peacekeeping operation carefully
to ensure that we have the most effective and efficient
forces possible. In some cases, that has prompted us
to call for a reconfiguration or reorientation of a
mission. In the case of MINUSCA, we believe that
additional capacity will give it the flexibility it needs
to address emerging threats and fulfil its mandate to
protect civilians.

However, simply adding troops will never be
enough to guarantee success. As Ambassador Haley
has noted previously, we should focus on the quality of
troops deployed, not just their numbers. We must also
be willing to address the Mission's shortcomings and
take steps to improve troop performance. It took years
for the peacekeepers to meet United Nations equipment
standards, and numerous reports of sexual exploitation
and abuse have long afflicted the Mission. We recognize
that its leadership has confronted those obstacles head-
on and is committed to having troops who meet the
highest performance standards. Resolution 2387 (2017)
outlines much stronger requirements for preventing
and reporting on sexual exploitation and abuse and for
reporting on performance indicators, so as to enforce
effectiveness more broadly.

The United States voted in favour of today's
resolution because we remain committed to supporting
focused and effective peacekeeping missions that are
working tirelessly to execute their mandate, thereby
creating the conditions for improving the lives of the
people they have come to serve. We recognize that this
purpose goes hand-in-hand with building the capacity
of the Central African Republic Government, including
its armed forces, police and gendarmerie, so that they
may take on the role of primary security providers for
the people of the Central African Republic. We hope
that the Government and MINUSCA will continue to
work together to ensure that the citizens of the Central
African Republic experience the peace and prosperity
that has long eluded them.

