Mr. Mufioz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We are
most grateful to you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting to discuss implementation of Security Council
resolution 1308 (2000). The meeting reflects your
wisdom and we commend you on the competent way in
which you have conducted the work of the Security
Council. We are also grateful for the reports submitted
by Mr. Guehenno, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, and by Mr. Peter Piot,
Executive Director of the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS).

HIV/AIDS has spread very rapidly since its first
appearance and diagnosis in the early 19805 and has
had an enormous social impact - becoming a global
pandemic, which has caused over 24 million deaths.
With the approval of resolution 1308 (2000), we began
consideration of a new dimension in the AIDS
problem: its multifaceted impact on stability and
security. As indicated by UNAIDS,

"In regions where HIV/AIDS has reached
epidemic proportions, it destroys the very fabric
of what constitutes a state: individuals, families,
communities, economic and socio-political
institutions, and the military and police forces
which guarantee the protection of State
institutions." (UNAIDS, Fact Sheet No. 1)

And as the UNAIDS report on Eritrea, which has
been circulated at this meeting, quite rightly states, for
a small country like Eritrea, AIDS "is an invisible
enemy, which became a problem of national security".
Moreover, it has also been determined that in conflict
and post-conflict areas military personnel taking part in
peacekeeping operations have a high risk of acquiring
and transmitting AIDS. Research indicates that the
changing nature of peacekeeping operations is a
significant factor in this process. Indeed, over the last
decade the role of troops in peacekeeping operations
has changed. Now peacekeepers are required to
become involved in a number of humanitarian areas
that are not related to their military status proper. As
indicated by a prominent expert, Dr. Tripodi, the risk of
infection for military personnel increases when military
contingents are required to intervene in complex
emergencies. Those are often situations or countries
where civil institutions have collapsed and therefore
prevention of HIV becomes very difficult, if not
impossible. In some countries where peacekeeping
forces are deployed there is no such thing as a health
ministry, or else it has disappeared.

Reports also show that constant and prolonged
absence from family and military pressures lead to
situations that tend to spread the disease. This is not to
detract from the great success that has been achieved in
using peacekeeping operations for humanitarian
purposes in war or civil war situations, it is simply
meant to point out the need to take additional
precautions.

The UNAIDS report "On the front line" adds yet
another dimension to the problem. The United Nations
has developed a coordinated approach to implementing
resolution 1308 (2000) on HIV/AIDS prevention
during the conduct of its own peacekeeping operations,
but apparently that approach does not apply when the
United Nations is replaced by regional institutions in
conducting peacekeeping operations, such as the
NATO, the African Union, ECOWAS, etc.

In the case of Chile, our army has created a
monitoring network with detection centres deployed
around the country that have an infrastructure adequate
for their operation, technical procedures and qualified
personnel, all of which is part of a larger AIDS
prevention programme. We have pursued the same
goals in preparing our military personnel deployed to
peacekeeping operations in post-conflict zones such as
Timor-Leste, Kosovo or the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, so that our training programmes have not
only enabled our national forces to avoid contagion,
but are also allowing them to help in educating some of
the people of those countries about different methods
of prevention, detection systems and treatment support.

We are, of course, prepared to make known the
lessons we have learned in this process to any country
interested in our experience in this field.

To conclude, let me express support for the
recommendations made by UNAIDS and the report I
have mentioned, and to request that on the anniversary
of resolution 1308 (2000), in July of next year, a joint
report between the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) and UNAIDS be drafted, setting
forth the advances in the implementation of this
important resolution.

