Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Pakistan for its initiative in holding today's open
debate on peacekeeping operations. China welcomes
the presence of Foreign Secretary Jalil Abbas Jilani in
the Council and thanks him for presiding over today's
meeting. I also wish to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his briefing.

Peacekeeping operations are an important means
for the United Nations to maintain international
peace and security. In the past six decades, they
have played an irreplaceable role. To address the
changing situation on the ground, the philosophy and
practice of peacekeeping operations have been on
the path of continuous reform and improvement. The
mandates of peacekeeping operations are becoming
increasingly diversified. The Security Council is now
granting to some integrated peacekeeping operations
the function of early-stage peacebuilding, which is
an important feature in the development of United
Nations peacekeeping operations. In recent years,
in some post-conflict countries and regions, due to
poor results in national reconciliation, security sector
reform, economic recovery and rebuilding and other
peacebuilding areas, the situation on the ground has
experienced ups and downs and even regression into
complications and turbulence. Properly addressing the
relations between peacebuilding and peacekeeping
is therefore very important. On the subject of how
to ensure a smooth transition from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding and how to effectively bring into full
play the multidimensional peacekeeping operations, I
would like to make three comments.

First, peacekeeping and peacebuilding are
closely related. When formulating the mandate of a
peacekeeping operation, priority attention must be
given to the urgent need to consolidate and maintain
peace. Meanwhile, it is important to have a long-term
vision and to consider the reality on the ground so as
to mandate the peacekeeping operation to undertake
early-stage peacebuilding functions. Early involvement
by peacekeeping operations in national reconciliation,
security sector reform, national institution-rebuilding
and economic and social development are conducive to
a good start in peacebuilding and for a solid foundation
for long-term peace and stability. Successful
experiences by some peacekeeping operations in
the area of quick-impact projects can be shared with
others. Peacebuilding functions and mandates in some
peacekeeping operations must be accompanied by
the provision of the necessary human and financial
resources.

Secondly, when carrying out peacebuilding
mandates, peacekeeping operations should also follow
the principles guiding United Nations peacekeeping
operations, particularly, the principle of the consent
of the host country. National institution-rebuilding,
national reconciliation, security sector reform,
elections and economic development all have a bearing
on the independence and sovereignty of the host
country. Peacebuilding mandates must be based on the
full consideration and respect for the will of the host
country and should be aligned with the host country's
own national development strategy and priority areas.
Peacekeeping operations must formulate exit strategies
and road maps so as to achieve smooth transitions from
peacekeeping to comprehensive peacebuilding.

Thirdly, peacebuilding is an arduous long-term task
and cannot be accomplished by peacekeeping operations
alone. The Security Council, the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Secretariat should strengthen
their internal coordination and should complement
each other. While carrying out the peacekeeping and
peacebuilding function, peacekeeping operations
should also strengthen their internal coordination.
With regard to the promotion of political processes and
national reconciliation, it is important to bring into
full play the advantages of the countries in the region
and regional organizations. As for economic and social
recovery and development, the United Nations should
surely mobilize the contributions that can be made by
the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and
other international partners.

Last but not least, China endorses the draft
resolution to be adopted at today's meeting (S/2013/27).
We thank Pakistan for the work it has done in the
drafting of and consultations on the draft resolution.

