Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for the Sahel for her briefing and to reiterate
France's full support for her mission.

The stabilization of Mali is of crucial importance
for the Sahel. After having mobilized the attention and
energy of the Security Council for two years, Mali
is now entering a period that could be historic. The
peace negotiations under way in Algiers are bringing
together the Malian parties for the first time under the
auspices of the international community as a whole. In
that regard, I should like to welcome the investment
of all international partners in these negotiations, in
particular Algeria and the United Nations.

An inclusive and truly applied peace agreement
in Mali would have beneficial consequences for the
entire Sahel region and beyond, and there would be
a clear improvement of security in the region. At this
crucial time, the United Nations and, more broadly,
the international community as a whole have a major
responsibility to fulfil. We must continue to encourage
the parties in Mali to negotiate in a spirit ofcompromise
in order to conclude a lasting and inclusive peace
agreement.

France is very committed to helping the countries
of the Sahel to meet the challenges they face. In
addition to its involvement in the European Union and
the United Nations, in 2013, France revised the Sahel-
Saharan strategy it had launched in its national capacity
in 2008. Our strategy is to develop a comprehensive
approach combining issues security, governance
and development. The French Sahelo-Saharan
strategy covers the cooperation of France with six
countries - Senegal, Mauritania, Mali, Burkina Faso,
the Niger and Chad.

The strategy focuses in particular on the following
four priorities: first, to contributing to improving the
living conditions of the population, through, inter alia,
access to basic services, opening up remote areas,
expanding the State's territorial network and sustainable
economic development; secondly, strengthening the
capacity of States to give them the means to fight against
terrorism and large-scale trafficking; thirdly, fighting
against radicalization by supporting the development
of education and the media; and fourthly, encouraging
and facilitating regional security cooperation. The
French Sahelo-Saharan strategy represents more than
€400 million - $500 million - in bilateral development
assistance each year. As part of this strategy, France
makes 160 technical and security experts available to
these countries.

The French military Operation Barkhane represents
the contribution of France to the fight against terrorism
and to the improvement of security in the Sahel.
Operation Barkhane was launched on 1 August 2014 at
the request of five countries of the Sahel and in close
collaboration with them. It mobilizes more than 3,000
soldiers, substantial air assets and hundreds ofvehicles.
Operation Barkhane's efforts are regional in scope in
order to deal with the movement of terrorist groups in

the Sahel. It has two objectives: first, to fight against the
terrorist threat at the regional level last night, during
an operation near Gao, French forces killed one of key
terrorist leaders in the Sahel, the former military chief
of the Movement for Unity and Jihad in West Africa,
who was personally responsible for several murders
and takings of hostages; and secondly, helping to build
the security capacity of the Sahel States.

 

The United Nations integrated strategy for the
Sahel should help all stakeholders to coordinate their
efforts for the Sahel. The variety of initiatives over the
Sahel - from the United Nations, the European Union,
the Economic Community of West African States,
the World Bank, the African Union - is the sign of a
strong mobilization of the international community. I
welcome in this regard the creation of the Group of Five
Sahel, which aims to coordinate the efforts of the key
countries concerned.

To be effective, it is important that these strategies
be coordinated. In that context, the Ministerial
Coordination Platform for the Sahel, implemented at
the time of the Secretary-General's visit to the Sahel
in November 2013, is a unique framework, which, now
chaired by Mali, is the only forum that brings together
all the States of West and North Africa, as well as
concerned international and regional organizations. I
welcome the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General's
efforts to bring about convergence of the regional
and international efforts for the Sahel. I particularly
welcome the strengthening of cooperation between
Ministerial Coordination Platform and the Group of
Five Sahel countries.

The United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel
should result in concrete projects in all areas. In the
area of governance, a significant number of elections
in the Sahel and West Africa will be held next year.
The United Nations objective will be to assist States
that seek such support in organizing the elections in a
transparent and credible manner.

On the occasion of the fifteenth Francophonie
summit, held on 29 and 30 November in Dakar,
President Francois Hollande praised the courage that
the people of Burkina Faso have demonstrated in recent
weeks. Their example shows that it is the people who
must decide their futures. We hope that the Burkina
Faso people will now master this transition process and
ensure that reconciliation is achieved and that free and
fair elections will be held within a year.

Next, in the area of security, the Secretary-General
recalled that the terrorist attacks in the Maghreb and
the Sahel increased from 60 per cent in 2013 compared
to 2012. The United Nations has as its mission to
assist States in the region and African organizations
to strengthen their cooperation in the fight against
terrorism. We support the operationalization of these
initiatives in the context of African architecture of
peace and security.

Finally, in the humanitarian and development
field, in 2014, it is estimated that there are more than
20 million people suffering from food insecurity in the
region. Five million children are threatened by a risk of
serious malnutrition. The development of desert areas
should be a major focus of the efforts of the international
community. In each of these areas, Mr. President, you
can count on France's strong commitment.

