Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank the United States
delegation for the initiative of convening this debate
of the Security Council on such a relevant topic. We
welcome the participation in today's meeting of a
number of high-level officials.

We have from the outset actively supported the
good offices of the Secretary-General for a swift
stabilization of the situation in the Great Lakes region,
which have made possible the signing of the Framework
Agreement in Addis Ababa on 24 February. This
initiative established the problems of the region as
one of the top priorities of the Security Council and
the international community as a whole. We welcome
the vigorous efforts of the Special Envoy of the United
Nations Secretary-General on the Region of the Great
Lakes, Ms. Mary Robinson, to discharge her mandate.

We view the outcomes of the joint visit to the
region from 22 to 24 May of the Secretary-General
and the President of the World Bank as an important
milestone in encouraging the signatories to the
Framework Agreement to strictly comply with its spirit
and letter, and to consistently fulfil their obligations.
We welcome the establishment and launch of a regional
oversight mechanism involving all the signatories of the
Framework Agreement in order to develop performance
benchmarks for its practical implementation. We also
note the decision of the President of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Mr. Joseph Kabila, to establish
a national oversight mechanism.

We share the conclusion of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2013/387) that the political
agreements must be reinforced by a deepening of
economic ties among the neighbouring States. In this
context, we welcome the intention of the World Bank
to provide $1 billion with a view to the development of
the Great Lakes region and to strengthening economic
cross-border ties and the well-being of the people.

In order to implement these plans, there is a need
for a speedy and full cessation ofviolence in the region.
We strongly condemn the illicit armed groups that have
resumed fighting in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The result of the recent escalation
of violence is yet more civilian victims, new flows
of refugees and internally displaced persons, and
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights. Such violations are absolutely inadmissible. It
is important to conduct careful investigations and to
bring the perpetrators to justice.

Any support for illicit armed groups must be halted.
We expect the deployment of a fully operational Force
Intervention Brigade under resolution 2098 (2013)
within the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO). This should assist in achieving a
qualitative breakthrough in combating anti-Government
armed groups and ultimately contribute to establishing
a climate of trust among neighbours and advance the
settlement process.

At this difficult stage of regional development,
assistance from the United Nations, aimed at achieving
sustainable and long-term peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in the Great Lakes region as
a whole, is more urgent than ever. At the same time, let
us not forget that the primary responsibility for ensuring
progress in the peace process is borne by the countries
of the region themselves. Important assistance in that
regard should also be provided by the African Union
and subregional organizations.

We must not lose sight of the crucial need for
comprehensive reform of the security sector in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in order to bolster
the national army, which, in the final analysis, must take
over all functions and responsibilities for protecting
civilians and ensuring the territorial integrity of the
country. Work must be done to eradicate the root causes
of the never-ending conflict, including by establishing
order in the exploitation of mineral resources. The
primary responsibility in these matters also lies with
the Congolese people.

For its part Russia, with other members of the
international community, will continue to support the
people and Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the States of the Great Lake region in
resolving the challenges before them.

