At the outset, allow me, Mr. President, to congratulate you and your delegation on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for this month. I would also like to express our appreciation for the Permanent Representative of China for his able leadership in steering the Council's agenda during the exceptionally difficult month of March. In addition, we thank the Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, and the Under-Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, for their briefings. The Sudan has taken note of the special report by the Chairperson of the African Union Commission and the Secretary-General of the United Nations (S/2020/202). While we welcome some of the suggestions and recommendations contained therein, I would like to highlight the following points. The overall security situation in Darfur has largely been stable. The Security Council, in resolution 2495 (2019), adopted on 31 October, reflected that reality when it welcomed the steady improvement in the security conditions in Darfur. The transitional Government of the Sudan is doing its utmost to safeguard Darfur's stability by, inter alia, preventing intercommunal conflicts and promoting the culture of peace and coexistence. The primary responsibility for protecting civilians in Darfur and elsewhere in the country lies with the Government of the Sudan. In that regard, my Government is able and willing to perform all of its responsibilities. The Government has already put in place a comprehensive strategy to enhance the protection of civilians in Darfur, address the root causes of the conflict, promote human rights and build sustainable peace. It is worth mentioning that peace is a key priority for the transitional Government and a cornerstone in the Constitutional Document, which governs the transitional period in the country. My Government has been engaging for several months in tireless and ceaseless negotiations with the various Sudanese factions in order to reach a comprehensive peace in the Sudan. At a joint meeting on 18 March, the Sovereign Council, the Council of Ministers and the political forces agreed on a matrix that sets timetables in seven key areas, topmost of which is the realization of peace. The second week of May has been agreed as the deadline for accomplishing a settlement that is viable, sustainable and responsive to the aspirations of all people. It is further worth mentioning that the peace negotiations are now continuing between partners - not adversaries - as the leaders of the armed groups are part and parcel of the change that has taken place in the country. Against the backdrop of those positive developments and the constantly improving situation on the ground in Darfur, Prime Minister Hamdok sent a letter to the President of the Security Council and the Secretary-General on 27 February, detailing the strategic areas in which the Sudan requires assistance from the United Nations and the wider international community. The Prime Minister's letter was issued as a Security Council document (S/2020/221), and all members of the Council must have perused it. Since the Sudan voluntarily sought the assistance of the United Nations in specific areas, we implore that the follow-on mission be mandated according to arrangements that fall under Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations. The current situation in Darfur no longer necessitates any Chapter VII provisions. The follow-on mission should be established in a manner that respects the sovereignty, national consent and national ownership of the Sudan. Furthermore, any deployment of United Nations police or military personnel pursuant to Chapter VII would be 25/26 26/26 contrary to what has been sought by the consensus among the Sovereign Council, the Council of Ministers and the governing political parties in the Sudan. Therefore, I would like to stress that any discussion involving reference to Chapter VII will not obtain the consent of my Government. Darfur is at a key juncture in its transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding. In order to make that transition as smooth as possible and avoid any security vacuum in a post-African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) configuration, my Government is fully committed to continuing its efforts to enhance security in Darfur by deploying law enforcement teams to maintain law and order. It is to be recalled that when a tribal clash erupted in El Geneina, West Darfur, earlier in January, both the Vice-Chair of the Sudan's Sovereign Council and the Prime Minister visited and stayed in the area until a robust security arrangement had been set up and non-recurrence of such incidents was assured. While we note the significant progress achieved in the overall security situation in Darfur, we are concerned about the ongoing sanctions imposed against the Sudan pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005). We strongly urge the Council to courageously reconsider those measures, particularly the restrictions imposed on the movement of arms and troops to and within Darfur. The region of Darfur is adjacent to volatile hotspots where terrorist organizations, such as Boko Haram, Al-Qaida, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham and others, are active and illegal migration and human trafficking are rampant. For these and other reasons, it is imperative to adequately enable the Sudanese security forces to be prepared for any potential threats by lifting the sanctions. We highly appreciate the efforts of the Friends of the Sudan contact group and their ardent desire to assist in mitigating the negative impacts and heavy heritage of the deposed regime on the country's economy. We urge the Friends of the Sudan to keep up the momentum until the convening of an international pledging conference for the Sudan and the accomplishment of its outcomes. I would be remiss if I did not reflect on the challenges resulting from the designation by the United States of America of the Sudan as a State sponsoring terrorism and the effects of that designation on our economy. That is compounded by the socioeconomic difficulties the coronavirus disease pandemic poses for our economy and health infrastructure. These represent two real threats to the success of our revolution, which toppled the most notorious dictatorship in Africa. Finally, while the Security Council is conducting a full and objective evaluation of a UNAMID drawdown and coming up with options for the post- UNAMID follow-on presence, it is imperative that the Sudan be fully engaged in that process in a transparent and consultative manner. Furthermore, the Sudan will continue to cooperate with UNAMID during the liquidation and exit phase. We stand ready to work with the international community so as to jointly achieve stability and development, not only in Darfur but in the whole of the Sudan.
