Mr. Patriota (Brazil): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this meeting in an open
debate format. I also thank the Secretary-General, the
Director-General of the World Health Organization
(WHO), the Senior United Nations System Coordinator
for Ebola and the representative of Medecins Sans
Frontieres. Let me also acknowledge the presence
of the ministers of Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone
and the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Cuba. We welcome the Secretary-General's
announcement of the establishment of the United
Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response, to be
headed by a Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, and look forward to further examining this
issue in the General Assembly.

Brazil welcomes this opportunity to reiterate its
commitment to assisting our sister nations of West
Africa to combat the effects of the Ebola virus. We
recognize the disease's potential to destabilize fragile
situations in Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone and
spread far beyond the affected countries. However,
we underline the need to treat the outbreak first and
foremost as a health emergency and a social and
development challenge rather than a threat to peace and
security.

Brazil welcomes the contributions made thus far
by the international community. In keeping with your
suggestion, Madam President, that this meeting allow
for the announcement of specific contributions, I wish
to announce that Brazil has shipped emergency supply
kits to support local efforts in Liberia, Guinea and
Sierra Leone, in coordination with local representatives
of WHO. Each of those kits contains personal protective
equipment for infection prevention and control and
medical supplies to care for hundreds of patients.
Together, they account for a three-month supply for a
total of approximately 7,000 people. Additionally, the
Government of Brazil has announced an initial donation
to assist efforts by WHO to curb the virus. Moreover,
President Dilma Rousseffhasjust authorized a donation,
on an exceptional basis, of thousands oftons of rice and
beans, through the World Food Programme, targeted to
the countries affected most by the Ebola disease.

Not only must we strive to contain the spread of the
virus, but we must make concerted efforts to contain
the potential of the outbreak to reverse or undermine
the significant strides the region has made through
peacebuilding and economic development in recent
years, after decades of war. Bearing that in mind, I
convened, in my capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), an informal meeting ofthe PBC on
8 September to hear a briefing by Dr. David Nabarro.
I also commend the Chairs of the Guinea, Liberia and
Sierra Leone configurations of the Commission for
having convened, in August, the first informal meeting
ofthe configurations to discuss the impacts ofthe Ebola
crisis on peacebuilding efforts in the three countries.

The statement adopted by the PBC after its
8 September meeting reiterated the Commission's
intention to serve as a common platform for discussion,
information-sharing and awareness-raising in New
York, engaging a wider audience of actors from
Member States, international financial institutions and
United Nations agencies. Noting with deep concern
the potential for the Ebola virus disease to reverse
peacebuilding gains, the statement appealed to the
international community to not isolate the affected
countries, by maintaining transportation connections
with adequate prevention measures. Containment
measures must be designed in such a way that they do
not aggravate acute problems associated with fragile
social, political and economic conditions.

Let me recall that, on 21 August, when the United
Kingdom organized an open debate (see S/PV.7247)
on prevention, the early warning issued by the
representative of Brazil, as PBC Chair, was the only
reference to the Ebola crisis and its destabilizing
implications for the region, which highlights the PBC's
role as an early-warning agent.

The outbreak underscores the importance of
building local capacity to respond to public health crises.
As Mr. Paul Farmer, co-founder of the international
non- governmental organization Partners in Health, who
is in Liberia this week, has noted, if the Ebola epidemic
had instead struck regions in the developed world,
there is no doubt that the health systems in place could
contain and then eliminate the disease. The crisis in
West Africa today is thus a reflection of long-standing
and growing inequalities in development and in access
to basic health care.

In line with the WHO Ebola response road map, the
coordinated international response being rallied here
today should place emphasis in supporting affected and
at-risk countries by strengthening national capacities.
Particular attention should be given to the security of
local health workers, who are essential for containing
the outbreak, but, unfortunately, if not adequately
equipped, face higher risks of contagion.

The unprecedented outbreak of the Ebola virus
disease is a test of our capacity to mobilize international
efforts to support affected States while preventing
further transmission. We express our conviction that
the General Assembly, the World Health Organization
and the Peacebuilding Commission are well equipped
to deal with the disease and its consequences. That
conviction is based on our confidence in the resilience
of the peoples and Governments of Liberia, Guinea
and Sierra Leone, who will not allow the epidemic to
undermine all the hard-won progress they have made
in stabilizing their countries and putting years of
instability and conflict behind them.

Let us hope that the solidarity and commitment
shown in the face of a cause that may affect the entire
international community, inspire the Security Council
to further promote cooperation and dialogue in its daily
business.

