We thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing. The Palestinian problem has a regional dimension, as reflected in the Arab Peace Initiative endorsed by the world community. Without its settlement, as history proves, it is impossible to establish peace in the region. A settlement that is acceptable to both sides - Palestinians and Israelis - is the only guarantee of a lasting peace. At all stages of work on the Middle East peace process, Russia, as a permanent member of the Security Council and a member of the international Middle East Quartet of mediators, has always proceeded from the need to achieve a comprehensive settlement on the basis of the internationally recognized legal framework approved by the United Nations. It includes United Nations resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative and the fundamental principle of a two-State solution. This basis provides for the creation of an independent, sovereign and territorially contiguous Palestinian State within 1967 borders, with its capital in East Jerusalem, which would live in peace with Israel. Russia will adhere to those principles. The entire range of final-status issues should be resolved in direct negotiations between the Palestinians and the Israelis. Those negotiations should be launched as soon as possible. We call on our partners in the Quartet - the United Nations, the European Union and the United States - to intensify cooperation to assist the parties. We are ready for dialogue with key regional players. In addition, Russia is actively engaged with various Palestinian representatives in order to overcome their differences, and is helping our Egyptian friends in that regard. We reaffirm the call to abstain from provocative moves and unilateral steps. International cooperation and joint action must accompany the advancement of the Middle East peace process. In that regard, we took note of the trilateral statement of the leaders of the United States, Israel and the United Arab Emirates. In accordance with that document, Israel will suspend the annexation of the occupied West Bank of the Jordan River. We consider that important since such plans were a key obstacle to the resumption of Palestinian-Israeli negotiations. Annexation would destroy the prospects for a viable, independent and territorially contiguous Palestinian State. The aforementioned trilateral statement also confirms that the parties will continue their efforts to achieve a just and sustainable settlement of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. In that regard, we would like to recall that despite the existence of unilateral initiatives, the basis of such a settlement should remain the internationally recognized parameters. We emphasize that unilateral actions, including plans for annexation, which undermine the legal basis for a settlement, should be abandoned. Looking at the situation on the ground, we call on all parties to refrain from violence, including threats of rocket launches on Israeli territory, and on Israel to stop its settlement activity, the demolition of Palestinian property and evictions. We are concerned with the recent escalation around Gaza. The coronavirus exacerbated the problems of the local population. We call on the parties concerned to cooperate and fight the pandemic together. We share the concerns voiced about the humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip. We are also concerned about the increased workload of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), as well as the need for additional funding for the Agency to respond to new challenges, including in countries hosting Palestinian refugees, primarily in Lebanon, Jordan and Syria. We call on the international community to respond and to support UNRWA. In conclusion, we would like to raise another important issue directly related to the situation in the Middle East that has clear implications for regional and international peace and security. We all know that our United States colleagues, on 20 August, handed to the President of the Council a letter (S/2020/815) with a claim that Iran's actions allegedly trigger a snapback process, as foreseen in paragraph 11 of resolution 2231 (2015). Almost all Council members responded immediately with a letter to the President. As far as we can tell, an overwhelming majority of member States explicitly stated in those letters that the letter from the United States cannot be considered as a notification under paragraph 11 of resolution 2231 (2015), nor does it trigger the snapback procedure, since the United States has ceased its participation in the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action. The United States is the only member of the Council that thinks otherwise. We would therefore like to ask you a question, Mr. President. Could you inform us about the results of bilateral consultations with States member of the Council held after receiving the United States letter, and clarify your view on the United States claim? How will you proceed in this situation? In particular, do you intend to follow the procedures foreseen by operative paragraph 11 of Security Council resolution 2231 (2015)? Second statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia Our position on this matter is very well known. It has been expressed consistently on many occasions, most recently in our communication to the President of the Security Council after the United States pointed out a snap-back that was allegedly triggered, which we challenged. That communication has been circulated as a Council document. I will not be repeating it. Today's discussion clearly demonstrated where most Security Council members stand on this issue. They confirmed the paramount need to preserve the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). Preservation of the JCPOA is important for the whole international community, including for the United States. I hope that the United States will finally be able to realize it and not to pursue its current path, which is not only illegal, but will simply not lead to achievement of the result that the United States envisages. My main point is to thank you, Mr. President, for the conclusion that you made in response to our question. I think it is a prudent step that you are taking given the positions of the member States of the Council on the matter that we raised. Annex X1 Statement by the Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to the United Nations, Inga Rhonda King I would like to thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing on the evolving situation in the Middle East and for his unwavering commitment to the Middle East peace process. We meet again at a critical juncture. The Security Council must solemnly reaffirm our commitment to uphold the vital principles of international law. In particular, we must - by all appropriate means at our disposal - safeguard the territorial integrity of the State of Palestine and promote a peaceful settlement to the decades-long dispute. We welcome the recent announcement by the Israeli Prime Minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, to delay annexation activities in the occupied West Bank. Notwithstanding, we call on the Middle East Quartet to renew its efforts to help facilitate a peace agreement that is acceptable to both Israel and Palestine. It is a categorical imperative that the Quartet carefully examines and pursues all practical courses of action to lead the peace process to a successful conclusion. We are all aware that annexation undermines international norms and constitutes a serious breach of international law. A continuation of such activities across the West Bank violates the terms of resolutions 465 (1980), 476 (1980), 478 (1980), and 2334 (2016), as well as the relevant Assembly resolutions. We therefore remain deeply concerned about the expansion of Israeli settlements and its associated infrastructure in the occupied Palestinian territories. Such settlements have no legal validity and undermine the peace process. As such, we reiterate the demands of resolution 2334 (2016) that Israel immediately and completely cease all settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, and to fully respect all of its legal obligations in that regard. Turning to the humanitarian situation, the dire needs of Palestinians in the occupied West Bank and Gaza demand urgent attention amidst the surge in coronavirus disease cases. The Palestinians cannot combat the pandemic alone. In that regard, we once again urge the international community to ensure that the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) has adequate, predictable and sustainable financing to respond to the urgent humanitarian needs of the Palestinian people. We also echo UNRWA's appeals that aid to Palestine refugees in Lebanon be built into the international community's immediate emergency response efforts and longer-term support plans following the horrific explosion in Beirut that claimed the lives of two Palestine refugees, among many others. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines reiterates its firm commitment to the two- State solution. In that connection, we also reaffirm our long-held position to not recognize any changes to the 4 June 1967 lines, including with regard to Jerusalem, other than those agreed by the parties through negotiations. Only through a negotiated two-State solution that addresses the needs and concerns of both Israel and Palestine can we achieve our long-held dream of peace in the Middle East. As Coordinator Mladenov said earlier, "today is the day to redouble our efforts" before it is too late. Second statement by the Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to the United Nations, Inga Rhonda King We thank the President for his update and assessment. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines takes this opportunity to reaffirm its strong support for the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), and we reiterate that the agreement remains the only viable path to ensuring a peaceful, comprehensive and long-term solution to the Iranian nuclear issue. We wholeheartedly believe that a commitment to dialogue and negotiation will not only preserve the JCPOA but will go a long way towards resolving the current issues. The preservation of the JCPOA is critical to safeguarding peace and stability in the region, and we once again urge all parties to commit fully to multilateralism and refrain from actions that are contradictory to the requirements and goals of resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA. We maintain the position outlined in the 20 August 2020 joint letter of the three African members of the Security Council - the Niger, South Africa and Tunisia - as well as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, that "(hjaving confirmed its withdrawal from the JCPOA and by not participating in any of the JCPOA structures or subsequent activities, the United States ceased to be a JCPOA participant and is, therefore, ineligible to submit a notification to the Security Council under the terms of resolution 2231 (2015)" (S/2020/821, p. 1).
