Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
welcome the briefing by Special Representative of the
Secretary-General De Mistura on the situation in
Afghanistan. I would like to thank Ambassadors Tanin
and Apakan for their statements. My thanks also go to
colleagues from the Turkish Mission, the Secretariat,
Mr. De Mistura, the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the Afghan Government
for their efforts and help in ensuring the success of the
visit of the Council's mission to Afghanistan.

As a friendly neighbour of Afghanistan, China
pays close attention to the development of the situation
there. We wish to register our appreciation to the
Afghan people and Government for the efforts for
peace and congratulate them on the holding of the
Peace J irga in Kabul from 2 to 4 June.

On 20 July, the Afghan Government will co-host,
with the United Nations in Kabul, an international
conference on the question of Afghanistan. On
18 September, parliamentary elections will be held.
With these developments, the peaceful reconstruction
of Afghanistan has entered a crucial stage. I would like
to focus my statement on three points.

First, improving the security situation is the
primary task facing Afghanistan. Although some
progress has been made by the Government in
strengthening its security forces, the security situation
in Afghanistan has deteriorated since the beginning of
this year, with a marked increase in security incidents
resulting in the deaths and injury of innocent civilians.
This not only jeopardizes the safety and security of the
Afghan people and their confidence in the prospects for
peace, but also negatively impacts the assistance work
of the international community. China expresses its
concern over this situation. We hope that the relevant
parties of the international community will continue to
support Afghanistan in implementing various
initiatives, including the National Police strategy, assist
the Afghan Government in the capacity-building of its
security force, and help the Government to assume the
important responsibility of maintaining security and
stability at an early date.

Secondly, economic and social reconstruction is
an important guarantee for the lasting peace and
security of Afghanistan. The precarious security
situation, backward infrastructure and lack of human
resources have constrained the reconstruction and
economic and social recovery of Afghanistan. The
situation not only impedes the improvement of the
lives of the Afghan people and dampens their
enthusiasm for participating in national reconstruction,
but also hampers efforts to eradicate the insurgency
and drug trafficking.

While increasing its inputs in the security area
and helping to maintain stability in Afghanistan, the
international community should also pay greater
attention to the economic and social development of
the country, actively support the Afghan Government
in implementing its National Development Strategy
and encourage it to make full use of international
assistance to build its own capacity for development.
We hope that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and UNAMA will make proposals
and provide assistance in this regard.

Thirdly, having the Afghan Government and the
people exercise ownership is an important guarantee
for the successful peaceful reconstruction of
Afghanistan. Afghanistan has unique national
conditions and a special development strategy and is
facing many acute difficulties in the process of
recovery and reconstruction. In providing assistance to
Afghanistan for recovery and reconstruction, the
international community should respect its sovereignty
and encourage the Afghan Government and people to
exercise full ownership and to choose their own mode
of governance and development in line with their
national conditions.

The international Kabul Conference on
Afghanistan will be held on 20 July. We hope that the
relevant parties of the international community will
fully hear the views of Afghanistan, consider the
priority development areas there, and reach consensus
on the next step of assistance to Afghanistan.

President Karzai of Afghanistan undertook a
successful visit to China from 23 to 25 March this year,
during which leaders of our two countries carried out
an in-depth exchange of views on bilateral relations
and the regional situation and achieved broad
agreement. China appreciates the efforts of
Afghanistan in promoting the process of peaceful
reconstruction and will, as always, provide assistance
to the Afghan Government and people to the best of its
capabilities and further strengthen bilateral cooperation
in such fields as the economy, technology, training and
trade. We wish every success to the international Kabul
Conference on Afghanistan, and hope that the Afghan
people will, through parliamentary elections in
September, further solidify their unity and common
understanding and advance the peace and
reconciliation process.

