Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): I can be quite
brief, first of all because the European Union
presidency, in the person of the representative of
Sweden, will speak later in the debate, and secondly
because I think it would perhaps be a little de trap for
me to inflict on the Council, again, a catalogue of the
general concerns that, as is very clear from the debate
so far, we all share.

I want to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Klein, for his wide-ranging,
useful and interesting briefing today. His more general
points about the international community's approach to
the Balkans were very well taken. I know that some of
them will be discussed at the Peace Implementation
Council Steering Board meeting to be held in
Stockholm next week. I think they are points on which
we all need to reflect.

Secondly, I think that it is worth reiterating again
the importance of full implementation of the Dayton
Agreement, as Ambassador Levitte and others have
done this morning. That is our guiding star, and we
should not forget it or allow it to become obscured.

I would also like to say that the United Kingdom
supports the extension of the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH) recommended by the Secretary-General,
and we note Mr. Klein's statement that UNMIBH will
be aiming to complete its core mandate by 31
December next year. But I would be interested to hear
anything further he might wish to say at this stage, or
subsequently, about exactly when and exactly how the
Mission will judge whether this target is going to be
achievable.

I wish to commend the Mission's effort and
clarity of thought so far; but what are the benchmarks,
how will they be measured, and when will we hear the
results of those measurements? Carried through
properly, this will be an exemplary approach to the
conduct of a United Nations mission. And, as I said, I
wish to endorse the approach and work that the Special
Representative has done in this area so far.

Picking up on some of the remaining areas of
work to which the Special Representative has pointed
this morning, I want to endorse, in particular, as others
have done, the importance of creating an apolitical
police force. Like Ambassador Cunningham, I would
want Special Representative Klein to know that he has
our full support on the issue of the appointment of
professional and apolitical police commissioners at the
cantonal level.

But I would be interested to hear any further
thoughts he might have on two other areas: first, the
need to improve crowd control capacity; and secondly,
the problem of low minority representation in the
police force, although it was good to hear from his
briefing that, in some areas at least, minority figures
are improving.

I would also like to flag, as Mr. Klein has done,
the extreme importance of addressing properly
ethnically motivated offences and crimes relating to
refugee returns. As he said, the return figures are
increasing, and that is a piece of very good news
indeed. As he also said, the resulting number of crimes
so far has been commendably low. But I think this is an
area on which we should keep the spotlight very
carefully pointed. For our part, we will be doing so
during the remainder of the year.

Finally, I would just like to welcome the United
Nations agreement to co-locate with European Union
expert teams on illegal immigration. The work that has
been done on this has been very encouraging, as has
the action that has been taken to combat human
trafficking. We look forward to further fruitful
cooperation, and our own bilateral support and the
European Union initiative reflect our commitment to
the State Border Service's critical role in strengthening
the role of the State in this area and in combating
organized crime.

