Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I would like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, J an
Kubis, for his briefing and to express my delegation's
appreciation for his leadership throughout his tenure
at the helm of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I also thank Ambassador
Tanin for his statement.

With the support of the international community,
during the past decade Afghanistan has made significant
progress in a number of areas, including the rule of law,
national capacity-building, human rights, women's
participation, the educational and health systems, and
infrastructure development. The elections held earlier
this year reaffirmed the desire of the Afghan people to
assume responsibility for the future of their country.
Voter turnout spoke for itself. Many chose to vote in
spite of intimidation and threats to their lives.

As the preliminary results of the presidential runoff
audits are to be announced, we strongly urge the two
contenders - Mr. Abdullah Abdullah and Mr. Ashraf
Ghani - to place the interests of their people above
all else and to translate their political passion for the
future of Afghanistan into the formation of a national
unity Government. The utmost care must be taken to
avoid any acts that could derail Afghanistan's historic
transformation.

The leading role ofthe United Nations in responding
to Afghan requests for support for the 12 July
agreement is much appreciated. Audit supervision has
been unprecedented in its scale, depth and scrutiny.
UNAMA's outstanding work and coordination with
International Security Assistance Force, European
Union and Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe teams have been of critical importance to
ensuring an outcome that genuinely reflects the will of
the Afghan people.

The attempts made by terrorist and insurgent
networks to take advantage of the protracted electoral
crisis and the growing levels of violence in the
country are of great concern. The sharp increase in
the number of civilian deaths and injuries in 2014
resulting from escalating ground engagements between
anti-Government elements and the Afghan National
Security Forces, terrorist acts and the use ofimprovised
explosive devices, particularly in civilian-populated
areas, is a worrying trend.

We urge all parties to uphold their obligations
under international humanitarian and human rights law
to protect the civilian population. The perpetrators of
acts of violence against the civilian population must be
brought to account. We also condemn all incitement and
attacks against United Nations and other international
staff, aid and medical workers, as well as their assets
and facilities. Putting an end to impunity for such
attacks is a must. Accountability must become part and
parcel of how the new Afghanistan operates.

Continued international assistance will be
essential in the years to come in order to sustain
Afghanistan's transformation. We welcome the Wales
Summit declaration on Afghanistan, which stresses the
importance of the post-2014 Resolute Support mission
contributing to the further development of professional
Afghan security forces, and sends a strong signal on
the necessity of continued international support for
the protection of human rights, the development of the
education, health and social sectors, as well as long-
term political and economic cooperation.

In that context, we stress the urgency of concluding
the status-of-forces agreement so that future security
assistance can proceed smoothly. Lithuania remains
committed to supporting Afghanistan's development
and democracy. Our cooperation with and assistance
to the Afghan people, including financial support to
the Afghan National Security Forces, will continue as
stated at the Chicago Summit, the Tokyo Conference
and other meetings on Afghanistan.

Lithuania will work closely with Afghanistan
beyond 2014 as part of a new training mission once all
the necessary agreements are in place.

We are well aware of the challenges that lie ahead
for Afghanistan. Further progress is needed towards
peace and reconciliation, strengthening regional ties,
including through the Istanbul process and bilaterally,
as well as tackling the illicit economy and advancing
the rule of law. The new Government will have to step
up actions aimed at addressing the country's economic
situation, combating corruption and drug trafficking,
about which other delegations have spoken, as well
as implementing measures aimed at combating the
financing of terrorism and money-laundering.

With regard to women's rights, we note that
incidents of violence against women remain
underreported, especially in rural areas, for fear of
social stigma, exclusion or reprisals. We encourage the
Afghan Government, as our colleagues from Australia
and Luxembourg have done, to continue efforts aimed
at implementing the Afghan national action plan on
women, peace and security, the 2013 recommendations
made by the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women, and the 2009 law on
elimination of violence against women.

Women's genuine and meaningful participation in
peace and reconciliation, including peace jirgas and
provisional councils, is an integral part of fostering
durable peace and development in the country.
Ensuring women's safety and dignity in the workplace
is key to enabling women to join the civil service. The
recruitment, training and retention of women in the
Afghan national security forces must also be pursued
vigorously.

In conclusion, the presidential candidates'
acceptance of the election results and the formation of
a national unity Government are the most immediate
priorities for Afghanistan today. All eyes are on the
two contenders. They cannot and must not fail the
expectations ofa nation that has been through so much.
Afghanistan needs strong leadership and a Viable,
capable Government of national unity, a solid partner
for the international community, which stands ready
to continue to work closely with the country to create
a sustainable, peaceful and prosperous future for all
Afghan people.

