Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The agenda of the Security Council for the
month of March was a very busy one, and we would like
to thank the French team for the very skilful manner in
which it conducted the work of the Council and the trip
to Africa.

I should like to touch on a number of key issues.
We are grateful to the delegation of France for having
convened a meeting on the issue of ethnic and religious
minorities in the Middle East (see S/PV.7419). This
situation has deteriorated significantly in recent years,
but the preconditions for the emergence on the territory
of a number of States of the region of organizations
using Islam as a pretext for spreading terrorism, which
has nothing to do with that peaceful religion, are not
new. The spread of this malignant phenomenon is the
result of the political vacuum that has emerged in a
number of countries.

Russia has always been in favour of resolving crisis
situations in the region through gradual reforms based
on national dialogue, without external interference, on

the basis of peace and harmony among all religious
groups, including the various sects of Islam and
Christianity.

Countering the increase of religious extremism
will be successful only if a universal approach is
taken, without any double standards. A clear example
of the fact that there is no alternative to this kind of
approach is the deteriorating situation in Libya. We
are particularly concerned by the increase in terrorism
there; the Islamic State is increasingly entrenched in
that State. Clearly counter-terrorism actions should
be taken in parallel with political measures. The two
resolutions adopted on Libya this month - resolutions
2213 (2015) and 2214 (2015) - will contribute to
dealing with these fundamental issues. We should not
drag our feet on implementing them. That would be
dangerous, especially given the legitimate concerns of
Libya's neighbours.

We hope that the presidential statement on
Lebanon put forward by France will make an important
contribution to stabilizing the situation in the country.

The situation in Yemen has worsened significantly
this month, and we express our serious concern at
the situation there. We have always supported the
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of that
country. We deem it extremely important for all parties
to the Yemeni conflict and their external allies to
immediately end all forms of military activity. We are
convinced that the deep-rooted sources of conflict there
can be dealt with only on the basis of a broad national
dialogue under the auspices of the United Nations.

Russia, in its contacts with all of the parties to the
Yemeni conflict, will continue to step up its efforts,
including within the United Nations, to find a rapid and
peaceful solution to the armed conflict in Yemen. We
need to get the parties back to the negotiating table.

Russia is also actively involved in resolving the
Syrian conflict, including through the holding of
intra-Syrian contacts in Moscow. It is no secret that the
current problems facing the area are largely fuelled by
the fact that the Israeli-Palestinian conflict has been
unresolved for several decades. Today the two sides are
entering a critical phase in which they need to reconfirm
once and for all their strategic choice in favour ofa two-
State solution based on agreed international legality.

During the past month we focused in particular on
the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We believe that the re-establishment of cooperation
between the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is in the interests of both sides. In that context,
we stress that it is unacceptable to extend the robust
mandate of the Force Intervention Brigade to the
Mission as a whole. The task of ensuring law and order
and eliminating armed groups on its territory lies solely
with the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

The Council has also focused attention on the
tragic situation in Ukraine. I would like to underscore
that the 12 February package of measures confirmed by
resolution 2202 (2015) remains the cornerstone of the
resolution of the Ukrainian conflict, and must be fully
and thoroughly implemented.

In conclusion, we wish every success to the
delegation of Jordan, which will preside over the
Council in April. I assure it of our full support.

