Mr. Cardi (Italy): First of all, I too would like to
thank Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda for the twenty-sixth
report on the International Criminal Court (ICC) on the
situation in Darfur, as well as for her briefing today.
Above all, I would like to acknowledge her tireless and
admirable efforts to maintain a focus on the situation
in Darfur and on other situations around the world. The
report shows not only that the Office of the Prosecutor
is continuing to work on the investigations and the
proceedings already under way but also that it has to
follow up on the continuing alarming reports indicating
that crimes continue to be committed in Darfur.
In that regard, the recent visit to the Sudan of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict from
26 to 29 November showed that intercommunal conflict,
human rights violations, including sexual and gender-
based violence, impunity, a lack of accountability
and attacks on internally displaced persons in Darfur
still persist, despite some progress. Where the Court's
investigation of this is concerned, the Council is still
faced with a situation of prolonged stalemate, which
is unsatisfactory and is intrinsically linked to the lack
of cooperation.

I would also like to recall here, in line with the
statements of the European Union, that cooperation
with the Court is a crucial element of resolution 1593
(2005). It is part and parcel of full implementation ofthe
resolution and is an obligation under the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court. Cooperation with the
Court is required in order for proceedings to take place.
Resolution 1593 (2005) clearly indicates the general
framework and some specific obligations. The ICC
Statute further complements the resolution. Inaction in
such a situation cannot be attributed to the Court. It
is up to States to do more, including collectively. Of
course, the Court remains a complementary mechanism.
However, there must be a stronger indication of
genuine willingness to engage in national prosecutions.
The priorities for investigation and prosecution are,
naturally, up to the State in question, but, at the same
time, the entire international community is called to
action when such crimes are committed.

Since Italy is leaving the Council at the end of
this year, I would like to reaffirm the position that we
have outlined on previous occasions. We should do
more work, and on more robust processes, to address
and discuss the issues underpinning this and other
situations where accountability is at stake. Clearly,
the Council can ultimately decide not to decide. The
absence of action by the Security Council is also a
form of decision. However, we think that is detrimental
to the Council's authority, and it does not make us
particularly proud. But it is the result of the procedures
envisaged in the Charter of the United Nations.

However, we also believe that the Council should
adopt a structured mechanism that would enable more
in-depth discussions prior to reaching any conclusion,
including the conclusion that the Council is unwilling
or unable to take any decision or suggest any measure
that would enable some progress to be made. Perhaps
processes and procedures cannot solve cooperation
issues in themselves, but we think that they can create
opportunities, including for more engagement and
more dialogue with all interested States, and that
they could potentially enable creative solutions to
be devised. Repeating the same arguments every six
months, unfortunately, does not advance things in any
way. At the same time, of course, it is a necessary and
appropriate reminder that the victims of crimes in
Darfur still need to see justice done.

