Lieutenant General Ngondi: Before I respond
to the specific questions, I should like to make two
remarks. First, I am very thankful for the kind words
that Security Council members have expressed to us in
recognizing the hard work that peacekeepers are doing
in the field. Secondly, I appreciate the desire expressed
by members to support peacekeepers either as a Council
or as individual States.

Having listened to the debate, I want to suggest
the need to borrow from the military planning and
decision-making process. I think there is a gap in
our planning and in the formulation of mandates.
The military planning and decision-making process
requires expert examination in order to understand
the situation and to identify what needs to be done and
with what strategy. At the end of the day, therefore, they
come up with ends, ways and means and mobilize them
to undertake an attack. They have a very deliberate
strategic implementation mechanism. If our mandates
were arrived at through that process, I do not think
that we would be having problems. I know that violent
situations require rapid action. However, that does not
mean that we do not follow up to ensure that a complete
decision-making process has been followed from the
very start. That can still be followed up. Adequate
capability and strategies will therefore have been
provided to implement the ways, means and ends.

The second issue is robustness. As Force
Commanders, we have debated that at length We
know that every mission has its unique security and
operational challenges. Robustness does not necessarily
mean the use of force. The nearest definition of
robustness that we have is being vigorous in pursuit
of an objective. "Vigorous" does not necessarily mean
using weapons, machinery and so on, but using what
is available, depending on what has been configured.
Its second meaning is "capable of performing without
failure" - the determination to perform, whether by
fighting or pursuing other objectives. Robustness is
therefore not confined to the field alone. It cuts across
the board - from the Security Council to the field
and from the field up to Headquarters and Member
States. Everyone must ensure robustness and work out
what that they want to pursue. If a strategy exists, the
objective can be achieved. That is why I said, in answer
to the specific question from the concept note, that the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) was sufficiently robust, because it
has the capabilities in terms of the various components
put together. If it is sufficiently robust, it will achieve
its objective. Having said that, let me turn to the
specific questions.

First, to respond to the question from the
representative of the United Kingdom as to the next step
after reconfiguration and the challenges that have been
experienced in mandate implementation, it is an open
secret that UNAMID is on its way out, having done
what it was supposed to do. That process started a long
time ago, with the adoption of resolution 2363 (2017),
which indicated that direction. Unless something
changes, if all factors remain the same, that train is on
its way. What we have therefore said very clearly is that
what we need next is a very good, detailed transition
plan. The transition will try to ensure that the gains
that the United Nations has made in the field do not go
to waste but are handed over to someone. We pass the
baton to someone. That can be the Government, a United
Nations country team or civil-society organizations
that take on the role of providing basic services,
because our mandate is to ensure the protection of all
civilians, deliver humanitarian assistance to vulnerable
people, assist with community resolution mechanisms
and, of course, to support the political aspect, which
is mediation between the Government and the parties
that have not signed the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur. That is presumed to be the answer, and it can
be given life only by the people who are discussing it.
The mission is on its way out. The answer is a smooth
transition to ensure that the gains that have been made
are not in vain.

Secondly, what are the challenges around those
four areas? There are a few. For example, where the
protection of civilians is concerned, the number of
internally displaced persons (IDPs) who are registered
is more than 1.7 million. There are only a few of us, and
we cannot cover every individual. There are areas where
we cannot be and areas we must focus on, particularly
IDPs who have differences with the Government,
which we know can very easily cause a crisis. That is
where we need to use our limited capabilities. They
may be there not because of the conflict but because
of other problems, such as drought or intercommunal
conflict, which the Government can sort out as long as
it has the capability. At the moment we are present in
most areas because of a lack of capacity on the part of
the Government. However, the area we need to focus
on is where there are peacekeeping-related issues
and the presence of armed groups, which can attract
Government hostility at any time. That is where we need
to be present. It is where people have run away from,
and if we are present, we will create a pull factor for the
IDPs to come from wherever they ran to, return to their
own area and start their normal lives again. In general,
that is what UNAMID sees, and that is the direction.

Where mediation is concerned, somebody has to
deal with it. I tend to think that at the ground level we
interact with the population. But the top leadership
of the groups that have not come to the table must be
persuaded to do so. They must be educated to see that
this is the only way to benefit the people whom they
profess to lead. Otherwise, they are likely to attract a
lot of hostility on the part of the Government, because
it will always try to exercise its sovereignty over
the territory.

With regard to major challenges in performance as
a whole, a mission must be integrated, bringing together
all competencies in terms of those in uniform as well
as civilians with various remits. We have observed
that such integration sometimes does not extend to all
levels. It exists within the mission headquarters, at the
sector level and at the team sites, where the activities
are. Not everyone is always at those sites - other
than those in uniform, the peacekeepers - although
civilian components should be there. The integration
therefore exists only at two levels, not at field level.
That is a question of resources, of what is available.
People sometimes do not understand that is where
action is needed and that the success of the mission is
measured by activities at the lowest tactical level. If, in
formulating the mandate and identifying the resources,
the ways and means, it can be ensured that all levels are
covered, that is good, and any mission will perform in
the way it is supposed to. We must therefore be robust in
formulating the mandate. We must pursue the process
of formulating it with vigour so that we come out with
an implementable mandate.

Next, I would like to respond to the question
from the representative of the United States. Does
the situation in Darfur require a military presence?
We have mapped out the area of operations. As I have
said before, we know where the military is necessary.
The military is necessary where there is a potential
for clashes between the Government and parties to the
conflict or among other parties in the country, as well
as some that are outside the country.

Now, that is where we need to be. We are now there
as well as elsewhere, but we are only elsewhere because
those who are supposed to be there are not available.
That is the capacity gap in the Government that I have
been talking about, as well as in the humanitarian
bodies in the country, which do not have the capacity to
do what they are supposed to do, and which is why we
are there. If those capacities can be improved, we can
leave that area and focus on the small area where the
real crises are, so as to ensure that such crises do not
happen or, if they do happen, to mitigate them, so that
the population does not suffer a lot. We therefore have
a military presence in those specific areas in adequate
numbers, with relevant capabilities, in order to tackle
the challenges there in terms of coverage, footprint
and terrain. That is where we need to be. Until that is
sorted out - by the parties being brought to the table
or by declaring a cessation of violence between the
two - and until the debate, the negotiation, the dialogue
is undertaken and the mediation process gets under
way, only then will we see the mission pulling out.

The representative of Sweden asked again about
how the reconfiguration affects the protection of
civilians. As I said, it is a huge area to cover, with few
personnel, a small footprint. That is the issue. With the
reconfiguration, we are not everywhere. As soon as we
downsize, we leave some areas, reducing the footprint
of delivery to those who benefit from our services. We
cannot do everything everywhere. We can only do what
we can do with the capabilities that we have. Nobody
should think that the military can be under every tree.
No, priorities have to be set based on the intensity
of the conflict or danger and on the capability that
exists - and we must be where we are supposed to be,
even though there will be people who will not benefit
from our services. That is the danger. The protection-of-
civilians aspect is affected by reconfiguration because
we are downsizing while the capabilities of the
Government and the other humanitarian organizations
are not enough to take over for us. That is the effect of
reconfiguration. But we will never be there forever. We
will get out.

Lastly, with regard to the question posed by the
President in her capacity as the representative of Poland
as to whether our mandate is implementable, the answer
is that it is implementable because it is understandable.
Its components are very simple and understandable
and are therefore implementable. They have been
implemented. The only challenges are the places where
we have some difficulties here and there, where there
are restrictions imposed on us - the terrain factor, and
the fact that we cannot act as fast as we would like to,
that sort of thing. But the mandate is implementable. It
has been implemented, including the task of reducing
or downsizing and handing over various areas. All
those tasks are also implementable because they are
well understood and because we have the will and the
capacity to fulfil the mandate and as soldiers to obey
the instructions we have been given.

