Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to sincerely thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, for his
informative briefing.

Jordan regrets certain parties' disregard of the
several calls made for a ceasefire either by the Security
Council or the international community as a whole. We
also regret the continued escalation of the crisis and
the violation of the Minsk peace agreement. Jordan
expresses its deep concern at this serious escalation
of violence and fighting, which could have grave
consequences and lead to the further deterioration of
the situation in eastern Ukraine and the region.

Jordan strongly condemns the targeting and
intimidation of civilians as well as the shelling of
residential areas, regardless of the source, and calls for
the conduct of a thorough and transparent investigation
into the incident involving the shelling of a bus stop
in Donetsk and the appalling incident that took place
in Mariupol two years ago, which is considered to be
the bloodiest incident since last July's peace agreement.
We also call for the bringing to justice of all of the
perpetrators of these criminals acts.

This serious setback in the situation in eastern
Ukraine and the spread of the fighting to other cities
makes it incumbent on all parties to hold an emergency
meeting to continue the negotiations based on previous
agreements and with a View to speedily reaching a
comprehensive ceasefire. A political and peaceful
solution will not be possible in the context of resort to
military means or unilateral measures that undermine
regional and international efforts and bring the
negotiations back to square one. Rather, the solution
lies in the effective measures that lead to peace and
calm.

Jordan calls on all States with influence on the
separatists to urge them to refrain from the use of
force and to cease all violations, which can lead only to
further instability in Ukraine.

We call once again on all parties involved in
this conflict to shoulder their responsibilities, to
immediately implement a ceasefire and to stop all
escalatory measures, including provocative and
irresponsible speech by any party. We in the Council
and at the international level as a whole should redouble
our efforts and do our utmost to prevent the collapse
of all the progress that has been achieved over the past
year, so as to achieve a comprehensive agreement that
takes into account all of the interests of the different
parties.

We would conclude by stressing the importance of
preserving the country's unity, territorial integrity and
sovereignty, of non-interference in its internal affairs,
of the proper control of its borders and of the cessation
of flows of separatists and foreign fighters and weapons
into Ukrainian territory. We also stress the importance
of the full implementation, in letter and in spirit, of the
Minsk peace agreement and of the memorandum issued
later, as well as of the joint statement by the Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of France, Germany, Russia and
Ukraine on the establishment of a communication line.

