Mr. De Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, Sir, allow me to congratulate you on Chile's
very efficient guidance of the work of the Security
Council, as further confirmed today by the convening
of this open debate of the Council to address a topic
that is of such great concern to the international
community - the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons.

Small arms are today a threat to peace and
security. They kill more people than any other type of
weapon, and they endanger human security and make
the streets unsafe in almost all the Member countries of
the United Nations.

According to the figures provided by the
Organization, there are more than 600 million small
arms and light weapons in circulation around the
world. Forty-seven of the 49 major armed conflicts of
the 1990s were waged with small arms. Small arms
cause half a million deaths a year: 300,000 in armed
conflicts and the remaining 200,000 in murders,
suicides and accidents. Small arms and light weapons
are one of the central factors in world violence and
urban insecurity in all countries, particularly in parts of
Africa, the Middle East, Asia and Latin America.
Today, terrorism, drug trafficking, common crime and
most civil conflicts that plunder nations in developing
countries are undoubtedly fuelled by the immense
illicit trade in small arms, whose victims outnumber
those of any other type of heavier or more
sophisticated weapon.

For those reasons, my country - having fought
terrorism, including weapons trafficking, for nearly 13
years and having overcome it - participates actively
in all current initiatives to prevent and combat the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons. We
complied with the requirement of submitting a national
report, in conformity with the mandate of the 2001
Programme of Action, and we participated in
formulating the Andean Plan to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects. In addition, we served as
Vice-Chairman of the First Biennial Meeting, held in
New York, and we have supported every initiative that
might enable us to make progress in this area.

It is paradoxical that, since the creation of the
United Nations, small arms and light weapons have
consistently killed more people than the feared
weapons of mass destruction, chemical, biological and
nuclear, yet the United Nations has no international
treaty to regulate these small and lethal weapons.
Although we undoubtedly made progress with the
Programme of Action established in 2001, we are still
far from finding effective solutions, because little can
be achieved with non-binding resolutions and
statements. Therefore, the Security Council's growing
interest in dealing with this massive problem - which
affects human security on every continent - is
encouraging.

So we must ask ourselves: what, then, can the
Security Council do to effectively halt the illicit trade
in small arms? The clearest response now - there is no
other - is to carry out the recommendations contained
in the Secretary-General's report on this matter. We
believe they are fundamental to achieving effective
mandatory control over small arms and light weapons.
Among those recommendations, the following are very
important.

First, the Security Council should establish
concrete mechanisms to obligate States to comply with
the embargoes imposed by the Council against these
weapons. The Council must then establish monitoring
mechanisms and undertake enforcement measures
against Member States that violate the embargoes.

Secondly, the Security Council must support the
open-ended working group established by the General
Assembly to negotiate an international legal instrument
enabling States to identify and trace illicit small arms
and light weapons.

Thirdly, the Council must coordinate with the
General Assembly to promote, in any international
action aimed at conflict prevention, strategies aimed at
combating the illicit proliferation of small arms.

Fourthly, the Security Council must continue its
efforts to identify the links among the illicit trade in
small arms, the illegal exploitation of natural resources
and drug trafficking.

Fifthly, the Council must include in the mandates
of peacekeeping operations concrete provisions on the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
former combatants. The main task should be to collect
and eliminate surplus small arms and light weapons in
order to prevent illicit trade that could generate new
conflicts or criminal violence. That task must be
closely related to an increase in the financial resources
available to light-weapons disarmament programmes
within the framework of peacekeeping operations, thus
ensuring that such an important process does not
depend on voluntary contributions.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that the best
thing the Security Council can do today is to provide
all possible support to initiatives aimed at negotiating
an international legal instrument that will enable States
to identify and trace, in a timely and reliable manner,
illicit small arms and light weapons. Although it is
certain that a legal instrument will not guarantee the
end of the multi-million-dollar trade represented by the
illicit sale of such weapons, it is also certain that such
an instrument will be an important point of departure in
combating a situation that, from the perspective of
human security, is becoming unsustainable.

For all those reasons, Peru strongly supports the
negotiation by the General Assembly of a legal
instrument to identify and trace small arms and light
weapons and congratulates you, Mr. President, on
having convened this meeting.

