Mr. Amrani (Morocco): I would like first
to express our deep appreciation to Pakistan for
convening a special debate under its presidency of
the Security Council on the important subject of a
comprehensive approach to counter-terrorism. The
Kingdom of Morocco shares Pakistan's commitment to
strengthening the international fight against terrorism
and welcomes the concept paper prepared by the
Pakistani delegation for our debate (S/2013/3, annex). I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
insightful briefing, and to commend his commitment to
reinforcing the United Nations leadership in combating
terrorism and in mobilizing resources and expertise to
strengthen the capacity of Members States.

Over the past few years, the international
community has steadily built stronger consensus,
efficient strategies and a robust architecture with the
aim of better responding to terrorism. Those major
efforts have disrupted terrorist structures, foiled a
number of terrorist plots and weakened the central
command of major terrorist groups. However, the
trends and methods of international terrorism continue
to evolve, and terrorist groups are constantly adapting
their modus operandi. Terrorist groups have developed
a more regional agenda, with an even stronger nexus
between terrorists and transnational organized crime
networks and a more intensive use of information and
communication technology.

Terrorism is a highly complex and multidimensional
phenomenon that we must address through renewed
consensus and effective cooperation. If it is to be
effective, our collective response to terrorism should
rely on a comprehensive approach and dedicated
strategies at the national, regional and international
levels.

The United Nations, as the appropriate and
legitimate multilateral framework, has developed a
robust counter-terrorism architecture. Over the past
decade, the Security Council has shown remarkable
determination in countering terrorism by adopting a
significant number of resolutions, and it continues to
strengthen the work of its counter-terrorism committees.
As Chair of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC),
Morocco is committed to working with all Member
States Members to strengthen the action taken by the
CTC to consolidate a strategic, transparent approach
and to further strengthen facilitation and coordination
of the provision of technical assistance that enhances
Member States' capacities to counter terrorism.

We have today the tools. We have the instruments.
I believe that the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, adopted by the General Assembly in
2006, represents the most comprehensive and effective
decision taken by the international community to
eliminate the dangerous threat and to improve United
Nations action. We also commend the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force for its
consistent efforts to coordinate international support.

Despite all those positive developments, terrorism
remains a prominent threat to international peace and
security. The United Nations must intensify its efforts,
adapt its responses to the new patterns of terrorism, and
diversify its partnership with regional and subregional
organizations. In that context, we reiterate, as other
delegations have reiterated this morning, our readiness
to pursue discussions on all proposals seeking to further
enhance the coherence, coordination and effectiveness
of United Nations counter-terrorism efforts, including
the proposal ofthe Secretary-General to appoint a United
Nations counter-terrorism coordinator. Likewise, the
United Nations should explore better ways to interact
with other multilateral initiatives actively involved in
the global fight against terrorism.

In that regard, allow me to recall the important
work done by the Global Initiative to Combat
Nuclear Terrorism in seeking to improve national and
international capacities for prevention, detection and
response to a nuclear terrorist event. I recall in particular
its most recent meeting in Rabat. We would also like
to highlight the early and important achievements of
the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum, in particular the
Rabat Memorandum on Good Practices for Effective
Counterterrorism Practice in the Criminal Justice
Sector, adopted last year.

Morocco has established a comprehensive and
multidimensional counter-terrorism approach, rooted
in its early commitment to contributing actively to
the preservation of peace and security at all levels.
The strategy is guided by Morocco's attachment to
the values of tolerance, human rights, fundamental
freedoms and the rule of law. It also converges with
the United Nations Strategy and complies with the
Charter of the United Nations, relevant United Nations
resolutions and other international legal instruments to
which Morocco is party.

The proactive Moroccan approach has been
successfully translated into firm and preventive law
enforcement measures with a dedicated counter-
terrorism justice system, as well as into national
initiatives aimed at addressing the various social,
economic and cultural factors involved.

Our effective approach is rooted in a series of
essential building blocks, in particular the total
rejection by all Moroccan citizens of terrorism and
violence as means to achieve political objectives. Our
firm commitment to pursuing irreversible democratic
reforms, with human development as a shared and
important priority, today provides Morocco with the
best safeguard against the spread of violent extremism.

Morocco has devoted equal attention and
commitment to preventing the spread of terrorism and
extremism at the regional level. For years, Morocco
has persistently warned the international community
about the deteriorating situation in the Sahel region,
which continues to face complex multidimensional
and interconnected challenges. The Sahel has emerged
today as the centre stage of alarming activities involving
terrorist and extremist groups that threaten the stability
and security of the States of the Sahel, West Africa,
the Maghreb and beyond. A year ago, the State of Mali
saw the northern part of its territory progressively
fall to armed extremist terrorist groups. Two thirds of
its territory is now in the hands of terrorist elements
whose confidence is ever-increasing, given the slow
response of the international community to dislodge
them. That state of mind was reflected in their actions
last week, when they broke the de facto six-month
ceasefire in place, thereby defying the decisions taken
by the Security Council. In the wake of those alarming
developments, Morocco supports the recent call of the
Government of Mali for outside assistance to combat
the terrorist elements and the response that is now
being provided by bilateral partners.

At the regional level, let me reiterate our call for
a sustainable framework for dialogue, cooperation and
solidarity i one that encompasses all States of the
Sahel and the Maghreb in order to address in a holistic
and effective manner the critical situation in the Sahel
region. We need further joint responsibility, inclusive
cooperation and constructive partnership to face those
challenges.

In conclusion, terrorism emanates from a complex
set ofinterrelated political, economic and social factors.
In combating it, we should not lose sight of the need to
address the underlying causes by promoting political
reforms and human development, eliminating social
injustice and resolving regional conflicts. To provide
sustainable solutions, terrorism must be addressed in
a holistic manner that does not rely solely on military
and law-enforcement measures, but also emphasizes
the human dimension of the cooperation.

We thereby firmly believe that the United Nations
should remain the central framework to effectively take
forward our fight against terrorism. We are equally
convinced that national counter-terrorism strategies
should include systematic and efficient regional and
subregional cooperation.

In keeping with its values and principles, Morocco
intends to remain an active and fully committed partner
of the United Nations and the entire international
community in the global fight against the scourge of
terrorism

Our commitment could not be better expressed
than by the words of His Majesty Mohammed VI, King
of Morocco:

"With regard to the fight against terrorism, Morocco
will continue to implement a comprehensive,
multidimensional strategy, in which security,
democratic reforms and development efforts
support and complement one another. Under
that strategy, cultural creativity and enlightened
thinking will also be encouraged, together with a
firm commitment to the rule of law and to equality
before the law and the nation's legal system".

