Mr. Seenz Biolley (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): Allow me to express the satisfaction of the
Government of Costa Rica at the Security Council's
continuing consideration of the case of Somalia, this time
by holding a formal meeting in order to approach this
subject with the greatest transparency, through the
participation of all the States Members of the
Organization.

It is true that the evolution of events in Somalia is
frequently frustrating and discouraging, but this meeting
demonstrates the firm will and steadfast commitment of
the United Nations to resolving the crisis in that country.

First, I wish to say how pleased my Government is
with the achievements of the process begun in Sodere and
Nairobi, but also to reiterate the urgent necessity for the
Somali parties that have not yet joined in the process to
do so as soon as possible. The Somalis are a great people
beset by great troubles, and they deserve a future of peace
and prosperity. It is to that great people that the leaders
of the various Somali clans and political groups owe their
greatest efforts, and it is for that people that they should
make peace.

Costa Rica would like to congratulate the countries
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, as
well as Kenya, Ethiopia, Italy and Egypt, for their special
efforts to bring the Somali parties to the negotiation table,
and we encourage them to continue those efforts. We also
believe that the United Nations should follow closely the
Somali peace process and support the international actors
that are trying to help the parties find a peaceful and
negotiated solution that would, among other things,
guarantee the stability, unity, integrity and sovereignty of
Somalia. In this regard, the United Nations, as suggested
by the Secretary-General in his report of 17 February
1997, should support the Sodere process and establish a
trust fund to cover the enormous costs entailed in
organizing these meetings.

As part of this international effort to support a
peaceful solution to the conflict in Somalia, Costa Rica
urges all States to respect the arms embargo established
in resolution 733 (1992).

We would also like to express our appreciation to all
the humanitarian organizations that provide assistance and
relief to the people of Somalia at great risk to their own

 

lives. We are concerned that the missions of the United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), the World Food
Programme and the World Health Organization have had
security problems recently, and we urge the parties,
particularly those in Mogadishu, to provide protection and
security to the officials of all international humanitarian
organizations.

We are also concerned about the situation of Somali
refugees. According to the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), on 27 April
the repatriation programme for the Somali refugees in the
east of Somalia will resume. This programme initially
began on 28 February last. To date, 2,500 refugees in
north-west Somalia have been repatriated, and it is hoped
that some 10,000 more will be repatriated by the end of
May. These refugees will receive food aid for nine months
and the equivalent of $30 in local currency. Costa Rica
hopes that these repatriation measures will be enough to
assure them a better future. We also believe that special
attention should be given to Somali refugees in Kenya who
left their homes because of the prevailing insecurity in
southern Somalia.

In my country's opinion, it is essential to deal with
and resolve the humanitarian problems besetting Somalia.
In order to provide humanitarian assistance to the Somali
people, it is indispensable, among other things, to open the
port and airport of Mogadishu, as well as to eliminate the
so-called green line, which not only splits the city but also
impedes access to and use of the international terminals
indispensable for delivering humanitarian assistance. It is a
duty of the parties to the conflict to eliminate such
obstacles to humanitarian assistance. In this regard, Costa
Rica supports the suggestion of the Secretary-General to
strengthen the United Nations Political Office for Somalia
and possibly, when conditions permit, to reopen it in
Mogadishu.

I would like to conclude by expressing my
Government's hope that all parties to the conflict, with the
support of the international community, will shoulder their
responsibilities in promoting a solution to the crisis and
reconciliation in Somalia. This requires openness, tolerance
and understanding, and my Government is sure that the
various Somali factions will now demonstrate by means of
clear actions their readiness for peace and reconciliation. To
that end, we support the holding of a National
Reconciliation Conference in Bossaso, beginning on 10
June, convened by the National Salvation Council, and we
trust that all factions will participate in that meeting.

