Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, I wish to thank you, Sir, for convening
this important meeting. I also commend the efforts of
the Singapore delegation.

I thank Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for
his detailed briefing. The Chinese delegation believes
that the situation in Kosovo remains very disturbing, as
reflected principally in the following four aspects.

First, the ethnic conflict in Kosovo has yet to see
a fundamental change. Violence against and killing of
members of ethnic minorities still occur from time to
time. We note that the former Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Kouchner, admitted before
he left office that, since its establishment, the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) has been unable effectively to guarantee the
security of minorities, especially the Serbs. We believe
that this is one of the principal reasons for the
instability of the situation in Kosovo. Together with the
Kosovo Force, UNMIK should take effective measures
to curb extremist ethnic forces, encourage all
communities to live in harmony and improve the tense
situation in Kosovo.

Secondly, the proposed elections for Kosovo are
very worrisome. Some people are trying to politicize
the elections. Many people on the ground also see the
elections as a move towards independence for Kosovo,
which would not only be in violation of Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999), but would also have
serious negative effects on the situation in the
province. The Chinese delegation believes that
resolution 1244 (1999) is very clear on the final status
of Kosovo. UNMIK should step up its work to
encourage the return of Serbs. Without the broad
participation of Serbs, Turks and other minorities, the
legitimacy of the elections will be in doubt.

Thirdly, with respect to cooperation between
UNMIK and the Government of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia, we welcome any step by UNMIK to
enhance dialogue with the Yugoslav Government. We
also welcome the mechanism for establishing dialogue.
We hope that the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General will make progress in moving
UNMIK to engage in constructive dialogue with the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, because the
appropriate settlement of the question of Kosovo
hinges on the understanding support and cooperation of
the Yugoslav Government.

Fourthly, as to the dialogue between Kosovo
Albanians and the Government of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia, UNMIK should actively encourage and
guide the Kosovo Albanians to resume that dialogue
and to seek a settlement satisfactory to all on a formula
for substantial autonomy. The international community
should exert a positive influence in this respect. Only
when national harmony is finally restored to Kosovo
and the rights and interests of all communities are
ensured through legislation can the issue of Kosovo be
decisively settled in a fair and reasonable manner.

I should also like to refer to the many recent
reports by the international media on the extensive use
by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) of
ordinance containing depleted uranium in the Balkans,
which has harmed the health of innocent civilians and
peacekeepers and damaged the environment. We note
that all parties concerned, including the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, the European Union and
NATO, have indicated their intention to investigate the
matter. We hope that such investigation will be
conducted in a fair and independent manner, that the
results will be made known to the public and that the
necessary measures will be taken as soon as possible.

I also take this opportunity to welcome the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Haekkerup, to his post. We note that, following his
assumption of office, he issued cautious statements on
the elections in Kosovo and that he is determined to
make the creation of a secure environment for the
return of Serbs and the fight against organized crime
priorities in his work. This should indeed be a focus for
UNMIK and we express our appreciation for it. We
sincerely hope that, under Mr. Haekkerup's leadership,
UNMIK will learn from the lessons of the past, truly
fulfil its responsibilities mandated by the Security
Council and comprehensively implement resolution
1244 (1999).

