Mr. Blanchard (Canada): I congratulate you, Sir,
on your leadership and reforms. They may be small
steps for humankind, but they are giant ones for the
Security Council.

(spoke in French)

I thank the members of the Security Council for
holding this important debate on the future of the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH) and for inviting Canada. I particularly
thank and welcome the presence of Foreign Minister
Edmond and Ms. Bachelet, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights.

Allow me to stress my agreement with the statement
delivered by Ambassador Ndong Mba of Equatorial
Guinea with regard to the urgent humanitarian situation
in Haiti. That worrisome situation cannot continue to
be ignored by the international community. We must
not overlook that difficult humanitarian situation when
we discuss the other issues concerning the situation
in Haiti.
Much progress has been made since 2004 in the
areas of security, governance, justice and human rights
thanks to the efforts of the Haitian authorities, the
meaningful presence of a United Nations mission and
the continued support of the international community.
Canada is pleased to have contributed to those efforts.
We are particularly proud to have supported the
strengthening of the Haitian penitentiary administration
and the Haitian National Police with the establishment
of the police academy. Recently, the national border
police of Haiti was established through the support of
Canada and the United States. Owing to its presence
in the north-eastern part of the country, it has seized
more than 600 kilogrammes of drugs over the past
month alone . Close cooperation with the authorities
of the Dominican Republic has also enabled restricting
human trafficking. In that area, as in others, Canada
will pursue its support for the development of Haiti in
cooperation with its partners to improve the quality
of life for all Haitians, especially those who are most
vulnerable. Successive events since July of last year
have demonstrated the need to continue efforts to help
Haiti improve governance and ensure the rule of law in
the country, including through - as the representatives
ofIndonesia and France pointed out earlier - combating
corruption and impunity, as the foundation of the social
contract, stability and economic growth for all.

We also need to work in a more integrated
way by using all the peacebuilding tools at our
disposal - diplomacy, mediation, security support
and development - to achieve a greater inclusive and
lasting impact. Our efforts must encourage political
solutions to underlying tensions and conflicts.

(spoke in English)

For those reasons, Canada supports the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to establish
a special political mission in Haiti to take over
from MINUJUSTH. The transition to a political
mission, however, must be carefully managed and
objectives-based. We should listen carefully to what
was said this morning by the representative of the
Dominican Republic, Haiti's neighbour, as well as the
representative of Peru, a witness in the region. The
objectives that have not been achieved by MINUJUSTH
should serve as a starting point for the special political
mission. Reducing the United Nations presence must
also be gradual and carefully sequenced to minimize
any negative impact and preserve hard-won gains
made since 2004. We encourage the establishment
of a robust special political mission with significant
resources and with a high-level political team under
the leadership of a Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. Such a mission must include well-
equipped components to continue efforts aimed at
decreasing community Violence and strengthening the
justice, police, corrections and human rights sectors.
The transition should also include a strong electoral
monitoring mechanism. The Mission should also
include a focus on economic security. That has been
missing in MINUJUSTH. As mentioned by Minister
Edmond this morning, there will be no stability Haiti
without economic opportunities for young people.

Canada wishes to emphasize the need to also have a
strong gender advisory capacity in the special political
mission. We need to ensure that gender expertise in
conflict does not become a nice-to-have by ensuring
that advisers remain part of the assessed contributions.
In addition to promoting the women and peace and
security agenda, that would effectively support the
Haitian authorities and civil society in improving
the inclusion of women in all aspects of the national
dialogue and reform processes.

Canada encourages the Security Council to decide
promptly on the establishment of the special political
mission to ensure optimal preparation conditions
on which to build a sustainable, democratic and
inclusive peace.

