Mr. Hattrem (Norway): I have the honour
of making this statement on behalf of the Nordic
countries: Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden and my
own country, Norway.

Trafficking in persons, including forced labour
and slavery, is a serious form of organized crime and
a grave violation of human rights. For the perpetrators,
trafficking is an enormously lucrative business. These
criminal networks exploit displaced persons and are a
factor that causes people to migrate. Terrorist groups
like the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, Boko
Haram, Al-Shabaab and the Lord's Resistance Army
are using trafficking as a tactic of terror and war.
Moreover, trafficking raises money for their operations
and criminal infrastructure. Women and children are
particularly exposed, often in the form of sexual slavery
or forced labour, or as soldiers, spies or infiltrators. In
that regard, we welcome the adoption last week, at the
margins of the United Nations Peacekeeping Defence
Ministerial Conference in Canada, of the Vancouver
Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the
Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers. We call on
parties to conflicts to take concrete action to address
such violations and abuses and to protect the victims.

We need to develop combined tools from the
security and development communities to address the
convergence of armed conflict, terrorism and trafficking
in persons. Therefore, we welcome resolution 2331
(2016). We need better and more effective utilization
of international organizations and instruments. That
includes the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, which are important
to ensure effective international cooperation across
borders and regions, as well as between countries' law
enforcement authorities.

In that regard, we welcome the capacity-building
activities of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime. Furthermore, we need to improve conflict
analysis, conflict prevention and cooperation through
data-sharing and monitoring between countries and
across United Nations entities. We welcome Secretary-
General Guterres' initiative to strengthen the conflict
and threat analysis of the United Nations. In addition,
we need to improve our ability to trace trafficking
networks and related financial flows and give priority
to the development of financial disruption strategies
and operations.

The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
gives us an important platform on which to tackle
trafficking in a more holistic manner. In line with
resolution 1325 (2000) and resolution 2250 (2015), we
also need to engage more women and young people
in both peacebuilding activities and actions against
human trafficking.

We support the Secretary-General's reform agenda
and would like to underline that the peace, security
and development architecture needs to be coherent
and mutually supportive in that regard. The Nordic
countries are strongly committed to tackling all forms
of trafficking and organized crime. We are already
deeply engaged in anti-trafficking programmes,
in partnership with developing countries, regional
organizations and the United Nations. Strengthening
multilateral cooperation and partnerships is more
important than ever.

