Mr. Djinnit (spoke in French): I would first like
to present the apologies of Mr. Amara Essy, the Interim
Chairperson of the Commission of the African Union,
who was not able to attend this meeting in New York
due to other pressing engagements on the continent. He
has entrusted me with representing him in this meeting
and with transmitting his greetings to the participants.

Mr. President, I would like to congratulate your
country, Guinea, on its assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of March, at this
crucial moment in which great stakes are the focus of
the entire international community, putting the Security
Council to the test.

Finally, I wish to express our appreciation for
having kept all the African questions on the Council
agenda, despite a strong temptation to marginalize
them in favour of more burning current events. Thank
you for having kept the world's conscience focused on
the critical problems of the African continent.

For many years, the dangerous phenomenon of
mercenaries and the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons have been the focus of African leaders'
concerns. Because they are intrinsically linked to all
acts of political destabilization, serious banditry and
cross-border crime, these phenomena have
compromised all efforts for sustainable development on
the continent and have ushered in massive Violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law. It is
worth noting that the massive proliferation of small
arms and light weapons has coincided with the
emergence of non-State actors that have become key
parties in most African conflicts.

West Africa in particular has paid a heavy debt in
this crisis, and it is very natural that the leaders of this
region have spearheaded the fight against the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons. The
ECOWAS Moratorium on the Importation, Exportation
and Manufacture of Lights Weapons, adopted in 1998,
and the code of conduct for its implementation, which
followed a year later, demonstrates the resolve of West
African countries to promote sustainable solutions to
conflicts that ravage the region. The other African
regions will follow the example of West Africa and the
continent will ultimately build on those gains by
adopting the Bamako Declaration on the Illicit
Proliferation, Circulation and Trafficking of Small
Arms and Light Weapons, which was a source of
inspiration for the United Nations Plan of Action
adopted in July 2001, despite the substantial
differences - it must be emphasized - between the
two documents, particularly on the terms of transfer of
weapons to non-State actors.

Furthermore, this traffic in light weapons fuels
cross-border crime and terrorism, which, particularly
since 11 September 2001, has been the focus of
collective and concerted action by the international
community. Africa was also aware of risks and had
adopted, in July 1999, a Convention on the Prevention
and Combating of Terrorism. That was later
supplemented by a plan of action drafted by a high
level intergovernmental meeting in Algiers that brings
together the crucial elements of Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001) and the modalities for the
implementation of the Convention.

Regarding mercenarism specifically, I wish to
point out that the Organization of African Unity
articulated a prescriptive response in the form of a
Convention for the Elimination of Mercenarism in
Africa, which was adopted in 1977 and entered into
force on 22 April 1985. This phenomenon, which held
sway in Africa in the 1970s and 1980s, has re-emerged
in West Africa as a result of instability, areas of tension
and the availability of small arms. In recent years it has
been aggravated by the activities of private
corporations specializing in providing security services
to multinational corporations in high-risk mining areas
and to Governments confronted with armed rebellion.

It cannot be denied that the proliferation of light
weapons, combined with the activity of mercenaries,
constitutes a factor of political and social instability
and is an obstacle to the economic development efforts
of our States. The essential question is why, despite the
existence of a significant amount of legislation, these
scourges continue to persist on our continent.

It is worth noting first that the best conventions
and programmes will not be effective as long as
sufficient political will does not exist on the part of the
signatory States to implement the provisions contained
therein.

Over and above political will, States must endow
themselves with the necessary mechanisms and means
to implement their collective decisions. Thus, a
moratorium on the import, export and manufacture of
weapons can only work if there is a follow-up and
monitoring mechanism that is truly independent and
has the necessary means that will allow it to identify
and cite Violators. In addition, there must be a
sanctions regime against noncompliant parties, whose
principle is envisaged in the charter of the African
Union. Efforts under way to set up the African Peer
Review Mechanism should help in the implementation
of the decisions and commitments of States members
of the African Union.

Finally, it must be recalled that while the ready
availability of weapons and the use of mercenaries
aggravate conflict situations within a State increase the
risks of explosion of already fragile inter-State
relations and add to war atrocities, the underlying
causes of tensions and conflicts that tear our societies
apart and poison inter-State relations can be found in
most cases in the weakness of the democratic culture,
discrimination against minorities, lack of respect for
rights and freedoms and the marginalization of entire
strata of populations. In other words, the challenge of
good governance is at the core of our quest for peace
and security in Africa.

Those were the comments I wished to make, and I
express my wishes for the full success of this meeting.

