Mr. Eitel (Germany): Let me begin by saying that
Germany fully associates itself with the statement made by
the distinguished Permanent Representative of Luxembourg
on behalf of the European Union.

On the basis of Council resolutions 1101 (1997) and
1114 (1997), the multinational protection force played a
decisive role in protecting the delivery of humanitarian aid
and guaranteeing the safety of international experts during
the election process in Albania. In my capacity as
representative of the State holding the presidency of the
Western European Union (WEU) for the second half of
1997, I would like to congratulate Italy, in the person of
its Permanent Representative, Ambassador Fulci, as well
as the other nations participating in the multinational
protection force, for successfully concluding this mission.

The Western European Union has been engaged in
the joint management of the crisis in Albania from its
start with a Multinational Advisory Police Element
(MAPE). On 22 July, the WEU Council decided on an
extension of the MAPE mandate until mid-October 1997.
This will give the time necessary to complete the WEU's
short-term advisory programme and gain experience. The
mandate of MAPE includes the following elements. First,
giving the Albanian police authorities information and
advice on appropriate aspects of policing and restoring
order; secondly, giving advice, for the purpose of training
instructors, by defining the needs and proposing training
modules in the following areas: organization, public order,
border control, logistics and communications; thirdly,
supporting the police academy by drawing up a teaching
programme. In the framework of the MAPE mission, a
number of WEU nations have provided equipment for the
Albanian police.

In addition to this short-term programme, the WEU
Council will also take up consideration of a longer-term
programme. The WEU sees its mission in Albania within
the framework of a variety of activities by a number of
international organizations, among them the OSCE, the
European Union and the Council of Europe, and also by
individual States. From the very beginning of the MAPE
mission, the WEU has been striving for close cooperation
with the organizations involved in Albania under the
overall coordination of the OSCE, as well as with the
Albanian authorities. We consider it to be of the utmost
importance to further continue and intensify this
coordination of activities. The future of the country will
have to be shaped by the Albanian people. The
international community is continuing, and will continue,
to support the process of stabilization. I would like to
underline that within this context, the WEU is playing and
will continue to play an active role.

