Archbishop Auza: The Holy See commends
the presidency of France for bringing this extremely
important topic to the attention of the Security Council
and to the international community. The long history
of peacekeeping operations, with their successes and
shortcomings, offers a rich reservoir of lessons learned
with which to develop parameters for more effective
strategy in conflict prevention and conflict resolution,
as well as in defining mandates and rules of engagement.
The same history tells us about the evolution in the
mandates that peacekeeping missions have been
receiving from the Council. For instance, one might
presume that an essential mandate of peacekeeping
operations has always been the protection of civilians.
Yet this is a relatively recent development. In fact, the
first peacekeeping operation to receive the explicit
mandate to protect civilians was the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Sierra Leone, only in 1999.

While my delegation considers the protection
of civilians a positive evolution of United Nations
peacekeeping mandates, paradoxically it also points
to the disturbing fact that more and more civilians
are being targeted during armed conflict, and indeed
used as weapons of war. This is one of the saddest
developments in the evolution of armed conflict. In
the early 19005, around 5 per cent of fatalities were
civilians, while in the 1990s, over 90 per cent of
the fatalities were non-combatants. Recent reports
and studies unanimously confirm that deliberate
targeting of, and indiscriminate attacks on, civilians
are increasing. Untold violence willfully inflicted
upon civilian populations and the defiant violations
of international humanitarian law in many current
conflicts are all too flagrant.

My delegation therefore believes that, in all cases
where mass atrocities and other forms of attacks against
defenseless civilian populations are being perpetrated
or are most likely to happen, the protection of civilians
in armed conflict must be a critical component of
peacekeeping mission mandates. It would be one of
the primary yardsticks with which to measure the
success or failure of a peacekeeping mission. Every
peacekeeping operation should be, at the end of the day,
all about saving lives. The evolution in United Nations
mandates also tells us that peacekeeping missions have
become much more than instruments for restoring peace
after conflicts have erupted. Considering the decisive
importance of both prevention and post-conflict peace
consolidation, peacekeeping missions must also be
deployed to prevent latent conflicts from exploding into
open violence and to prevent post-conflict situations
from descending again into Violence.

While conflict prevention is primarily a function
of diplomatic negotiations and mediations and post-
conflict reconstruction and peacebuilding are often
seen as the work of development experts and social
scientists, particularly grave cases warrant a preventive
peacekeeping mission to realistically stop latent
conflicts from exploding, thereby sparing populations
from the scourges of death and destruction. In the
same manner, lessons learned suggest that pulling
out peacekeeping missions too early can be extremely
costly in every way.

A sure way to protect civilians during armed
conflict is the preventive strategy of arms control. The
Holy See renews its call upon arms producers and States
to limit the manufacture, sale and gifting of horrendous
weapons that are later used to terrorize the civilian
population or destroy civilian infrastructure.

In the name of Pope Francis, my delegation wishes
to express deep appreciation in particular for the work
of the peacekeeping mission in the Central African
Republic. Without ignoring the disturbing allegations
of crimes committed by some peacekeepers, and
without underestimating the danger that the country
could still fall back to violence, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) has
contributed substantially to calming down the situation,
to assisting the displaced and those victimized, and to
maintaining an atmosphere that is conducive to the
pacification of the population, the regular functioning
of the institutions and the return to normal life. The
multidimensional mandate of MINUSCA overall
augurs well for the reconstruction and institutional
capacity-building efforts that underpin durable peace
and sustainable development in the country.

Moreover, the Holy See would like to express its
profound gratitude to MINUSCA for all the help it
rendered to make the visit of Pope Francis in Bangui
safe and fruitful, together with the French forces, of
course. The President of the Central African Republic
spoke about the fruit of the Pope's visit at the recent
World Humanitarian Summit, saying,

"with the visit of the Holy Father to my country
the humanitarian situation has significantly calmed
down, characterized by a disarming of the heart,
along with a return to the spirit of social cohesion
and living together".

The Holy See follows with interest the activities of
the United Nations peacekeeping missions in different
hotspots in the world and reiterates its commitment
to collaborate, where possible, in the work of
conflict prevention, conflict resolution, post-conflict
stabilization and peace consolidation.
