Mr. Gillerman (Israel): Allow me at the outset to
pay tribute to the Spanish Ambassador, Mr. Arias, for
his stewardship as Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC). The CTC, under his leadership,
continues to assume a vanguard role in the global
campaign against terrorism by assisting and monitoring
State implementation of Security Council resolution
1373 (2001). Israel would like to take this opportunity
to reaffirm its support for the work of the CTC and to
assure it of our full cooperation.

In our fight against terror, we should not forget
the faces of the victims. Lior was a happy boy and one
of the most popular students in his class. His friends
described him as the class clown, a boy who was
always making everyone else laugh. He was a forward
on the school soccer team and had dreams of a career
in the sport. "Lior excelled at keeping control of the
ball and loved dribbling it in front of everyone else,"
his coach has said.

Lior Azulai, age 18, a 12th-grader at the
Gymnasia School in the Rehavia neighbourhood of
central Jerusalem, was killed on the morning of 22
February in a homicide attack on the bus that took him
and dozens of his classmates to school every
morning - but not on that morning. Eight Israelis were
killed and over 60 wounded when a Palestinian
terrorist from Bethlehem detonated a bomb hidden in
his backpack, mangling the crowded bus and scattering
body parts and wreckage throughout the area of the
blast, creating a scene of despicable horror.

The Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade of Yasser Arafat's
own Fatah movement claimed responsibility for the
attack. It was the same terror cell responsible for the
grave homicide attack that killed 11 passengers on a
bus in Jerusalem less than one month earlier, on 29
January.

Since we last met in October 2003 to convene an
open debate in the Security Council on the threat of
terrorist acts, Israel has witnessed the murder of 66
Israelis and the injury of 224 in a continuous onslaught
of terrorist attacks. These figures, by the way, do not
include three United States citizens and a European
tourist who were killed during that period.

But these numbers are just the tip of this
horrendous phenomenon. In this same period alone,
217 terror attacks - including numerous homicide
bombings - have been thwarted by the Israeli security
forces. They would have cost the lives of hundreds of
innocent people, if not more. The terrorists target the
most defenceless in our society, such as Lior Azulai,
other young boys and girls, women and the elderly
alike. Homicide bombings have orphaned our children
and widowed our husbands and wives. They have
denied us life, peace and hope. What Israel faces today
in its most potent and sustained form has shown itself
to be nothing less than the first world war of the
twenty-first century. This new and horrendous
phenomenon is now revealing itself to the rest of the
world.

Recent global attacks have demonstrated that
extremist elements continue to be willing and able to
strike at any target, in any hemisphere, without concern
or regard for human life. In New York, Washington,
DC, Mombassa, Bali, New Delhi, Casablanca,
Jerusalem - no part of the world is immune from the
scourge of this global threat. Israel would like to
express its condemnation of recent terror events in
Russia, Iraq, Pakistan and other areas of the world.
Those despicable acts, unfortunately, demonstrate once
again the long road still ahead in the fight against
terrorism. We send our condolences to the bereaved
families and our wishes for a speedy recovery to the
injured. The war on terrorism is far from won.

Steadfast political will constitutes a potent
instrument of power, ensuring a united front of
international counter-terrorism cooperation based on
two essential components: the adoption of a zero-
tolerance attitude towards terrorism in all its forms and
the elimination of safe havens and support
infrastructure for terrorists provided by any
Government. The States that continue to harbour
terrorists and abet their activity must be named and
shamed. In that respect, our tone must be strong and
unmistakable.

Today, it is clear that the success of the global
counter-terrorism campaign will depend both on
sustaining international political will and on enhancing
the capacity of all States to fight terrorism, including
assisting those well-intentioned States that want to
fight terror but lack the necessary tools and experience
to meet the challenge. It has never been more clear that
the international community must pool its resources. In
the absence of close coordination, unwavering political
will and enhanced capacity-building among States,
terrorists will succeed in taking advantage of every
weakness, vulnerability and disagreement.

We must also re-examine our capacity to deal
with a second category of States - those that possess
the means to fight terrorism but lack the will to do so.
In many cases, it is not a question of capability, but a
question of willingness. I would like to share with
Council members what I see as a troubling
contradiction in the letter and spirit of resolution 1373
(2001) and the ability of the CTC to take the necessary
actions to implement its objectives. Whereas resolution
1373 (2001) was adopted unanimously under Chapter
VII of the United Nations Charter, it seems that
implementation depends upon the consensus support of
the members of the CTC. I believe that this stipulation
may present a serious obstacle to the current direction
of the CTC's work and our potential to effect real,
tangible results in the area of counter-terrorism. In
order to better serve the cause of resolution 1373
(2001), decisions should be taken by majority -
relative or absolute - and not by consensus. The
requirement of a consensus vote could impede crucial
actions taken by the Committee.

It is in this spirit that Israel has been and
continues to be supportive of ongoing efforts to
strengthen international counter-terrorism cooperation
in general and the work of the CTC in particular. In the
past year alone, we have witnessed increasing interest
on the part of Member States to work more closely
with us against terrorism and we have responded by
readily sharing our painfully gained experience in that
difficult sphere. We are equally willing to increase our
role in the work of the CTC, both at the administrative
level as well as in the field. No country can be left out
if international counter-terrorism efforts are to truly
succeed.

We agree with the current direction of the
Committee's work, which seeks to move from
formulating guidelines to practical implementation
with a view to attaining tangible results on the ground.
Two years after the horrifying terrorist attacks of 9
September 2001, the international community is still
formulating its counter-terrorism agenda. The existing
agenda - gleaned from the landmark Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001) - already rests on critical
counter-terrorism pillars, inter alia, enhancing
capacity-building and pooling resources, implementing
national legislation, increasing information exchange,
reinforcing land and sea security, and combating
terrorist financing. It is crucial that these elements also
be implemented on the ground.

In that context, we would like to draw attention to
comments included in the report of the Chairman of the
CTC with regard to the continuing challenge of
combating terrorism financing:

"Certain non-profit associations have been
used by terrorists, either to disseminate terrorist
propaganda or by collecting funds that are
diverted for the benefit of terrorist groups."
(S/2004/70, p. 6)

We would hope that those wise words will be taken on
board and acted upon by Member States.

However, in our view, efforts cannot stop here.
There is a continuing need to update the international
counter-terrorism agenda in order to deal with
emerging threats in an attempt to keep pace with an
increasingly sophisticated terrorist world. Agenda
items that deserve increased attention include, among
others, blocking the financing of terrorism, suicide
terrorism, Man-Portable Air Defence Systems,
terrorism using weapons of mass destruction, and the
nurturing of a culture of violence and hatred. We look
forward to working with the Committee in its new
phase of implementation, and we wish members of the
Committee much success in achieving their noble
aspirations.

