Mr. Eler (Turkey): At the outset, allow me to
express our sincere congratulations to the Nigerian
presidency for successfully leading the Council's work
in April, and to convey my delegation's best wishes to
the Republic of Korea for its upcoming presidency.

Turkey has supported all efforts towards a lasting
solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, comprising
two States living side-by-side in peace and security,
based on the pre-1967 borders, the relevant United
Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles and the Arab
Peace Initiative.

Today was meant to mark the deadline for the
conclusion of the peace talks launched between Israel
and Palestine in July last year. Unfortunately, one of the
parties decided to suspend the talks last week. We deeply
regret that decision. Turkey is of the view that the peace
process and the Palestinian reconciliation efforts are
not mutually exclusive and should not be presented as
such. That view is also mentioned recurrently in various
United Nations reports. Indeed, the need for Palestinian
unity has been a reality since the division in 2007 and,
if well guided and supported, such unity would help lay
the groundwork for sustainable and lasting peace in the
region. With that understanding, Turkey welcomed the
agreement reached between Fatah and Hamas and the
decision to form a unity Government that will embrace
all Palestinians.

As a matter of fact, it is hard to describe the
political environment within which the peace talks
were held as conducive. The Israeli side did not live
up to its commitments to release the fourth batch of
pre-Oslo Palestinian prisoners, and it continued its
illegal settlement and demolition activities and its
violation of the basic rights of the Palestinians in the
occupied territories. Settler violence, provocations
against religious and holy sites, including Al-Haram
Al-Sharif and the Al-Aqsa Mosque, and attempts to
meddle with the status of Jerusalem intensified. The
embargo imposed against Gaza remained in force and
the construction of the separation wall, in defiance of
international law and Security Council resolutions,
continued.

The international community has a responsibility
to take all the necessary steps to end the humanitarian
crisis in Palestine. Turkey, for its part, continues to
help alleviate the suffering of the Palestinian people
through bilateral projects in several parts of Palestine,
including the Gaza Strip. Last year, we delivered urgent
aid, including generators, fuel, flour and medicine, to
Gaza. In addition to our ongoing project to build a
hospital, the Turkish Government recently allocated
another $1.5 million to a World Health Organization
project aimed at providing further support to the health
system in Gaza. However, long-term solutions are
urgently needed to avoid greater humanitarian risks.
Only a comprehensive and just settlement abolishing
these restrictions will enable the robust and sustainable
development of the Palestinian economy. We therefore
call once again for the immediate lifting ofthe embargo
against Gaza in accordance with resolution 1860 (2009)
and the ceasefire commitments ofNovember 2012.

The year 2014 has been proclaimed by the General
Assembly as the International Year of Solidarity with
the Palestinian People. This should be a year for all of
us to mobilize our means and capabilities to support
Palestine in the economic and political realms. A
politically and economically strong Palestine will
surely be a stronger partner for Israel and the entire
neighbourhood for years to come. Turkey supports
the inalienable right of the State of Palestine to fully
enjoy the privileges of statehood, including becoming a
Member of the United Nations and other international
organizations and joining international treaties.

The Syrian regime missed yet another deadline to
eliminate its declared chemical weapons before 27 April.
Turkey is also deeply concerned about the reports
concerning the regime's recent chlorine gas attacks on
civilian populations. We welcome the decision of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
to send a mission to Syria to investigate those incidents.
If the allegations are true, they constitute a violation of
the regime's commitments.

The humanitarian situation in Syria, on the other
hand, is deteriorating every day due to the increasing
number of people in need of urgent assistance and the
regime's continued arbitrary denial of access. The
provisions of resolution 2139 (2014) are very clear on
stopping violence against civilians, putting an end
to sieges and allowing rapid, safe and unhindered
humanitarian access and cross-border humanitarian
operations via the most direct routes. Using the issue
of humanitarian access as a bargaining chip cannot
be tolerated. The regime's policy of deliberately
minimizing the number of access points into Syria
is a violation of resolution 2139 (2014), and imposing
such preconditions is unacceptable. The United Nations
should therefore find ways and means to provide
humanitarian assistance through a greater number
of border gates, in order to ensure access to a larger
population.

Since the beginning of the crisis, Turkey has
spared no effort to alleviate the suffering of our Syrian
neighbours, consistently maintained an open-door
policy, facilitated zero-point humanitarian assistance
and responsibly provided for the needs of the Syrians
who sought shelter in the 22 camps in Turkey and in
various Turkish cities. As oprril, the number ofSyrians
in Turkey is fast approaching 1 million. Unfortunately,
neither Turkey's nor Syria's other neighbours' resources
are limitless. What we expect from our partners is an
active engagement and meaningful contribution in
shouldering this burden.

The Syrian regime, which clearly displayed
reluctance to discuss the political transition in Geneva,
once again revealed its lack of sincerity when it comes
to finding a political solution to the crisis, with the
announcement of the so-called presidential elections
in June. Such elections, which will apparently be
organized under conditions whereby nearly half of the
population is displaced, some still under indiscriminate
attacks by the forces of the regime, will not only be
null and void, but also be in flagrant contravention of
the Geneva communique (S/2012/523, annex) and will
constitute another blow to efforts to find a political
solution to the crisis. The way ahead towards a solution
to crisis is clearly set out in the communique, that is,
the immediate establishment ofa transitional governing
body with full executive powers.

Peace and security in the Middle East are not
unattainable goals, as long as there is strong political
resolve. In that sense, we call on the leaders of Israel
and the State of Palestine to overcome the hurdles and
get back to the negotiating table with a genuine desire
to put an end to the decades-long search for peace.

I would like to assure you, Mr. President, that
Turkey's strong commitment to peace and security in
its region will continue until we reach that goal and that
Turkey will never shy away from its responsibilities.

