Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
France associates itself with the statement that the
Permanent Representative of Germany will make on
behalf of the European Union.

France would like to thank, first of all, the
Belgian presidency of the Security Council and
Minister Karel de Gucht for organizing this useful
debate on an important topic. We very much hope that
the discussion today will advance understanding of the
link between natural resources and conflicts and lead to
greater consideration of this link in the Council's
actions.

This is not a new problem. Since the 1990s, the
financing of certain armed rebellions in Eastern and
Central Africa by what were called "blood diamonds"
drew attention to the links between the illegal
exploitation of natural resources and the effects on
peace and security. In fact, a veritable war economy
cycle was established in some countries. In order to
stop it, it was essential to find a response that
integrates this dimension, an economic dimension.

The Kimberley Process, born directly of this
observation, is considered to be the main success with
regard to certification of a mineral resource. The
success of the Process is reflected in particular in the
significant increase in the official output of the
countries concerned. The Process - which the
European Union chairs this year - remains fragile,
however, as it is dependent on improvements in
keeping statistics and in the implementation of more
rigorous internal controls. Despite this fragility, it is a
success that has been the source of numerous debates
now taking place on extending and adapting the
methodology to other mineral resources.

These initiatives must be encouraged by the
Security Council, as they respond directly to the
problem of the illegal exploitation of natural resources
as a factor in conflict - which is within the Council's
competence. The Council must also emphasize with
force and clarity and without hesitation, each time that
the situation requires it, the link between illegal
exploitation of a certain natural resource and a conflict.

We believe that we must also see about
strengthening the effectiveness of sanctions
mechanisms established by the Council with a view to
greater coherence and responsiveness. We believe that
that is one of the Council's top priorities in its action in
this area.

The Council must also consider the actions to be
taken from the period of managing and exiting a crisis
so that those actions are naturally extended in the post-
conflict framework. Concretely, that means that the
Council must also take the problem that brings us
together today into account when drafting the mandates
for peacekeeping operations.

It must also be recognized, as several speakers
before me have done, that the links between natural
resources and conflicts concern areas that come under
the competence of other bodies. I am naturally thinking
of all the actors in development, since the sound
management of natural resources is a factor in stability
and sustainable development.

What is our Council's place in this? It seems to
us, in fact, that the exact extent of the responsibility
that the Council must take in this matter in relation to
other international institutions or bilateral partners
cannot be determined in advance. It depends, in reality,
on the circumstances of each specific case, and there is
certainly no model in this matter.

We believe that the Peacebuilding Commission,
given its mandate, will naturally have to take into
consideration the problem of the exploitation of natural
resources in the context of its work, with the desire that
resources of countries emerging from conflict be
exploited in such conditions that only lead to the
stabilization and development of the country.

In conclusion, I should like to emphasize the
importance of this debate to our joint consideration of
ways to fine-tune the instruments available to the
Council.

