Mr. Bamrungphong (Thailand): Today's open
debate is both timely and practically relevant, as the
Security Council and the General Assembly are in the
process of reviewing the peacebuilding architecture,
with the objective of adopting parallel and identical
draft resolutions that will set out the framework of
United Nations peacebuilding for the next five years.
I commend the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
for choosing for this open debate a topic that can
contribute in a concrete and meaningful manner to
the ongoing intergovernmental negotiation process
on peacebuilding.

The Advisory Group of Experts on the
Review of Peacebuilding Architecture, chaired by
Ambassador Gert Rosenthal of Guatemala, produced a
comprehensive and aspirational report (see S/2015/490)
that contains key recommendations on how the United
Nations can improve its approach to peacebuilding. I
once again commend the Advisory Group of Experts'
efforts to provide us with a framework of ideas to tackle
the challenges that peacebuilding is facing.

In response to some of the questions raised in your
concept note (S/2016/104, annex), Sir, I wish to make
comments on two specific points.

First, one of the key challenges identified in
the report of the Advisory Group of Experts is that
peacebuilding is left as an afterthought: under-
prioritized, under-resourced and undertaken only after
the guns fall silent. We share that assessment and are of
the view that peacebuilding is not only a post-conflict
activity, but should be undertaken throughout the
conflict cycle. As such, it requires sustained political
attention. The Peacebuilding Commission, as an
intergovernmental advisory body, can play a crucial
role in sustaining international attention to countries at
risk of lapsing or relapsing into conflict.

To have an impact, political commitment must
be matched by adequate and predictable funding for
peacebuilding efforts. However, the Peacebuilding
Fund continues to face financial shortfalls. We must
find a way to better finance peacebuilding activities.
The Security Council and the General Assembly should
explore resource mobilization through partnership with
the private sector, along with strengthened partnership
with the international financial institutions and regional
development banks. The proposal of the Advisory Group
ofExperts to support the Peacebuilding Fund through an
assessed contribution also merits careful consideration.

Secondly, many of the conflicts that we witness
around the world are rooted in underlying socioeconomic
problems, be it poverty, social injustice or inequalities.
Thailand firmly believes that peace cannot be sustained
in the absence of sustainable and inclusive development;
it is about giving due regard to the needs and livelihoods
of the people and their communities.

We cannot wait until the guns fall silent to start
development work. For conflict-affected countries, the
United Nations can play a crucial role in laying the
necessary groundwork for a transition from conflict to
normalcy. Our peacekeeping experience in the former
East Timor, and more recently in Darfur, has shown
that peacekeepers can undertake peacebuilding efforts
that have an impact. Through the implementation
of various development and quick-impact projects,
peacekeepers can significantly contribute to alleviating
socioeconomic grievances of the local population.
I wish to conclude my remarks by expressing
my appreciation to the Permanent Representatives
of Angola and Australia, in their capacities as the
co-facilitators of the intergovernmental negotiations on
the review of the peacebuilding architecture, for their
able leadership. The Kingdom of Thailand remains
fully committed to extending support and cooperation
to the co-facilitators in this process.

