Mr. Eler (Turkey): Let me join the delegations that
have spoken before us in thanking the New Zealand
presidency of the Council for convening this timely
meeting to address the security challenges facing
small island developing States (SIDS). Our thanks also
go to the Secretary-General for his briefing. It was a
pleasure to listen to the Prime Ministers of Samoa and
Jamaica and the Minister of Finance of Seychelles, who
presented briefings on their regional perspectives on
peace and security challenges faced by the SIDS.

Turkey has become increasingly active in sharing
its own development experiences and in contributing
to international development cooperation efforts in
countries in special situations, including the SIDS. The
declaration of 2014 as the International Year of SIDS
was of particular importance for the acknowledgement
of the challenges faced by SIDS. We were pleased
to create opportunities throughout the International
Year of SIDS to give fresh momentum to our political
engagement with SIDS from different regions.

Within this framework, I would like to mention
two important meetings we hosted in 2014. The first
meeting, held from 7 to 8 June 2014, was on Turkey
and the Pacific SIDS. The second, on the Turkey-
Caribbean Community consultation and cooperation
mechanism, took place on 18 July 2014. The
respective outcome documents of those ministerial
meetings - namely the Bosphorus Declaration and
the Istanbul Declaration - will shape our efforts,
partnership and engagement towards the SIDS.

We would like once again to congratulate Samoa
for hosting the Third International Conference on
Small Island Developing States in a very successful and
able manner in September 2014. The Conference and
its Outcome document and the Small Island Developing
States Accelerated Modalities of Action contained
therein will be guiding our efforts in the years to come
and its effective implementation will be crucial.

As the current President of the Group of Twenty (G- 20), Turkey's priorities are summarized as the three "i"s,
namely inclusiveness, implementation and investment
for growth. We also placed development at the centre of
the G-20 agenda this year. The Turkish Presidency has
introduced a strong low-income developing countries
(LIDCs) perspective into the G-20 agenda. We are
focused on reaching out to LIDCs, almost all of which
belong to categories of countries in special situations.
The SIDS face a wide range of challenges in pursuing
sustainable development, and we believe that the G-20
has an important contribution to make in addressing
their vulnerabilities and building resilience.
To give members of the Council a concrete example
and as part of our outreach activities, we organized,
together with Trinidad and Tobago, the Caribbean
Region Dialogue with the G-20 Development Working
Group in Washington, DC, last April. During that
meeting, an enthusiastic exchange of development
policy experiences and insights, knowledge-sharing
and the exploration of opportunities took place, which
was aimed at deepening existing relationships.

Climate change is one of the toughest global
challenges facing our century. Tackling climate change
requires global solidarity and effective action. The
SIDS and LIDCs are the countries most vulnerable to
and negatively affected by global warming. Increasing
their resilience to climate change requires enhanced
financial and technological support. In that context, the
international community, the developed countries in
particular, should mobilize adequate levels of finance
from public and private resources for those countries.
Climate change poses an immediate and real threat to
the survival ofthose peoples and communities. Ifurgent
action is not taken, living conditions in those countries
will get worse, eventually leading to disastrous
consequences. In that framework, the significance of
resilience and preparedness must be emphasized.

The G-20 agenda has a special focus on climate
finance. The G-20 Climate Finance Study Group
has been considering ways to effectively mobilize
resources, bearing in mind the objectives, principles and
provisions of the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change. We aim to facilitate the access of
LIDCs to climate funds. In that regard, a toolkit for
access to adaptation finance by developing countries
and an inventory of methods for climate change study
are being prepared as the main deliverables of the
Climate Finance Study Group this year.

In the period ahead, our commitment will remain
strong to work together with SIDS in order to develop
our cooperation based on a shared agenda for sustainable
development, which is directly linked with peace and
security challenges. The first-ever World Humanitarian
Summit, to be held May 2016 in Istanbul, will provide
a very valuable platform to discuss all those issues in
length and depth.

2015 is a landmark year for sustainable development.
We have successfully completed the Third International
Conference on Financing for Development, which
was recently held in Addis Ababa. We are confident
that Addis Ababa will set a good precedent for the
upcoming United Nations Summit for the Adoption of
the Post-2015 Development Agenda in September and
the twenty-first session of the Conference of the Parties
to the United Nations Climate Change Conference
in Paris in December. From the outset, Turkey has
supported the well-founded request of the SIDS for a
stand-alone oceans goal in the post-2015 development
agenda, which is now Sustainable Development Goal
14. We support that goal within Turkey's well-known
position regarding the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea.

We believe that, as a member of the United Nations,
we should continue our pragmatic, constructive and
forward-looking approach as we address the concerns
of countries in special situations, including the SIDS,
in a way that leaves no one behind.

