Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.

Just yesterday we were gathered in this Chamber for
a meeting on the situation in Syria, during which China
made clear its position on the issue of Syria, expressed
profound concern about the further escalation of the
tensions in Syria and made a clarion call for a political
solution to the issue of Syria (see S/PV.8231). I would
like to restate the following.

China has consistently stood for the peaceful
settlement of disputes and against the use of force
in international relations. We advocate respect for
the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of all countries. Any unilateral military
actions that circumvent the Security Council contravene
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, violate the basic norms enshrined in
international law and those governing international
relations, and would hamper the settlement of the
Syrian issue with new compounding factors. We urge
all the parties concerned to refrain from any actions
that may lead to a further escalation of the situation,
to return to the framework of international law and to
resolve the issue through dialogue and consultation.

China believes a comprehensive, impartial
and objective investigation of the suspected
chemical-weapons attack in Syria is necessary in order
to arrive at a reliable conclusion that can withstand
the test of history. Until that happens, no party must
prejudge the outcome.

There is no alternative to a political settlement in
resolving the Syrian issue. The parties concerned in the
international community should continue to support
the role of the United Nations as the main mediator and
should work together unremittingly towards a political
settlement of the Syrian issue.
I would like to restate that China stands ready to
continue its positive and constructive role in the efforts
to achieve a political settlement of the Syrian issue in
the interests of peace and stability in the Middle East
and in the world at large.

