Mr. Field (United Kingdom): I would like to thank
Foreign Minister Kono for bringing us together in
today's important meeting under Japan's presidency
of the Security Council. I also thank the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive briefing on the clear
global threats and challenges that the destabilizing
conduct of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
presents to us all.

I would like to start by discussing the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. It was
and is a great diplomatic achievement and remains
a cornerstone of our international security. As
signatories, we have all benefited from its protections.
It is our collective responsibility and in our collective
interests to ensure that all nations stand by their
commitments and obligations under the Treaty and its
associated agreements; it is also our duty as members
of the Council, and as responsible international actors.
We must abide by our collective rules, defend our
values and work together in the Council to safeguard a
system of international security that benefits the whole
of humankind. North Korea repeatedly and wilfully
rebuffs that system and our collective values. Earlier
this week, members of the Council heard appalling and
harrowing accounts (see S/PV.8130) of the regime's
brutal treatment of its own people - of women forced
to drown their newborn babies because the regime did
not consider them to be racially pure. We heard multiple
examples of Violations of foreign citizens' rights,
including those of your own country, Mr. President.

Today we meet once again to condemn North
Korea's illegal and dangerous nuclear-weapon
programme. Kim Jong Un claims that he wants to be a
responsible actor and to bring security and prosperity
to his people. The regime's actions, exemplified by its
systematic violation of human rights and its nuclear-
weapon programme, demonstrate precisely the opposite
intent. North Korea's pursuit of an intercontinental
nuclear weapon is increasingly destabilizing for us
all. It has fired some 20 ballistic missiles this year.
We have seen three intercontinental ballistic-missile
launches and two missiles launched across the territory
of northern Japan. In response to those actions, the
Council has unanimously and appropriately decided to
impose the strictest sanctions in a generation on North
Korea. Our community of nations has shown its deep
condemnation of the regime by taking the sanctions
seriously. And, of course, that has started to have an
impact. We all have a responsibility to ensure that the
sanctions are fully and properly implemented so that
they have the desired effect.

Now that North Korea's arms dealers are

discovering that their usual routes to clients are
closed, its diplomats are struggling to process bank
transactions for contraband goods and their exporters
of manual labour are finding that their contracts are not
being renewed. We must therefore not only keep this
pressure up but increase it. We must share information
and expertise to prevent North Korea from using front
companies or illicit channels to evade sanctions. We
must all cooperate fully with the highly competent and
professional United Nations Panel of Experts on North
Korea sanctions, whose work we strongly recommend
and will continue to support actively.

But we should be clear that the reason we enforce
sanctions is to force Kim Jong Un to see that he has a
choice of two paths. The path he is currently on will
lead his country to greater poverty and isolation, and
threatens the security not just of North Korea but of
the entire world. He can and must choose to change
course. He can choose to comply with the Security
Council's resolutions and join the community of law-
abiding nations. He can choose to let his people express
themselves through debate and commerce. That is
the real path to security and prosperity for the North
Korean people; only Kim can now make that choice,
and all of us here must work together to persuade him
to make the right choice. Our message to Kim Jong Un
and his regime must therefore be clear and united. For
the well-being of his countrymen and the safety of his
neighbours in the wider world, he must change course. I
hope that the North Korean representative present here
today conveys that strong message back to Pyongyang.

We must all work together and use all the diplomatic
and economic tools at our disposal to deliver this
uncompromising message. Let us stand firm and stand
fast to our values. The world looks to all of us here
to defend our system of international security. For the
sake of future generations of humankind, we must now
rise to the challenge.

