Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I would like to begin by congratulating Kuwait on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of June. China will fully support your work,
Mr. President. I also wish to thank Indonesia for its
extraordinary work during its presidency in May.

I would like to thank Mr. Fall, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Central Africa and Head of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA), for his briefing.

Progress has recently been made in the political
processes of Central African countries. The Government
of the Central African Republic has signed the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation with
armed groups and many countries have successfully
held presidential or parliamentary elections. New
Governments and parliaments have been formed.
The process of regional integration has continued
to advance, and the Central African Economic and
Monetary Community has adopted a common policy
on emigration, immigration and border security.
Central African countries and regional organizations
have demonstrated greater willingness and ability to
maintain peace and stability and to promote common
development. China welcomes those developments.

At the same time, factors such as conflict, poverty
and disease continue to constrain stability and
development in Central African countries. The Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA) and piracy in the Gulf of
Guinea continue to threaten the countries of the region.
The international community should pay greater
attention to the situation in the region and step up its
support for the countries there.

First, we should encourage the countries of Central

Africa to continue to resolve their differences through
political dialogue. The Council and the international
community should play a constructive role in the
political settlement of relevant issues in the region and,
on the basis of respect for the sovereignty and leadership
of the countries concerned, conduct mediation and
good offices to promote peaceful dialogue. Moreover,
the international community should closely follow
the impact of the situation in other parts of Africa on
the Central African region and adopt an integrated
approach to ajoint response.

Secondly, we should help countries to enhance
capacity-building. The international community should
heed and respect the views of the countries concerned,
work towards enhancing the ability of countries of
the region to solve their problems independently and
provide support that is tailored to their needs in the
areas of poverty reduction, sustainable development,
the improvement of the humanitarian situation and
the combat against cross-border arms smuggling and
drug trafficking.

Thirdly, we should continue to support countries of
the region in maintaining security and stability. China
commends the efforts of countries of the region to
combat the LRA and other armed groups and terrorist
organizations and supports the African Union (AU)
in its ongoing implementation of relevant regional
cooperation initiatives. We hope that the international
community will strengthen cooperation with the
countries of the region and the AU in that regard.

China supports Central African countries in
bolstering their capacity to fight piracy in the Gulf of
Guinea. Special Representative Fall and UNOCA have
been closely engaged with regional and subregional
organizations, carried out preventive diplomacy
and good offices and promoted political dialogue in
Central African countries in order to settle differences
peaceably. China acknowledges those efforts. We
support the greater role being played by the United
Nations to achieve lasting peace in Central Africa
and hope that UNOCA will continue to implement
its mandate, as authorized by the Council, fully heed
and respect the views of the countries concerned and
strengthen coordination and coherence among the
United Nations, regional organizations and relevant
countries to forge the synergy necessary to maintain
regional stability.

Finally, I would like to emphasize that the issues in
the North-West and South-West regions of Cameroon
are not on the Council's agenda. The situation there does
not pose a threat to international or regional peace and
security. The international community should respect
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Cameroon, acknowledge and support the recent
efforts of the Government of Cameroon to engage in
dialogue and improve the humanitarian situation,
among others.

