Mr. Abdel Aziz (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
Egypt has followed with deep interest and concern the
developments in Burundi since the events of last 25 July,
as well as the response of the neighbouring African States.
We have followed them not only in view of their potential
repercussions on the stability of this important subregion of
the African continent, but also because of the movement of
the Burundi armed forces to take political power and the
installation of a new President which, in effect, pre-empts
the arrangements reached at the first Arusha summit. Under
those arrangements, a multinational African force would
have been dispatched to enforce security and stability in
Burundi, a notion that was initially put forward by the
Government of Burundi and was later endorsed by the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) in Yaounde.

Developments in Burundi - the most serious of
which are ethnic killings and massacres as related by
Amnesty International, which documented the killing of
over 4,000 unarmed civilians in Gitega Province - prove
that there is indeed no alternative to a political formula for
power-sharing to safeguard the rights of both the majority
and the minority communities, while taking into account the
lessons learned from the shortcomings of the Convention on
Governance of 1994.

It has become abundantly clear that the parties to the
conflict in Burundi are incapable of reaching an agreement
among themselves and that they are indeed in need of help
from outside. Hence, Egypt subscribes to the efforts
undertaken by the neighbouring States to achieve a peaceful
settlement to the crisis. In point of fact, those States have
a better sense of the root causes and dimensions of the
problems. After all, it is those neighbouring States that
would eventually bear the spillover consequences and risks
of a festering crisis. Furthermore, such endeavours
supplement the mediation efforts pursued by former
President Nyerere and other mediators.

 

In the same vein, Egypt subscribes to the efforts
made and positions adopted by the OAU, which deployed
an observer Mission in Burundi over three years ago and
was the first body to address the crisis there.

Egypt maintains that several measures should be
immediately taken to restore constitutional legality and
order in Burundi. These include the unbanning of all
political parties, the restoration of the National Assembly,
the initiation of businesslike and unconditional
negotiations between all political and military powers in
the context of the mediation efforts pursued by former
President Nyerere, guarantees for the security and safety
of members of the former Government, the immediate
cessation of all acts of violence, ensuring the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to the targeted needy groups
throughout Burundi and ensuring the safety and security
of personnel of regional and international humanitarian
agencies.

Egypt agrees that it is wrong to rule out the
possibility of the perpetration of further ethnic massacres.
Hence, we maintain that it is essential to continue
contingency planning for a rapid humanitarian response,
in the event the international community has to intervene
to save innocent lives. In this context, we feel that
differences over the definition of the entity to be entrusted
with the contingency planning have sent the wrong
signals, in view of the seriousness of such endeavours.
This must be avoided in the future when addressing such
complex crises.

We sincerely hope that all parties to the conflict in
Burundi will overcome the psychological barrier that
prevents them from recognizing the impossibility of
imposing a situation that is unjust to some parties. The
citizens of Burundi must be able to put aside the tragic
events of both the distant past and the present, and to
embark on building mutual trust in place of distrust and
fear. We hope that the current Government will recognize
the expectations of the international community in this
regard. In this context, we hope that the recent meeting
between Major Buyoya and former President Nyerere
proves to be a step in the right direction.

Egypt maintains that the problems of the Great
Lakes subregion of Africa do not lend themselves to
viable solutions unless the regional dimensions of such
problems are taken fully into account. We hope that the
international community, the neighbouring African States
and international mediators will pursue their efforts to lay
the ground for convening a regional conference on

 

security and development in this region. Proper timing and
good preparatory work for such a conference are crucial
factors for an effective outcome. Obviously, the success of
this conference will largely depend on the genuine desire of
the participants to reach a lasting political solution to the
problems in Burundi.

Finally, the delegation of Egypt would like to take this
opportunity to put on record its appreciation for the efforts
of the Secretary-General and his aides, particularly his
Special Representative for Burundi.

