Mr. Nishida (Japan): I would like to echo
previous speakers in thanking Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon; Mr. Mohamed, Prime Minister of the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) of Somalia;
and Mr. Diarra, Special Representative of the
Chairman of the Commission of the African Union for
Somalia, for their presence here today and for their
statements.

Japan welcomes the timely convening of this
open debate, which provides a valuable opportunity to
discuss the situation in Somalia at this important
juncture, with fewer than six months remaining before
the expiration of the mandate of the TFG.

Japan is deeply concerned about the slow
progress of the political process, in particular the
delays in the constitutional process and the recent
declaration by the Puntland Government that it was
suspending its cooperation with the TFG We would
like to join others in urging the TFG to effectively
address the remaining political tasks before the end of
the transitional period, including the formulation of a
Somali constitution and inclusive consultations with all
political groups in Puntland and Somaliland, as well as
with other clans.

The key problem in Somalia lies in the
interrelatedness of a number of critical issues -
including the political process, security, the
humanitarian crisis, terrorism and piracy - that
hamper the resolution of any of the others. Japan
supports the idea that the international community
should join forces to implement a comprehensive
strategy that takes into account all of those issues.
Japan is firmly committed to contributing to such
collective efforts, and various actions and assistance
that we are undertaking in areas such as security,
anti-piracy measures and humanitarian support testify
to our determination in that regard. For instance, an
additional $77 million in assistance to support stability
and to cope with humanitarian crises is being
processed for immediate disbursement.

We welcome the enlarged coverage by TFG
forces and the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) of the area under TFG control, and we
highly commend the efforts and sacrifices of Ugandan
and Burundian troops in that endeavour. The
international community should continue to support
them so that they can fully meet their mandate. We
sincerely hope that the Council will continue
consultations on how to provide predictable support to
AMISOM. It is also essential to maintain security in
the controlled areas, and in order to do so a functioning
police force is essential.

To that end, Japan is vigorously contributing to
the capacity-building and deployment of the Somali
police force. The training of 500 police officers in
Djibouti through our financial contribution of
$10 million to the United Nations Trust Fund for the
Somali security institutions has just been completed. In
addition, Japan recently authorized an additional
$10 million to cover the cost of the salaries of trained
police officers and the construction of police facilities
in Mogadishu. We expect the TFG to make full use of
its enhanced security and to seize the current
momentum for political dialogue.

With regard to anti-piracy activities off the coast
of Somalia, Japan is engaged in various ways,
including escort and surveillance activities by Japanese
vessels and patrol aircraft and capacity-building
support extended in cooperation with the International
Maritime Organization to coastal countries for
maritime security. Despite the efforts of like-minded
countries to date, acts of piracy are still on the rise, and
that is a matter of grave concern for all of us.

We appreciate the comprehensive report of
Mr. Lang, Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on
Legal Issues related to Piracy off the Coast of Somalia
(S/2011/30, annex), which includes various proposals.
Japan shares the view that building capacities,
especially the correctional capacities, of the coastal
nations, as well as of the region as a whole, is an
urgent task in the effort to effectively bring pirates to
justice. Japan had previously disbursed $500,000 to the
Trust Fund to Support Initiatives of States Countering
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, and has recently
authorized an additional $1 million for that purpose.
We will continue to support regional efforts to that end.
Lastly, Japan would like to note that, while we remain
fully committed to supporting the TFG, we will
maintain our assistance to Somaliland and Puntland as
well, with a view to achieving progress on Somali
issues as a whole.

I would like to conclude my remarks today by
reiterating Japan's continuing commitment to peace
and security in Africa and our intention to work closely
with the Council on these issues.

