Mr. Vrailas: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States. I
shall deliver a shortened version of our statement. The
full text will be found on our website. The candidate
countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Montenegro, Iceland, Serbia and Albania;
the country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Armenia
and Georgia, align themselves with this statement.

I want to thank the Lithuanian presidency of the
Council for bringing back this important issue to this
forum. Let me also thank Deputy Secretary-General
Eliasson for his briefing, and Mariane Pearl and
Christophe Deloire for their testimonies.

We also welcome the adoption of resolution 2222
(2015) on the topic of this debate.

At the time of the last Security Council debate (see S/PV.7003) we regretted the high number ofjournalists
killed while doing their jobs. Sadly, today we cannot
but note that this figure continues to increase with an
unparalleled level of viciousness shown by the barbaric
executions committed by Daesh.

The freedom of opinion and of expression are
fundamental rights ofevery human being. Indispensable
for individual dignity and fulfilment, they also constitute

essential foundations for democracy, the rule of law,
peace, stability, sustainable inclusive development and
participation in public affairs. Journalists' work often
puts them at specific risk of intimidation and violence.
Such attacks and intimidation are not only an attack on
the victim, but also on the very essence of article 19 of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

States must take active steps to prevent violence
and to promote a safe environment for journalists and
other media actors, thereby enabling them to carry out
their work independently, without undue interference
and without fear of violence or persecution. The EU
attaches the highest priority to the safety of journalists
and other media actors and encourages all States to
take all the appropriate steps to ensure the protection
of journalists, both in terms of preventive measures
and by urging effective investigations when violations
or abuses occur. In that context, the April 2015 Doha
Declaration includes language calling for States to act
in that regard.

European Union member States subscribe to
freedom, democracy, respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms and the rule of law, on which the
European Union is based. Accession to the European
Union is based on the adherence to those principles,
which include the freedom of expression, of opinion
and of information. We all have an obligation to
react to the worrying trend of the increased level of
intimidation and violence that journalists, media actors
and other individuals face in many countries across
the world because of their job. In that context, we
must not forget that female journalists are more often
subject to harassment and sexual violence. The EU
has repeatedly condemned attacks against journalists
and bloggers through several public statements, in
other international forums, such as the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, and in the
framework of the European Union's bilateral relations
with third countries.

The European Union is also active in supporting
concrete actions in the field of the protection of
journalists, including in countries in crisis. For example,
we have funded a programme to protect journalists
and bloggers, especially young and inexperienced
ones, providing them with administrative, material or
financial support when needed. The programme also
provides judicial support for journalists and bloggers
who are detained or facing trial and, in the most
extreme cases, moves them to a safe location. We also
have an emergency fund scheme to protect human rights
defenders, including journalists, which was recently
expanded to help cyberdissidents build self-protection
skills.

The protection of journalists and support for
independent media are also among the top priorities
of the European Endowment for Democracy, which
is supporting independent media and journalists,
including bloggers, social media activists, et cetera, in
the EU neighbourhood and beyond.

Article 10 of the European Convention on Human
Rights guarantees the right to the freedom of expression
and information. The Council of Europe launched an
Internet platform aimed at protecting journalism and
promoting the safety of journalists. The platform is
a reliable tool to compile, process and disseminate
factual data in Council of Europe member States,
verified by independent partners, concerning physical
threats to journalists or risk to the confidentiality of
media sources, as well as other forms of intimidation.
It also enables the initiation of a dialogue with the
States concerned on possible remedies and protective
measures.

We must recall that, according to international
humanitarian law, journalists engaged in dangerous
professional missions in areas of armed conflict shall
be considered as civilians and shall be respected and
protected as such. We call on all parties to armed
conflict to respect their obligations under international
human rights law and international humanitarian law,
including the Geneva Conventions and the Additional
Protocols thereto. We furthermore call on all parties to
conflict to allow, within the framework of applicable
rules and procedures, media access and coverage in
situations of international and non-international armed
conflict.

Almost half of the journalists killed in 2014 died
in the Middle East. Approximately 38 per cent of the
total died in combat or cross-fire. That clearly shows
that more are killed outside of combat. Alhough it is
vital that we protect journalists and media actors in
conflict, we must also ensure their safety outside of
combat. They serve an invaluable role in preventing
conflict and holding Governments to account. The
EU condemns any Government that intimidates or
suppresses independent and free press.

We encourage the Secretary-General to continue
including the issue of the protection ofjournalists in
armed conflicts in his reports on the protection of
civilians, and encourage peacekeeping and special
political missions to also include this issue in existing
reporting, as relevant. We also encourage the Security
Council to address the protection of journalists in
situations of armed conflict, including through public
statements.

The Council is not alone in addressing this issue.
The General Assembly and the Human Rights Council
have adopted annual consensual resolutions on the
safety of journalists and the issue of impunity. In that
context, the United Nations Plan of Action on the Safety
of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity, a work led by
UNESCO with the aim of greater cooperation among
United Nations organizations, is a key document.

If today we are discussing this matter, it is not
because the United Nations is not paying attention to the
issue. It is, first, because States are not doing enough to
promote a safe and enabling environment for journalists
to work independently, without undue interference and
without fear of censorship, persecution or prosecution;
and, secondly, because they need to do more to bring to
justice the perpetrators of attacks onjournalists.

Let me conclude by expressing the European
Union's tribute to, and support for, all those who fight
for the respect of freedom of expression and for a free,
pluralistic press and other media.

