Ms. Wolcott (United States of America): We
welcome this opportunity to comment on the report
(S/2007/711) on the Security Council's recent visit to
Timor-Leste. I was pleased to be part of that mission.
The timing of the Visit was optimal, as it will assist the
Council as it reviews the mandate of United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), which
expires in February 2008. Based on the delegation's
findings and our own experience in Timor-Leste, the
future mandate of UNMIT should include the
following priorities.

First, there should be continued emphasis on
security-sector reform, in particular on the training and
institutional development of the Timorese police force.
In that regard, the United States Government supports
a review of the role and responsibility of UNMIT
police in relation to the National Police Force of
Timor-Leste (PNTL), as requested by the Special
Representative in the country. Such a review could
point to key improvements in UNMIT's training and
professional development programme for the PNTL.

Secondly, the mandate should include support for
reconciliation and the resolution of differences among
the Timorese leadership, so that the Timorese
Government and opposition cooperate to reintegrate
internally displaced persons and resolve other pressing
issues, including those raised by the petitioners and
military dissident Major Alfredo Reinado, as well as by
other unresolved cases such as those identified by the
2006 committee of inquiry. As noted in the mission's
report, reconciliation should be without prejudice to
justice and accountability, to the Government's right to
govern in accordance with the Constitution and laws,
and to the opposition's right to oppose Government

policies using exclusively peaceful and non-violent
means.

Thirdly, it should include assistance to the
Government in support of key policy objectives, such
as improving the business investment climate,
promoting economic development, improving
governance and strengthening the rule of law. A
particular priority should be a justice system that is
independent, impartial, transparent, accessible and
efficient and that enjoys the confidence of the
community.

I wish to thank the Government of Timor-Leste
for hosting our visit and the United Nations for making
all the arrangements for it.

