Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): In 1993, the international
community was hopeful that, following the signing of the
Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government
Arrangements - in the context of the Oslo accords -
the elusive goal of peace in the Middle East seemed more
and more attainable. These hopes were first tested, then
strained and finally dashed, following acts that violated
the letter and spirit of the accords. Specifically, the illegal
construction policy in Har Homa/Jabal Abu Ghneim in
East Jerusalem, an issue which would be negotiated in the
final stage of the Oslo accords, brought the entire peace
process to its knees. In the tense and volatile environment
that now prevails in the Middle East, recent
pronouncements and the proposed construction of new
settlements by Israel in Jerusalem have undermined not
only the foundation, but the legitimacy of the whole
Middle East peace process, pushing the actors close to the
brink of armed conflict. These developments are of such
great concern to the international community that the
Security Council, which is entrusted with the maintenance
of international peace and security, must address the crisis
in a cogent, direct and unemotional way.

I recall that, when the issue of the illegal
construction of settlements in East Jerusalem came up in
the Security Council last year, my delegation stated that
Kenya had been a consistent advocate for peace and
supported an honest and constructive dialogue between
Israel and Palestine. We expressed deep concern about the

 

threats to ongoing negotiations and called on all the parties
to refrain from any activities that had the potential to
irretrievably harm the peace process. We expressed the
hope then, as we do again now, that cool minds and calm
action would characterize the response of the Palestinians,
Israelis and the international community. We make that
fervent appeal again today, conscious of the unimaginable
consequences to peace and security should any unilateral
decisions to change the status and demographic composition
of Jerusalem be made. Any unilateral decisions to change
the status of Jerusalem are not only unacceptable, but also
illegal.

All nations must strictly adhere to the resolutions of
the Security Council. Current Israeli settlement policy is
contrary to international law, Council resolutions and
agreements already in place between Israel and the
Palestinian Authority. We call on all the parties to respect
this Council's resolutions on the status of Jerusalem in
particular, and the Middle East in general. The question of
the final status of Jerusalem must be decided through
negotiations by the parties directly involved. The
international community cannot allow the establishment of
new facts on the ground that would prejudge final status
negotiations.

Kenya believed the commitment made by both parties
last year that they were determined to advance the peace
process. We are disappointed that this commitment has not
been met. We are disappointed that words have not
matched action. Just as we were requested to exhibit
restraint and trust, so do we now request both parties to
exhibit the same. They must reactivate their political will,
stand brave in the midst of adversity, and resolve their
differences through dialogue. In this context, we strongly
encourage the facilitators of the peace process not to
diminish their zeal or case in their resolve and energy to
mediate a mutually acceptable solution to the whole
problem of the Middle East, and specifically the Palestinian
question, at the heart of which lies the policy of land for
peace.

Kenya remains determined to continue supporting the
parties in their search for durable, comprehensive, just and
lasting peace. We therefore call for all the parties to
exercise maximum restraint and urge them to resume
discussions on the issue before us, because negotiations
remain the only viable and peaceful option to resolve the
cr1s1s.

