Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): Not too long
ago, we believed that we had firmly transitioned into
an era of the primacy of international law. That belief
has been weakened in the recent past; however, our
determination to make it so has not. Those who believe
in the rule of law, as we do, are challenged to stand
up for the primacy of international law at the heart of
the international order. The prohibition of the illegal
use of force is a core provision in that respect. It was
incorporated into the Charter of the United Nations in
direct response to the destruction caused by the Second
World War and has been recognized as a key provision
of international law since. It continues to be of crucial
relevance. Resorting to the use of force remains one of
the most serious decisions a State can take and requires
careful legal scrutiny and communication. In assessing
their decisions in that respect, States are now assisted
by the first internationally agreed definition, set out in
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), of a crime of aggression, which is met only
in cases where the illegal use of force constitutes a
manifest violation of the Charter.

At the Nuremberg trials, 12 leading figures of Nazi
Germany were convicted of crimes against peace. Since
then, no international criminal tribunal has had the
competence to hold individuals accountable for the most
serious forms ofthe illegal use of force. In the following
seven decades, we did not even have an internationally
accepted definition of the crime of aggression. In
December 2017 that changed. The 123 States parties to
the Rome Statute made the historic decision to enable
the International Criminal Court to prosecute the
crime of aggression. Exactly two months from today,
on 17 July, the Court's jurisdiction over the crime of
aggression will commence - marking the first time
that humankind will have a permanent international
court with the authority to hold individuals accountable
for this crime. That will be a crucial moment also for
the Security Council, which will have a new tool at its
disposal, namely, the ability to refer situations involving
acts of aggression to the ICC. If applied in a meaningful
way, that new tool could assist the Security Council in
the peaceful resolution of conflicts and in reinforcing
the Charter.

The date of 17 July also marks the twentieth
anniversary of the Rome Statute, an occasion to
both reaffirm our collective commitment to justice
and international law and to address the numerous
challenges we continue to face. Impunity continues
to reign in many situations where grave crimes are
committed. Where the seriousness of the situation so
requires and where all other options fail f in particular
national prosecutions - the ICC must be enabled to
act. It is often up to the Security Council to provide
the Court with jurisdiction, as indeed it should do with
respect to the situations in Syria and in Myanmar. But
more than 10 years after its first referral decision, the
Council still has much room for a more productive
relationship with the Court and lacks a collective
commitment to accountability. As much as we need
to strive to make this relationship more productive,
combined with working towards the universalization
of the Rome Statute, we also must be prepared to act
within the parameters of today's reality. The Court's
reach is severely restricted, as the situation in Syria has
illustrated for a number of years.

Given that the path to the ICC was blocked in the
Council through the veto of two permanent members,
the General Assembly responded by creating the
accountability mechanism known as the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism for Syria. We
were proud to lead that effort in the General Assembly.
The Mechanism acts as a model for future action, in
that the General Assembly should step in where the
Council is paralysed and therefore unable to take on
its responsibility to ensure accountability in line
with its authority under the Charter. The collective
commitment of the United Nations membership to
fight mass atrocity crimes is also expressed in the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group's
code of conduct on mass atrocities. We echo the call by
many speakers in the Chamber on all Member States
to join that initiative, which is supported by 116 States.

There is no doubt that international norms
and international law are under attack today. In
its consequence, that is an effort to undermine the
international legal order and the United Nations itself,
which is at the heart of that order and not only with
respect to the maintenance of international peace and
security. The Organization is the ultimate expression in
the belief of the power of the law. Its continued relevance
depends on our ability to stand up for that belief.

