Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): Allow me, Sir, to
congratulate you formally on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month, and to pay
tribute to Ambassador Cunningham of the United
States for his able stewardship of the Council last
month.

My delegation expresses its appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for convening this important and timely
meeting. Our appreciation goes also to the Russian
Federation for initiating the request for a meeting on
this subject, and to the other members of the Council
for their support. We are encouraged that the Security
Council is supportive of an open debate on one of the
Council's most challenging issues: how to mitigate the
humanitarian crisis in Iraq and move forward on the
issue of disarmament. We believe that today's meeting
will provide the Council with important feedback on
this issue from the general membership of the United
Nations.

In an earlier commentary on the humanitarian
situation in Iraq, the Secretary-General had described
the situation there as one that was posing "a serious
moral dilemma" for the United Nations. He remarked
that as a matter of principle, the Organization had
always been on the side of the vulnerable and weak,
focusing its efforts to relieve suffering, but in the case
of the Iraqi situation, the United Nations was accused
of promoting the suffering of an entire population. His
lament remains as poignant today as it was then.

The United Nations will be hard pressed to
defend itself against this charge in the face of
substantive cumulative evidence - much of it gathered
by its own agencies - that comprehensive sanctions
against Iraq have resulted in the severe suffering of
innocent civilians and caused profound socio-economic
dislocations. The fact remains that a decade of the most
comprehensive and punitive sanctions ever imposed on
a society has decimated Iraq as a modern State,
effectively forcing that country's economy back to a
pre-industrial age and making it ever so dependent on
the United Nations humanitarian programme for basic
survival. That is beyond dispute.

It is time for the Council to muster the political
will to move beyond its current approach in dealing
with the situation. We do not believe that the Council's
efforts for disarmament in respect of Iraq, which in fact
have made significant progress, should continue to be
linked to a policy of comprehensive sanctions that have
resulted in the loss of lives and untold suffering for the
Iraqi people. We do not believe the situation today
justifies the continuation of these comprehensive
sanctions.

After more than a decade of debilitating
sanctions, the time has come for the international
community and the Council to take a new and more
balanced approach, one that would address the
legitimate security concerns of the countries in the
region, but would also spare the people of Iraq further
collective punishment. If this Council is indeed serious
in its intention to alleviate the suffering of the Iraqi
people, this new approach should not link progress and
disarmament with efforts to alleviate the humanitarian
suffering.

It has long been our view that incremental
improvements within the framework of the sanctions
regime will not mitigate the impact of sanctions in any
significant way. Based on our own direct observation
of the situation on the ground, including the
observation made by the recent humanitarian
delegation from Malaysia to Iraq, the so-called
humanitarian improvements against the background of
a weakened physical, health, medical, water and
sanitation infrastructure, due to the numerous holds,
have failed miserably. This has reinforced our
conviction that the oil-for-food programme will not be
able to adequately mitigate the effects of the sanctions.

The issue of the moral dilemma alluded to by the
Secretary-General is very pertinent to the question of
violations of human rights and humanitarian law.
Paragraph 109 of the Bossuyt report, entitled "The
adverse consequences of economic sanctions on the
enjoyment of human rights", issued by the Commission
on Human Rights in document E/CN.4/Sub.2/2000/33,
of2l June 2000, states:

"Sanctions regimes that clearly violate
international law, especially human rights and
humanitarian law, need not be respected. This is
especially true when the imposers are clearly on
notice of those violations and have undertaken no
effective modification. Sanctions are now
imposed with no consideration whatsoever of
their legal status. In these situations, the
humanitarian tragedy must be viewed as
constituting an 'override' to an unduly harsh
economic sanctions regime - analogous to the
doctrine of force majeur. And, as already set out,
the degree of public outcry is a factor in
determining whether a sanctions regime is too
harsh."

Perhaps the most important implication of
international law for the issue of sanctions from the
perspective of human rights and humanitarian law is
that the right to impose sanctions is not unlimited. The
rights of the civilian population must be protected to
the maximum extent possible through the provisions of
the essentials for survival. Even with this modest
objective, the ability of the oil-for-food programme to
deliver is being seriously questioned. We are not even
talking about the higher-level needs of civil society,
which also constitute a right of every individual.

We cannot in any serious discussion of the
situation in Iraq be oblivious to the ongoing operations
in the so-called no-fly zones. Malaysia has consistently
challenged the purpose and the legality of such
operations. Due to the low level and limited nature of
the operations, the bombing of Iraqi targets remains as
background noise in the general effort to confront or
contain Iraq. The tendency of the international
community has been to generally ignore these events as
if they were routine operations, even when civilian
casualties - the so-called collateral damage - are
involved.

Clearly the continuation of these illegal
operations is not conducive to a constructive dialogue
between the United Nations and Iraq, which is so
necessary at this stage. Indeed, these illegal and
provocative operations will only complicate any effort
towards dialogue and engagement with Iraq, such as
the one initiated by the Secretary-General, for which
we commend him and strongly encourage him to
continue. Only dialogue and engagement will move the
process forward, not continued isolation and
containment, which will punish the long-suffering
people of Iraq even further.

In the light of the continuing suffering of the Iraqi
people, there has been increasing outcry among civil
societies in a number of countries against the
continuing sanctions and a more discernible
manifestation of international solidarity with the
people of Iraq. The dispatch of some 132 humanitarian
flights to Iraq since November last year is a clear and
undeniable reflection of this rising concern and
solidarity with the people of Iraq. In working out its
approach on Iraq, the Council should not turn a blind
eye to this clear manifestation of international public
sentiment on the situation in Iraq.

While Malaysia is concerned about the plight of
the Iraqi people living under sanctions, it has never
failed to also add its voice to the call by the
international community for an early resolution of the
issue of more than 600 Kuwaiti missing persons, as
well as those from third countries. We consider it a
grave humanitarian issue that needs to be addressed
and more vigorously pursued. We reiterate our call on
Iraq to fulfil all its international obligations and resume
participation in the Tripartite Commission and the
Technical Subcommittee. Not less important is the need
to facilitate the return of Kuwait's national archives
and other property that was taken out of Kuwait. These
are important issues that should not be relegated to the
back burner of Council deliberations. The existence of
complete consensus in the Security Council on these
two humanitarian issues should provide a strong basis
for their early resolution.

