Mr. Lovald (Norway): Let me start by thanking
the United Kingdom for providing a very useful and
timely paper as the point of departure for our debate
here today.

The General Assembly stated in the 2005 World
Summit Outcome that "We recognize that climate
change is a serious and long-term challenge that has
the potential to affect every part of the globe"
(resolution 60/1, para. 51). The Heads of State and
Government went on to

"acknowledge that we are living in an
interdependent and global world and that many of
today's threats recognize no national boundaries,
are interlinked and must be tackled at the global,
regional and national levels in accordance with the
Charter and international law." (ibid., para. 71)

Against that background, we welcome the fact
that for the first time the Security Council is addressing
the security aspects of climate change. While climate
change and energy are broad issues that are also being
addressed in other United Nations forums, there is no
doubt that the implications of climate change also pose
a number of threats to our collective security. The
many powerful messages delivered here today clearly
testify to that.

The subject of the interlinkages between
environmental sustainability and peace and security was
put on the international agenda in 2004, when Wangari
Maathai received the Nobel Peace Prize for her efforts to
counter environmental degradation. Today, climate
change is our main environmental challenge. But it is a
threat that reaches far beyond the environment. It
affects economic development, threatens the livelihood
and resource base of whole societies and affects health
and the spread of infectious diseases. It is likely to
reduce the world's food security through droughts and
unstable weather conditions. Through rising sea levels
it endangers the very ground on which nearly half of
the world's population lives. And it is likely to lead to
increased humanitarian emergencies. For all those
reasons climate change also represents a security threat
that needs to be considered and addressed.
Climate change, as part of the peace and security
agenda, should and must be addressed by the Security

Council. The Council could become less effective in
preventing and resolving conflict if it was to ignore the
environmental dimension when analyzing the
underlying causes of conflicts. To be able to address
this issue effectively, the Council needs to base its
decisions on facts and specific knowledge. We need to
fill the current knowledge gap on how climate change
and changing energy needs may impact on specific
conflict situations on the Council's agenda. Such
improved knowledge will help prevent and deal more
effectively with future conflicts.

Such knowledge may also prove vital in
preparing a coherent response to the risks of climate
change among the United Nations membership and
across the United Nations organizations. We would
suggest that the Department of Political Affairs, in
cooperation with the United Nations Environment
Programme and other relevant United Nations
institutions, be requested to look into how the current
knowledge base on the interlinkages between climate
change and security could be improved and made more
readily available. I was very pleased, therefore, to hear
this morning that the Secretary-General has so clearly
committed himself to assisting in that important task.

Climate change is truly global a problem that can
be solved only through global cooperation and joint
action. It is therefore essential to reach a greatly
improved and broader agreement on the reduction of
greenhouse gas emissions as soon as possible. Norway
supports all efforts to focus attention on the issue of
climate change at the highest political level. While the
Security Council should address the implications of
climate change for the maintenance of international
peace and security, the broader aspects of climate change
are clearly an issue for the General Assembly. In that
regard, we find the idea of a high-level meeting on
climate change in the General Assembly in September
this year interesting, and we encourage the Secretary-
General and Member States to pursue that possibility.

