I wish to commend the German presidency of the Security Council for convening this session on Libya. I thank Secretary-General Guterres and commend the efforts of the United Nations. The situation in Libya remains extremely concerning. The unstable balance on the ground is a consequence of a series of strategic mistakes over the past 10 years, the latest of which was the military attack to Tripoli on 4 April 2019. When I was in Tripoli a few weeks ago, I conveyed a message of self-restraint and moderation to President Serraj. The same message must be conveyed to General Haftar, as we are also witnessing a military build-up from the east. Our collective support must stand with any proposal leading to a political solution, as long as it is fully inclusive, completely Libyan-owned and firmly anchored in the Berlin process. Italy is responding to humanitarian concerns by helping the Libyan Government dispose of the threat of landmines and booby traps in and around Tripoli. I wish to make four brief points. First, all foreign interference in Libya in violation of the arms embargo must stop. To that end, the European Union (EU) launched its Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI. Italy has always supported a stronger role being played by the EU and is determined to ensure that the Operation is balanced and conflict-sensitive. We call on all countries to cooperate faithfully to halt all arms transfers via air, land or sea. Public statements must be matched by concrete commitments. Secondly, we need to establish a real ceasefire. Any agreement should be taken in the framework of the Berlin process. We fully support the United Nations- mediated negotiations within the 5+5 Joint Military Commission. The United Nations Support Mission in Libya should stand ready to favour a ceasefire agreement in the framework of the Berlin process, including - as also referred to by Minister Maas - through the definition of a "demilitarized zone", which would help defuse tensions and reduce the military presence in the area. Thirdly, we should immediately resume political dialogue with a view to achieving a fully inclusive and Libyan-owned political solution. We took note of the Cairo initiative and the agreement between President of the House Saleh and General Haftar, but we must strive for a fully inclusive, Libyan-owned political solution. Fourthly, we must reach a prompt reactivation of oil production. We are ready to support a "Libyan" solution for a more equitable and transparent distribution of financial resources. In this framework, the proposal by Chairman Sanallah of the Libyan National Oil Corporation goes in the right direction. Six months on from the Conference, it is our collective responsibility to stick to the Berlin commitments. I convey to the Council Italy's sense of urgency to appoint a new Special Representative of Secretary-General for Libya. I call on all members of the Security Council and all countries to work towards our common goal of stabilizing Libya for the sake of the Libyan population.
