Mr. Moreno-Ocampo: First, I would like to
respond to the question posed by the representative of
South Africa. For the purpose of clarification, may I
begin by saying that I truly appreciate the question, in
particular because South Africa stands as an example
to the world on how to conduct a transition. As the
Permanent Representative of South Africa said, South
Africa, as a founding member of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), was leading the Rome
discussions, and throughout my five-year tenure, South
Africa has been leading and supporting international
justice. That is why I really appreciate his question and
his frankness.

Let me be totally clear. As he said, I am a
prosecutor; I have to respect the law. I have to follow
the evidence without fear, favour or political
consideration. That is what I am doing. He has his
responsibility, and I will not infringe on his
responsibility. But part of my responsibility is to
investigate crimes, and what I see in the crimes
committed in Darfur is that the crimes have the
particularity that they are committed by the members
of the Government, using the Government apparatus.
That is the particularity of this case, because President
Al-Bashir is the President of the country and the
commander-in-chief of the army. But how can we
ensure that the Sudanese Armed Forces will not follow
illegal orders? That is the particularity. He gave the
orders to commit the crimes. He ensured - and this is
the evidence, I am following the evidence now - he
ensured the implementation of his orders, and let me
review how.
First, he replaced those officers and governors
who refused to follow his instructions. He replaced a
governor in Darfur because he advised him not to use
the militia/Janjaweed. He recruited the militia/
Janjaweed and incorporated them as reserve forces to
replace those members in Darfur who were members of
the army and refused to attack Darfur.

Interestingly, Mr. Al-Bashir adjusted the plans for
the extermination of the groups according to the facts.
After 2004, there was increasing pressure from the
international community, and most of the Villages that
the Fur, Zaghawa and Masalit were inhabiting were
emptied. Then he adjusted, to attack them in the camps.

The most clear example is how he then appointed
Ahmed Haroun, who was the Minister of State for the
Interior, coordinating the attacks in the Villages. In
September 2005, when most of the Fur, Zaghawa and
Masalit areas were clean, he appointed the same person
to be Minister of Humanitarian Affairs. It is a false
name, and that members must know. Of course, it is a
secret service operation; it is an operation to keep
controlling and attacking these people. But of course,
they cannot directly attack people in the camps,
because there would be an international clamour. That
is why they used different strategies. Fear, rape and
hunger are the strategies. That is why people there, aid
workers and African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) peacekeepers, are
under tremendous pressure.

He gave the orders, he adjusted the orders and he
implemented the orders, but then the other aspect that I
was trying to brief the Council on - and I appreciate
the question because it allows me to provide the
answer - is the covering up of the crimes. A person
cannot openly use a State to commit crimes. That is
why they cover up the crimes. They cover up the
crimes with different strategies, using the Janjaweed
militias, playing with the ambiguity of the Janjaweed
militias and denying the commission of crimes. As
members know, they have denied the crimes and
denied the numbers many times. Today I quoted them
as now denying the rapes, saying that the women who
are raped are relatives of the rebels. They deny the
value of the evidence. They say I have no evidence.
They are trying to attack all of my witnesses, all over
the world. They are attacking the evidence and they are
also protecting individuals sought by the Court. That is
why they have not handed over Haroun, because for
President Al-Bashir, it is a really important point not to
hand over Haroun and to keep people following his
illegal instructions.

One important point I was trying to relate to the
Council is that they always promise national
proceedings and they never deliver national
proceedings. How can you investigate nationally if you
are attacking those who are speaking out about the
crimes?

Finally, part of his cover-up is diplomatic work to
the Council, the African Union, the Arab League and
the United Nations, promoting and proposing
ceasefires that he never complies with, promising
justice that he never delivers and promising to disarm
Janjaweed militias - and the next day saying, well,
not the reserve forces - and, finally, threatening
retaliation. Using proxy force is the last strategy he
uses to keep his plan working. So I am just talking
about how the crimes are committed, and I have to
alert the Council. This is what I saw according to my
evidence. This is my responsibility.

