Mr. Erjavec (Slovenia) (spoke in French): The
stability and prosperity of the Middle East and North
Africa continues to rank among the most urgent
priorities for the international community. The region
represents one of the cradles of our civilization, and it
is both culturally and religiously rich. In that context,
we condemn in no uncertain terms the destruction of
cultural heritage perpetrated in Syria and Iraq.

The situations in Syria, Iraq, Libya and Yemen are
complex and extremely disturbing. Israeli-Palestinian
negotiations are still at an impasse. The political,
economic and social transition in the Maghreb also
faces numerous obstacles.

Terrorism and violent extremism - in whatever
form or manifestation - cannot and must not be
tolerated. The atrocities committed against civilians
by Daesh, Al-Qaieda, the Al-Nusra Front and similar
extremist groups are beyond human understanding.
Given the extent and nature of the crimes committed
in Iraq and Syria, they can be qualified in no other
way than as crimes against humanity, war crimes and
genocide - with women and children being particularly
vulnerable. Extremist groups constitute a complex
terrorist threat that should not be solely dealt with by
military means. Rather, we need to turn to diplomacy,
mediation and conflict prevention. Through education
and open dialogue, we need to improve our familiarity
and knowledge of the other.

Young people represent one of the most vulnerable
groups facing radicalization and extremism. When we
talk about prevention, we mean that we are looking for
positive alternatives for youth. That entails education
and creating employment opportunities and an
environment of hope.

We must also focus on the concept ofresponsibility.
The international community must find a way to
address the impunity currently enjoyed by those who
commit such horrible crimes. The perpetrators of such
atrocities must be brought to justice for their actions.
The International Criminal Court plays a crucial role in
the fight against impunity. We call on all States in the
region to accede to the Rome Statute of the Court. We
continue to advocate for the Security Council's referral
of the situation in Syria to the International Criminal
Court.

The violence and atrocities committed by extremist
groups have triggered massive displacements.
Thousands of Syrians, Iraqis and Afghans are fleeing
their countries every day, resulting in a catastrophic
humanitarian situation. Millions of people are displaced
within the region or are seeking refuge in neighbouring
countries and well beyond the region, including Europe.
The international community must respond effectively
to the immediate needs of those at risk by adopting an
approach based on needs, all the while respecting basic
humanitarian principles.

We must do everything in our power to restore
peace in the Middle East. The resumption of Israeli-
Palestinian talks is of crucial importance for the entire
region. Sustainable solutions to the crises in Syria
and Iraq can be brought about only through dialogue
among Syrians and Iraqis. The role of the international
community is to assist Syrians and Iraqis in the pursuit
of such dialogue.

Let me conclude by assuring the Security Council
that Slovenia fully supports the efforts of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan
de Mistura.

