Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Ambassador Daudi Mwakawago, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Sierra
Leone, for the briefing he has just given us in
introduction of the Secretary-General's twenty-seventh,
and last, report on the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) (S/2005/777). I should like
Ambassador Mwakawago and all his predecessors to
know how much my delegation appreciates their
enlightened guidance of the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone.

The withdrawal of the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone marks the end of the peacekeeping
operation in that country. We have come a long way:
from the United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNOMSIL), which was established in July
1998, to the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL), set up in October 1999, and now to the
United Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIOSIL), which is soon to become operational.
Sierra Leone is without a doubt a peacekeeping success
story. It is also an exemplar of cooperation between the
United Nations and regional African organizations,
which have demonstrated how useful they are.

In that connection, the Secretary-General has
highlighted some of the innovations that have
characterized the Mission's disengagement process and
the management of the subsequent phases. Those have
included the development of precise criteria to guide
the exit strategy, the establishment of UNIOSIL and the
regional approach taken in peacekeeping operations.
We particularly welcome that regional approach, which
reflects an ongoing effort to control external factors
affecting the situation in a given country.

From the perspective of the mandate given to the
Mission, we can take pleasure in saying that
UNAMSIL has done its job. However, in reading the
Secretary-General's last two reports, we are struck by
his assessment of the political situation prevailing in
the country. The newly restored security and stability
stand in contrast to the clear threats confronting the
country's future. Those threats emanate from the
underlying causes of the conflict that roiled the country
for over 10 years. The persistence of those threats
certainly cannot be blamed on UNAMSIL, but they
must be highlighted as representing a limit to what the
international community can do in terms of peace and
security. The situation should prompt us to rethink the
mandates of peacekeeping operations and to reassess
the exit strategies established for their draw-down. We
need to learn every possible lesson from this
experience.

We believe that peacekeeping operations should
be endowed with a clear mandate to address and
eradicate the roots of conflicts in countries where they
are deployed in order to establish solid bases for
subsequent peaceful development. We are convinced
that the creation of the Peacebuilding Commission will
make it possible to address, with equal attention, the
underlying causes of conflicts and the violence and
chaos they entail. The Peacebuilding Commission
should follow very closely the work of the United
Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone. We hope
that it will spare no effort in helping Sierra Leone to
remain on the path of peace.

From that perspective, we support the
recommendations of the Secretary-General concerning
various areas of activity in which an ongoing effort
must be made to consolidate achievements. We call on
the political class of Sierra Leone fully to shoulder its
responsibility to overcome the difficulties surrounding
the upcoming elections, which will be a real challenge
to the maintenance of peace and security throughout
the country. We urge the international community to
strengthen its support for Sierra Leone, particularly by
increasing the resources available to the country, given
the reduction in post-conflict humanitarian assistance
and the high rate of poverty throughout the country.
Efforts should be made to reduce that poverty by
enhancing the Government's capacity to provide the
people with the basic social services necessary to an
improved quality of life.

In that regard, the consolidation of the
achievements made requires increased attention to the
implementation of the recommendations of the Truth
and Reconciliation Commission and to improving the
human rights situation.

In conclusion, we pay tribute to the staff of the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone for their
invaluable contribution to the country's recovery. As
the Mission draws down, my delegation, through me,
pays tribute to the troop-contributing countries for their
precious contribution to peacekeeping in Sierra Leone
and the stability of West Africa.

I take this opportunity to honour the memory of
the peacekeepers who made the ultimate sacrifice in
their commitment to peace in Sierra Leone. All of West
Africa will cherish their memory from generation to
generation.

