Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): I wish to thank
Mr. Mladenov for his usual comprehensive update on
the situation on the ground.

Again, we are disappointed about the continuing
provocative actions by the occupying Power, including
its destabilizing actions and violations of the situation
and historic status of Al-Haram Al-Sharif, thereby
potentially creating tensions not only in the region but
also in the surrounding areas.

We are deeply concerned about the fact that no
concrete measures have been taken, including by this
body, in relation to the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016). In that regard, the Council should spare no
effort in creating an atmosphere that is conducive for
all parties to implement the resolution.

We also took note of the statement by Mr. Mladenov
on the various provocations in the occupied Palestinian
territory, in particular in Gaza. We call on all parties
to refrain from making further statements that may
escalate tensions. We share the view of Mr. Mladenov
that highlighted that economic measures cannot be
considered as the only element that needs to be solved
when addressing the issue of Palestine.

With those comments in mind, I wish to highlight
three important points in my remarks today.

The first point is the humanitarian crisis in
Palestine. While there is no sign of political talks
in sight, the living conditions of the Palestinians
continue to deteriorate every day, whether in Gaza or
in the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem.
Palestinians continue to be deprived of their rights.
Their hope for a better future is fading away. Before our
eyes, the occupying Power continues to dismantle past
political deals and perimeters that are the foundation
of the two-State solution. Widespread and persistent
practices such as continuous violence, the expansion
of settlements and increasing threats by settlers, the
blockade of Gaza, the demolition of property and
evictions aggravate the economic situation and pose a
serious security threat. Israel continues to withhold the
transfer of Palestinian tax revenues to the Palestinian
Authority - a dangerous measure by the occupying
Power. Let me again stress that we cannot question the
Palestinian Authority's refusal to accept a transfer that
is less than the full amount owed to it, but must demand
that Israel not take what does belong to it.
That brings me to my second point, namely, the
significant role of the United Nations Relief and Works
AgencyforPalestineRefugeesintheNearEast(UNRWA)
amid worsening economic and social conditions in
Palestine. As an organization providing basic services
to half of the people of Gaza, UNRWA provides a small
glimmer of hope. The generous contributions of many
countries are a clear demonstration of the support and
responsibility of the international community with
regard to the existence of UNRWA for the benefit of
the Palestinian people. UNRWA is vital to Palestinian
refugees and to Palestinians at large. It is also the least
the United Nations can do to help the Palestinians, given
the failure of the Security Council to act authoritatively
on its own resolutions as they relate to Palestine. The
United Nations is indebted to Palestine and we must
discharge that debt, now or in the future. With respect
to that point, I wish to remind all of us here that on
25 June, just a few days from now, there will be a
pledging conference for UNRWA. We did a tremendous
job last year, which helped prevent UNRWA from
collapsing. I urge all delegations to demonstrate the
same sense of commitment again this year.

My third point is the maintenance of the historic
status quo of Al-Haram Al-Sharif, to which I alluded
at the beginning. Al-Haram Al-Sharif has always been
the epicentre of violence because of what it represents,
spiritually and culturally. It is critical that we remind
ourselves that what happens there affects not just the
immediate region, but ripples to far distant areas of the
world. In that regard, it is worth recalling that earlier
this month, during the last 10 days of Ramadan, during
a time when there is a great concentration of people
in Al-Haram Al-Sharif, there was another provocation
by settlers and security forces of the occupying Power
trying to gain access.

Once again, that was a violation of the status quo.
What is even more deplorable is that the aggression
took place during the celebration of the occupation
of East Jerusalem in 1967. Not surprisingly, a number
of Palestinians were injured during the incident. The
delegation of Indonesia would like to warn that turning
the conflict into a religious one is something that
we must prevent, as the consequences could be very
serious. I believe all of us here agree on that. We call on
Israel to respect history and the status quo and to avoid
any measures or insensitive policy that might result in
a destabilizing effect.

Finally, on a positive note, I welcome the agreement
between the State of Palestine and the International
Atomic Energy Agency on a safeguards agreement,
which has placed the State of Palestine on an equal
footing with other members.

Once again, we call on this body to exercise its
authority with regard to the situation in Palestine. Let
us be fair and place justice above all.

