Mr. Eitel (Germany): On 30 October the German
delegation took the initiative in the Security Council for
another energetic attempt to establish the fate and the
whereabouts of the missing Bosnian men from Srebrenica,
Zepa and the wider Banja Luka area. We are gratified
that this initiative has now led, thanks to the efforts and
support provided by the United States of America, to the
draft resolution currently before the Council on violations
of international humanitarian law in the former
Yugoslavia.

We are alarmed and deeply concerned at an
increasing number of eye-witness accounts and newspaper
reports to the effect that large numbers of missing men
from Srebrenica and Zepa, and also from the Banja Luka
area, have probably been killed in summary executions or
led away by Bosnian Serbs to unknown destinations.

In particular, we are deeply worried that, months
after the fall of Srebrenica and Zepa, no significant
progress has been made in the search for the missing
persons - this although the Security Council has already
dealt with this matter repeatedly and has adopted three
formal decisions. We are shocked that massive violations
of international humanitarian law are apparently still
going on in the wider Banja Luka area.

We have to insist that immediate access to all
detainees from Srebrenica, Zepa and the wider Banja
Luka area must be granted, in particular, to the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). We
demand that the safety and well-being of all persons
detained by Bosnian Serbs or on the territory of the FRY
be ensured and that Bosnian civilians taken prisoner be
released immediately.

The draft resolution also deals with the human rights
situation in Croatia, and rightly so. But let me not be
misunderstood: while we are deeply worried about the

 

situation in Croatia, we are fully aware of the different
qualitative and quantitative dimensions of the violations of
international humanitarian law and the human rights
violations committed by Bosnian Serbs in Srebrenica, Zepa
and the wider Banja Luka area. We also note that the
Croatian side has consistently granted access to the Krajina
region to human rights observers, whereas the Bosnian
Serbs have systematically blocked all access to the Bosnian
Serb sites in question. This attitude even led on 31 October
to a formal request from the President of the International
criminal Tribunal to the Security Council to consider
further measures against the Bosnian Serbs in order to
achieve cooperation by the Bosnian Serbs with the
Tribunal.

The probable summary execution of thousands of
Bosnian men by Bosnian Serbs is a war crime without
parallel in the former Yugoslavia. Or is there any objective
party which would claim that, equally, thousands of draft-
age Serb Croat men were separated from their families and
killed in summary executions, as apparently perpetrated by
the Bosnian Serb side? The answer is no. We would
therefore warn against any attempt to equate the war crimes
committed by the Bosnian Serbs with the human rights
violations that have occurred in Croatia.

With regard to Croatia, we are deeply concerned by
ongoing reports from human rights monitoring missions
concerning killings and mistreatment of mostly elderly
civilians, as well as deliberate arson and looting in the
Krajina region. These reports contradict Croatian promises
that the Croatian Government will do its utmost to stop
these events, and thus have an overall negative impact on
the return of the Serbian refugees to their homes. We
therefore urge the Croatian Government once again to
ensure that its own commitments be honoured.

Germany fully supports the ongoing efforts of the
ICRC and United Nations representatives to gain access to
the detainees in question and to get information about the
fate of all missing persons. We continue to pray that they
are still alive. We cannot allow these events to be forgotten
in the context of a peace settlement for the former
Yugoslavia. Germany therefore calls upon all States, in
particular the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) and all parties to the conflict to cooperate
fully with the International criminal Tribunal in The Hague.

Germany has consistently argued that the Security
Council has to follow up on this matter. We feel there is an
urgent need for the Security Council to react to the strong
indications of war crimes and to prevent further human
rights violations in the area. We therefore welcome the
fact that the draft resolution takes up our proposal by
requesting that a written report be submitted by the
Secretary-General based on all information available to
the United Nations concerning recent violations of
international humanitarian law in Srebrenica, Zepa and the
wider Banja Luka area. We urgently need this report as
a solid base of information on which to act.

My delegation will vote for the adoption of the draft
resolution.

