Mr. Sin Son Ho (Democratic People's Republic of Korea): Allow me, first of all, Madam President, to
acknowledge your convening of this open debate of the
Security Council on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question.

My delegation expects that today's meeting will
help bring about a practical resolution of the
Palestinian issue as soon as possible. We wish to thank
Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for his comprehensive overview of
the current state of the Palestinian question.

We would also like to express our full support for
the statement made by His Excellency Mr. Maged
Abdelaziz, Permanent Representative of the Arab
Republic of Egypt, on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
The establishment of an independent State of
Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, has been
unanimously called for by the international community.
To that end, many resolutions have been adopted in the
United Nations and various proposals, including the
Arab Peace Initiative, have been put on the table, but
the prospects for success remain unclear.

The Israeli military occupation of Palestine and
East Jerusalem continues, as it does in other Arab
territories, and its settlement activities in particular are
expanding, posing a challenge to the international
community. The result has been a deadlocked peace
process and serious difficulties for, and threats to,
peace and security in the Middle East. This year alone,
the Israeli bombing in the Gaza Strip and its continuing
merciless use of force have killed many innocent
civilians, including women and children. The situation
in Lebanon and in the occupied Syrian Golan is the
same. That is entirely due to their continued occupation
by Israel and the prejudicial Middle East policies of the
United States, which sides actively with the occupying
Power. My delegation believes that the Security
Council should give those high-priority issues the
attention they deserve.

Establishing an independent State of Palestine is
an inalienable sovereign right of the Palestinian people.
We must put an end to the Israeli military occupation
and to the violations of human rights in Palestine as
soon as possible, in order to allow the Palestinian
people to exercise their full right to national
self-determination. The peace process between
Palestine and Israel should be carried out on the basis
of those principles.

It is also my delegation's position that the
Security Council should pay due attention to the issue
of Palestinian membership of the United Nations,
which is on the international agenda, and make it a
reality without further delay, now that more than 130
countries have officially recognized Palestinian
statehood. The Democratic People's Republic of Korea
recognized Palestine as an independent sovereign State
in 1988, and since then has given its unreserved
support and solidarity to the Palestinian people's
struggle for statehood. In that regard, my delegation
firmly reiterates our continuing support for the just
cause of the Palestinian and Arab peoples.

My delegation takes this opportunity to clarify
once again the principled position of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea that all disputes should be
settled peacefully through dialogue and negotiation
between the parties concerned, without interference
from outside forces. In that connection, my delegation
is of the view that the Syrian issue should also be
resolved peacefully through dialogue, without any
foreign intervention, in conformity with the
fundamental principles of the United Nations Charter,
such as respect for sovereignty and non-interference.

