The President: Today is the second anniversary
of the bombing of United Nations headquarters in
Baghdad, in which 22 people lost their lives and
hundreds more were injured. May I ask the members of
the Council to join me in observing a minute of silence
to honour the memory of those who were killed while
assisting the Iraqi people in their pursuit of peace,
stability and democracy.

The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Guinea-Bissau, in which she requests
to be invited to participate in the consideration of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in
the discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mrs. Pinto
Lopes D'Alva (Guinea-Bissau) took a seat at the
Council table.


The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2005/380, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau
and on the activities of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in that country.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council acknowledges with
satisfaction the successful holding of the
presidential elections in Guinea-Bissau and the
announcement by the National Electoral
Commission of the final results of the ballot. This
marks an important step towards the restoration
of constitutional order. The Security Council
takes note of the appeal filed with the Supreme
Court of Justice by one of the contenders and
strongly encourages all parties to honour their
commitments and accept the final ruling of the
Court. The Security Council urges them to refrain
from any actions that could jeopardize the efforts
towards peace and stability in Guinea-Bissau.

"The Security Council commends the
people of Guinea-Bissau for their encouraging
participation in the electoral process.

"The Security Council pays tribute to
Guinea-Bissau's partners and neighbours, which
provided indispensable support for the holding of
the elections. The Security Council also
congratulates international observers on the
essential role they played throughout the country,
and welcomes their statement recognizing the
presidential elections as free, fair and transparent.

"The Security Council expresses its
appreciation for the contribution made by the
African Union, the Community of Portuguese-
Speaking Countries, the Economic Community of
West African States, the European Union, the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, the
Special Envoy of the Chairperson of the African
Union, the Representative of the Secretary-
General in Guinea-Bissau and the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNOGBIS), bilateral partners and international
financial institutions. The Security Council
underlines the importance of their timely
diplomatic efforts aimed at promoting national
dialogue and respect for the rule of law.

"Considering the challenges still facing
Guinea-Bissau, the Security Council urges all
relevant national and international parties to
reaffirm their commitment to peace and
democracy in Guinea-Bissau, and calls upon
bilateral development partners of Guinea-Bissau,
international financial institutions and United
Nations agencies to increase their support for

economic and social development and

consolidation of national institutions, as well as
the promotion of good governance and human
rights, in particular by providing emergency
financial assistance and technical support, in the
short run, and by participating actively in the
Donor Round Table Conference to be held in
November 2005.

"The Security Council therefore welcomes
the decision taken by the Economic and Social
Council on 26 July 2005 to extend the mandate of
the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Guinea-Bissau,
and commends the group for its work.

"The Security Council invites the Secretary-
General to present recommendations in his next
report regarding the updating of UNOGBIS's
mandate and role in the consolidation of peace
and stability in Guinea-Bissau in the post-
transition period."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol SfPRST/2005/39.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at I] a.m.

