Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): First, let
me express our sincere appreciation for the cooperation
of outgoing members of the Security Council: Columbia,
Germany, India, Portugal and South Africa. Each of
them has made a significant contribution to the work
of the Council over the last two years, and it has been a
pleasure working with them.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his comments today and for all his efforts to
improve United Nations support for countries emerging
from conflict. I also thank Ambassador Momen for
his thoughtful briefing and his valuable efforts as
Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
We appreciate the important work of the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Peacebuilding Fund and the
Peacebuilding Support Office, and we are grateful
for the steady progress they have made in supporting
countries in transition.
We have discussed peacebuilding often in this
Chamber, both in general terms and in addressing
countries on the Council's agenda. We have agreed on
core issues - the imperative of national ownership, the
priority of building effective and credible institutions,
the need for international efforts to be flexible and
tailored to context and the necessity of incorporating
women and youth in our peacebuilding strategies.
The stakes are high. Without effective strategies to
consolidate and sustain peace, fragile settlements are
vulnerable to reversal and renewed violence. Governing
capacities are easily overwhelmed, economies cannot
restart and communities cannot rebuild.

Today, I would like to touch on three issues that
warrant greater attention and improvement in our
collective efforts: building institutions, gender-
responsive peacebuilding and division of labour based
on core competencies.

While every transition is unique, post-conflict
authorities all struggle to build or rebuild effective
democratic institutions that can meet basic needs,
whether securing the streets, providing access to
justice, delivering public services or enabling economic
activity. That requires significant attention to public
sector capacity at all levels of Government and to the
institutional foundations of a vibrant civil society and
a healthy private sector. The international community
has made concrete progress assisting institutional
development, but we can do better.

The United States appreciates the Secretary-
General's call for a more responsive approach to
balancinglong-termsupportforinstitution-buildingwith
the need to achieve early and tangible outcomes - the
restoration of core Government functions and service
delivery. We believe strongly that countries with their
own experience of transition from conflict or crisis
have valuable expertise and perspectives that can assist
others. We also welcome efforts in the Security Council
to explore ways to factor that critical issue into the
design and oversight of mandates.

Robust participation of women is crucial to
peacebuilding. We applaud the Secretary-General's
candour about insufficient progress on the seven-
point action plan for gender-responsive peacebuilding,
particularly in the areas of governance and economic
recovery. Women's needs and concerns must be given
greater attention in Government administration,
particularly at the subnational level and especially in
the composition of and access to public services.

Women's centrality to economic recovery - notably
their potential roles in the agricultural supply chain and
in small business - also deserves more focus. From
Haiti to Burma, the United Nations has a growing track
record of assisting women in post-conflict situations,
whether through disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration efforts or training and employment
programmes. We encourage the United Nations,
together with other partners, to scale up those efforts
and good practices more systematically.

The issue of international roles and responsibilities
has been a constant theme since the Secretary-General's
first report on peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict
(S/2009/304). We have urged the United Nations
system, together with outside partners, to develop a
division of labour in supporting post-conflict countries
that reflects comparative advantages. We appreciate
the Secretary-General's charge to peacekeeping
missions and United Nations country teams to develop
partnerships on that basis.

We are pleased by the recent establishment
of the global focal point on the rule of law that will
bring the United Nations Development Programme
and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
into closer alignment, and we look forward to the
forthcoming review of international efforts on public
administration. We commend the PBC's recent
successes in strengthening partnerships with the
World Bank and the African Development Bank, and
encourage the PBC to explore further collaboration
with the private sector and philanthropic and other
non-governmental organizations. We welcome ongoing
dialogue with the PBC and other actors to reinforce
peacebuilding partnerships and the concept of dividing
labour according to comparative advantages.

Finally, the United States also thanks Bangladesh
for its leadership in convening the high-level event on
peacebuilding on the margins of the General Assembly
general debate in September. This event raised
the visibility of our common interests in effective
peacebuilding, and its resultant declaration reflects our
shared priorities going forward.

Healing the wounds of war and building peace in
the aftermath of conflict is one of the most complex
and compelling tasks we face in the Council, and
one we cannot neglect. The alternative is only more
violence, more suffering and more instability. Though
the challenges are formidable, there is too much at
stake for conflict-affected people, their neighbours and
the international community to neglect peacebuilding
processes. We must make every effort to accelerate
progress.

