Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): At the outset, Mr.
Azad, I would like to welcome you back to this
Chamber. It is our honour and our pleasure to have you
presiding over today's important meeting. I wish to
express our appreciation to the Bangladesh presidency
for convening this meeting on an issue that constitutes
one of the main tasks and responsibilities of the United
Nations: the prevention of armed conflict.

Let me also thank the Deputy Secretary-General,
Ms. Louise Frechette, for her introduction of the
Secretary-General's report (S/2001/574), which
reviews the progress achieved in recent years in
developing the conflict prevention capacity of the
United Nations system and which spells out specific
recommendations on how to enhance it in cooperation
with Member States.

We welcome the report and we commend the
Secretary-General for the excellent job done in
preparing it. My delegation is impressed with the
comprehensive nature of the report, and with its correct
philosophical premises, factual data, result-oriented
recommendations and forward-looking conclusions. We
fully subscribe to the main motto of the Secretary-
General's report: that the time has come to translate the
rhetoric of conflict prevention into concrete action. In
our view, the document represents a remarkable step
forward in making the potential of the United Nations
for conflict prevention more effective and in moving
the international community from a culture of reaction
to a culture of prevention.

At the same time, since the report is still under
thorough consideration in my capital, at this stage I
will limit myself to a few preliminary remarks on its
content.

Ukraine has been actively advocating the
development of reliable preventive United Nations
mechanisms for the timely detection and elimination of
potential sources of conflict. Most recently, at the
Millennium and Security Council summits, the
President of Ukraine put forward a proposal to develop
a comprehensive United Nations strategy for conflict
prevention on the basis of the large-scale use of
preventive diplomacy and peace-building.

Against this background, we find that the content
of the report is largely in line with the proposal of the
President of Ukraine. Specifically, we consider
fundamental the 10 principles proposed by the
Secretary-General as guidelines for the future approach
of the United Nations to conflict prevention, and we
support their full application. We believe that these
principles lay down solid conceptual foundations for
the further elaboration of a comprehensive long-term
conflict-prevention strategy for the United Nations and
for the international community as a whole.

In the context of the Secretary-General's
recommendations on the role of the Security Council,
my delegation welcomes his intention to initiate a
practice of providing the Council with periodic reports
on the regional aspects of conflicts. The Security
Council's efforts in conflict settlement in recent
years - in particular in the Balkans, the Middle East,
West Africa and other parts of the world - clearly
testify to the significance of a regional approach to
existing problems.

We believe that the recommendation to consider
the establishment of new mechanisms of the Security
Council to discuss prevention cases on the basis of the
Secretary-General's regional reports deserves further
examination. In our View, at the initial stage of
introducing the practice of submitting periodic regional
reports, their consideration can be entrusted to the
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations. My
delegation also agrees with the view of the Secretary-
General that Security Council fact-finding missions can
have important preventive effects. Therefore, we are in
favour of introducing the same practice of visits to
conflict-prone states or potential zones of conflict.

We believe that the Security Council should more
frequently resort to its past experience of preventive
deployment, with the consent of the host country, of
operations in areas of growing tension, as in the case of
the United Nations mission in the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia. The unique and successful
experience of the United National Preventive
Deployment Force (UNPREDEP), which remains the
only preventive deployment mission in the history of
United Nations peace support efforts, should, in our
view, be further exploited and developed, with a view
to creating a qualitatively new type of operation: a
conflict-prevention operation.

Ukraine, while maintaining its position on the
leading role of the Security Council in the prevention
of armed conflicts, firmly believes that the task of
eliminating the root causes of these conflicts - in
particular those of an economic, social or humanitarian
nature - falls basically under the competence of other
principal United Nations bodies and specialized
agencies. In this regard, we subscribe to the Secretary-
General's view that a successful preventive strategy
depends on the close cooperation of many United
Nations actors. In this respect, we look forward to the
forthcoming discussion of the Secretary-General's
report by the General Assembly on 12 and 13 July.

We feel also that the traditional role of the
Secretary-General in discharging his mandate - which
is derived from Article 99 of the Charter - through
"quiet diplomacy" or "good offices" can be enhanced
through the implementation of the four proposals
outlined in his report, all of which we support. In
particular, we find useful and constructive the idea of
identifying eminent persons to serve as an informal
network for advice and action in support of the
Secretary-General's efforts to prevent and resolve
armed conflicts. Ukraine stands ready to provide a list
of candidates for that system. We would also encourage
the Secretary-General to resort more actively, in
conducting conflict-prevention missions, to the use of
special envoys appointed on the basis of a roster of
eminent and qualified experts of Member States.

As far as a United Nations regional presence is
concerned, we are in favour of the idea of creating
United Nations liaison offices at the headquarters of
the regional organizations, as was done in Addis Ababa
in 1998, to coordinate United Nations conflict-
prevention efforts with those of the regional
organizations. In our View, this concept should be
further developed, with a view to the creation of United
Nations regional centres on conflict prevention. In this
context, let me recall Ukraine's proposal to set up such
a centre under the auspices of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in
Ukraine's capital, Kiev.

We also encourage the Secretary-General to take
further initiatives as concerns his joint preventive
actions with the Security Council. In our View, the
recent mission of the Secretary-General to the Middle
East serves as a good example of such joint action on
conflict prevention, initiated by the Secretary-General
on the basis of the mandate given him by the Security
Council.

Lastly, my delegation believes that it would be
appropriate for the Council to consider following up
today's debate in the form of an official document that
would accurately reflect the ideas and assessments of
the participants in the discussion and endorse the
Secretary-General's recommendations.

Ukraine also welcomes the adoption, at the recent
European Union summit in Gooteborg, of the European
Union programme for the prevention of violent
conflicts as a demonstration of the continued
commitment of those countries to this important issue.

Finally, let me express our hope that the current
open debate, focused on the Secretary-General's report
on conflict prevention, will foster the effective
implementation of the recommendations contained
therein and contribute to the goal of mobilizing the
collective potential of the United Nations, its Member
States and other international stakeholders in
eliminating the threat of the emergence of armed
conflicts. Ukraine is determined to continue its efforts
to achieve this goal.

