Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): My delegation would like
to thank the Chairmen of the 1267 Committee, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and the 1540 Committee
for their respective briefings on their activities. We
would like to take this opportunity to extend to them
our deep appreciation for their untiring efforts to move
forward the work of the Committees.
I should now like to comment briefly on each
presentation.
Indonesia is grateful to Ambassador Johan
Verbeke for his strong leadership of the 1267
Committee and welcomes the progress made in its
work. We hope that the current and future activities of
the Committee, as presented by its Chairman, will
significantly contribute to global efforts against
terrorism, particularly against Al-Qaida and the
Taliban.

My delegation would like to reiterate its position
to the effect that the current and future work of the
Committee should involve fair and clear procedures for
the processes of listing, delisting and granting
exceptions. We recommend that the need to
mainstream procedural fairness and assert human rights
principles be adequately addressed by the Committee,
especially in its evaluation of the implementation of
resolutions 1730 (2006) and 1735 (2006).

We also attach great importance to the further
improvement of the quality of the consolidated list,
particularly in terms of enhancing its completeness and
accuracy. Lack of completeness and of accuracy will
prevent the consolidated list from serving as a useful
operational tool in counter-terrorism matters. Having
said that, we deem it essential that the Security Council
and the Committee continue to promote transparency in
the procedures involved in both the listing and
delisting processes.

As far as the review mechanism is concerned, my
delegation welcomes the initiative to review more than
100 individuals and entities by July 2007. In that
regard, we would also like to stress that the process
should be substantive and not aim merely to update
existing information. The review should consider all
relevant information, including a statement of
justification for the inclusion of a particular name of an
individual or entity on the consolidated list.

With regard to the issue of compliance, my
delegation would like to highlight the increasing
number of legal cases challenging the implementation
of sanctions at the national level. Given that this
increasing litigation is capable of affecting States'
compliance in the implementation of sanctions, the
Security Council should direct the Committee to study
the legal problems arising from national
implementation and recommend ways of resolving the
matter.

With regard to the presentation made by the
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee,

Ambassador Ricardo Alberto Arias, my delegation
expresses its appreciation for his excellent work. My
delegation underlines the importance in the carrying
out of that work of cooperation, transparency, even-
handedness and consistency of approach as the
fundamental guiding principles of the work of the
CTC.

It is my delegation's wish that the future
programme of work of the CTC also include a clear
direction for the Committee so as to ensure the
comprehensive and balanced implementation of
resolution 1624 (2005). While maintaining the
importance of the prohibition of incitement, my
delegation emphasizes the need to take effective
measures to promote dialogue among civilizations,
interfaith dialogue and respect for international law
and human rights.

With regard to the implementation of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, it is our
view that the adoption of the Strategy requires further
development in the work of the three counter-terrorism
committees, particularly the CTC. My delegation
therefore supports the role of the CT C in the
implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy.

My delegation wishes also to thank the Chairman
of the 1540 Committee, Ambassador Peter Burian, for
his untiring efforts in guiding the Committee in the
fulfilment of its task and of the mandate conferred on it
by resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1673 (2006). It is
important, in our view, that the Committee should
continue to proceed faithfully with its work within the
context of its mandate and continue to be guided by the
principles of cooperation, transparency, equal treatment
and consistency.

Let me also take this opportunity to highlight
several points my delegation considers essential in the
continuation of the Committee's work.

We believe that technical assistance is an
important contributing element to the successful
implementation of the resolution. The technical
assistance programme would be more appealing and
might lead to a better response from recipient States if
it also addressed their larger needs and priorities and
was not confined only to addressing their capacity
needs strictly in the non-proliferation area.
Recognizing that the implementation of the resolution
is a national responsibility, we believe that assistance
should be conducted as cooperation between provider
and recipient, and not be perceived as an imposition.

As to the issue of reporting, we note that, for
almost three years, the focus of the Committee has
mainly been on encouraging compliance with the
reporting requirement. While noting that reporting is
indeed important as a baseline for analysis, it is not the
objective of the resolution. The key point is the
implementation of all of the provisions of the
resolutions. For developing countries with limited
resources and many other equally pressing priorities,
the increasing burden of reporting in its various forms
could be overwhelming.

Finally, when resolution 1540 was adopted two
years ago, concerns were expressed that the Security
Council had taken on a legislative role in which it was
dictating domestic law to Member States and enforcing
non-proliferation obligations outside the traditional
multilateral process. As we draw closer to the end of
the mandate of the 1540 Committee, it is my
delegation's view that we could now start to work
towards a multilaterally negotiated instrument that
would permanently address the gap that is being
temporarily filled by this resolution.

