Mr. Matulay (Slovakia): I would like to join
previous speakers in thanking the Presidents of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
and the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), as well as their Prosecutors, for
their assessment of the work of both Tribunals. We
wish to express our full support for them as they carry
out the tasks given to them by the Security Council.

Slovakia is strongly committed to bringing about
universal, balanced and transparent justice. We believe
that to be an important aspect of reconciliation in both
regions. My delegation considers the completion
strategies and objectives set out in resolution 1503
(2003) and 1534 (2004), determining the deadlines for
finalizing their work as crucial documents streamlining
the final phase of the functioning of both Tribunals.

As to the ICTY, we appreciate the progress made
in recent months, in particular the recent outcome of
the working group on speeding up trials, in order to
identify effective measures to implement the Tribunal's
completion strategy. We very much appreciate that the
Tribunal promptly implemented recommendations of
the working group, allowing some trials to commence
more quickly than originally foreseen.

We also welcome the cooperation of the ICTY
with domestic courts of the affected countries of the
region. My country shares the Tribunal's expectations
that trials at the national level will be conducted with
full adherence to international norms of due process.

We welcome the arrest of Ante Gotovina in Spain
in December 2005. However, we regret the failure to
arrest six remaining high-level accused, in particular
Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic.

With regard to the death of two accused - Milan
Babic and Slobodan Milosevic - we appreciate the
prompt reaction of the Tribunal and the steps taken to
clarify the circumstances surrounding those events.
We support the call on all States to cooperate
fully with the ICTY to ensure the immediate arrest and
delivery of remaining fugitives to The Hague to enable
the Prosecutor and the ICTY to complete the trial
programme within the target date of the end of 2008.

With regard to the ICTR, we welcome the
activities it has undertaken in recent months. We
appreciate the intention of the Tribunal's Prosecutor to
transfer a number of cases to national jurisdictions. It
is necessary to insist on compliance with international
standards of fair trial in such transfer.

We welcome the estimate of the ICTR that by the
end of 2008 the Court could complete trials and
judgments of between 65 and 70 persons. We
encourage the Tribunal to bring to justice those persons
who are most responsible for genocide and violations

of international humanitarian law committed in
Rwanda in 1994.

My delegation appreciates the outreach
programme activities to strengthen understanding of
and confidence in the work of the ICTR among the
Rwandan people, as a contribution to national
reconciliation in Rwanda.

