Mr. Limeres (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council this month. I would also like to commend you
for convening this open debate on the subject before us.

The protection of civilians in armed conflicts
continues to be a subject to which the international
community and my country in particular attach the
utmost importance. Unfortunately, the Security Council
has to continue to consider this issue owing to the fact
that today civilians still suffer greatly from the
consequences of armed conflict. The Security Council
must therefore remain committed to the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts, to promoting full respect
for humanitarian law, human rights law and human
rights in general, and to combating impunity.

Argentina would like once again to underscore
the value and significance of the 1949 Geneva
Conventions, which represented a remarkable step
forward for the international community against the
backdrop of the dehumanizing experiences it had
suffered. Six decades later, conflicts continue to take
place. Regrettably, there are still many situations where
civilians are the targets of attacks and there are
unacceptably high numbers of civilian deaths; where
children are recruited as soldiers and girls are subject
to abuse, rape and all other types of sexual abuse;
where thousands and even millions of people are
displaced; and where access to humanitarian assistance
is impossible or seriously curtailed. Many of those
situations are made worse by impunity.

Parties to an armed conflict are subject to the
basic obligation of international humanitarian law to
protect civilians from the effects of armed conflict.
Such an obligation, embodied in common article 3 to
the four Geneva Conventions of 1949, also applies in
the context of armed conflicts of a non-international
nature, that is to say, to non-States parties to conflict.

The Security Council is directly responsible for
matters of peacekeeping operations and the protection
of civilians. As I have pointed out on other occasions,
my country is convinced of the need to include in the
mandates of United Nations missions protection
activities that are clearly developed and receive the
necessary resources in an effective and timely manner.
In this regard, interaction with components on the
ground is essential to ensuring that mandates will be
clear and appropriate to the circumstances faced by the
peacekeeping operation.

Regarding the integration of the components, it is
important to bear in mind the need, where relevant, to
ensure the necessary structure for the protection of
women, especially from sexual violence. At the same
time, it is also worth bearing in mind the need to
protect children, particularly from being recruited as
child soldiers, and to rehabilitate former child soldiers.
Another critical aspect of the protection of civilians is
the need to ensure access to humanitarian assistance. If
the parties to a conflict fail to fulfil their obligations

under international humanitarian law, they must at least
do all they can to ensure access to shipments and
material, as well as first aid support. Furthermore,
people fleeing combat areas must be allowed to transit
safely to areas where they will be safe from hostilities.

Action by the Organization is essential to prevent
the emergence of situations of genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity, and to
end them when such situations emerge. Those four
crimes, included in the concept of the responsibility to
protect, demand not only action, but also prevention.
The commitment of the Organization is needed to
prevent the recurrence of the horrors of the past. It is
often possible to detect in a society elements that set
off alarms regarding the possible emergence of
situations of massive and serious violations of human
rights and humanitarian law. Therefore, prevention
requires that the Organization be provided with
appropriate mechanisms to gather information on
present and potential situations that may trigger the
responsibility to protect.

Fact-finding is an important element. Argentina
considers it worth reiterating that there exists an
impartial body for fact-finding into possible serious
violations of the Geneva Conventions: the International
Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission, established
by virtue of Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions of
1949. We welcome the Security Council's recognition
in its resolution 1894 (2009) of the possibility of
recourse to the Commission for timely, objective,
accurate and reliable information.

Being a victim of an armed conflict is a condition
that usually extends beyond the end of hostilities. In
the case of women and children in particular, they
continue to be victimized after returning to their
communities by being stigmatized and subject to
retaliation. In this context, it is necessary to underscore
the role of justice. Perpetrators of war crimes, genocide
or crimes against humanity are responsible for serious
crimes and must therefore be held accountable before
justice.

This Council established two international
tribunals: the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda. Currently, we are transitioning towards an
international justice system for the most serious
crimes, including war crimes, based on a permanent
tribunal more than on ad hoc tribunals. That permanent
tribunal, which is fully functioning, is the International
Criminal Court, established by the Rome Statute in
1998.

I would like to end my statement by stressing
once again that, in accordance with international
humanitarian law and resolutions of this Council, any
kind of attack against civilians or other protected
persons in situations of armed conflict, including the
obstruction of access to humanitarian assistance and
the recruitment of children, is a violation of
international law. Thus, I would like to conclude by
urging once again strict compliance with the
obligations arising from The Hague Conventions of
1899 and 1907, the four Geneva Conventions of 1949
and their Additional Protocols of 1977, general
international law and the decisions of the Security
Council.

