Mr. Zhang Yesui (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I wish to thank His Excellency Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing. We welcome the
presence at today's meeting of His Excellency
Mr. Mahmoud Abbas, President of the Palestinian
National Authority; Mr. Amre Moussa, Secretary
General of the League of Arab States; and the Foreign
Ministers of a number of Arab countries.

China is greatly concerned at the heavy casualties
and the loss of property caused by the most recent
outbreak of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and is
deeply worried about the ongoing humanitarian crisis
in Gaza. The top priority now is for the parties
concerned to achieve an immediate ceasefire to avoid
further civilian casualties. We urge Israel to halt its
military operation immediately and open all the border
crossings in Gaza to ensure unfettered access of
humanitarian supplies to the area. The armed
Palestinian faction also needs to stop its rocket firings.
We urge the international community to provide further
assistance to ease the humanitarian crisis in Gaza.

The Security Council, which shoulders the
primary responsibility for maintaining world peace and
security, has every reason to play an active role.
Regrettably, however, the three emergency meetings
held by the Council since the outbreak of the conflict
have achieved no result. We hope the Council will
respond to the will of the international community and
the appeal of Arab States and take swift actions to
adopt a resolution so as to send a positive and clear
signal to the parties concerned and push for an
immediate ceasefire.

China always opposes the use of force in settling
disputes and condemns all violent activities against
civilians. What has happened over the past 60 years
shows that military means are not a way out of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The cycle of violence does
no good to either side and cannot bring about security
for any party. We hope that the parties concerned will
exercise maximum restraint, exhibit courage and
wisdom and continue to resolve their differences
through dialogue.

We call on the international community to make
vigorous efforts for the peace process, push for a just
and equitable settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian issue
and work towards real and enduring peace in the area.

