Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
you, Foreign Minister Nin Novoa, for presiding over
this meeting and for your wise leadership in your
delegation's first presidency of the Security Council. I
also thank the Secretary-General for his briefing to the
Council today and for his being here, which is testament
to the serious challenges facing the region - a reality
underscored by his appropriately bleak briefing. My
remarks today will focus on three parts of the region:
the Israeli-Palestinian issue, Syria and Lebanon.

On the Israeli-Palestinian issue, we remain very
concerned about the impact that terrorism and the
ongoing violence have on Israelis and Palestinians
and by the lack of progress made towards a two-State
solution. The United States strongly condemns terrorist
attacks perpetrated by Palestinians. Those include the
attack on 24-year-old Shlomit Kriegman, who was
stabbed yesterday outside a supermarket and died
earlier this morning. Another woman, 58 years of age,
was also stabbed and wounded in the attack. The victims
also include Dafna Meir, a mother of six children, who
was stabbed to death in her home on 17 January while
trying to defend her kids, as we heard earlier. Those
and other reprehensible and inexcusable attacks against
innocent civilians underscore the critical importance
of affirmative steps to stop incitement, restore calm,
reduce tensions and bring an end to the Violence on
both sides.

We also condemn Israeli settler violence against
Palestinians and their property in the West Bank, such
as the appalling 2015 attack that killed three members
of the Al-Dawabsheh family in Duma - the father,
Saad, the mother, Reham, and their 18-month-old boy,
Ali Saad - and badly burned their 4-year-old son.
There is absolutely no justification for any of those acts
of terrorism. We all must condemn them consistently
and unequivocally.

The United States continues to stress the need
for fair judicial processes for all to bring to justice
all perpetrators of violence and acts of terrorism. The
recent indictments brought by the Israeli Government
against the terrorists who perpetrated the Duma attack
represent a positive step, but more must be done to
ensure that those responsible for such attacks are held
accountable. It is also incumbent upon the Palestinian
Authority to do all that it can to counter incitement to
violence and to continue to press for calm. In addition,
in dealings with civilians and peaceful protests on both
sides, it is critical that every possible effort be made
to show restraint, guard against the loss of life and
de-escalate tensions.

The United States strongly opposes settlement
activity, including some steps that Israel has taken
this month. We are deeply concerned about reports
of a declaration of more than 370 acres in the Jordan
Valley, in the West Bank, as State land. We are also
deeply concerned about recent steps that appear to
have effectively created a new settlement south of Gush
Etzion. Some 70 per cent of the West Bank's Area C
has already been unilaterally designated as Israeli State
land or as being within the boundaries ofIsraeli regional
settlement councils. Steps aimed at advancing the Israeli
settlement project, including changing the designation
of land, issuing building tenders and constructing
new settlements, are fundamentally incompatible with
the two-State solution and raise legitimate questions
about Israel's long-term intentions. That concern
notwithstanding, let me make crystal clear, as have
Secretary Kerry and other United States Government
officials on multiple occasions, that settlement activity
can never itself be an excuse for violence. The United
States is also following with concern the demolitions
and evictions that have been undertaken by Israeli
authorities in several locations throughout the West
Bank and East Jerusalem. On 21 January, 16 people, of
whom six were children, were displaced, when Israeli
authorities demolished four homes in Jabal Al-Baba,
a village that lies within the area known as E-l.
Those actions reflect an ongoing trend of demolition,
displacement and land confiscation that continues to
undermine prospects for a two-State solution.

Also alarming are the grave humanitarian conditions
in the Gaza Strip, where Gazans face extraordinary
challenges in their daily lives. This month, the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA) launched a $403 million
appeal to meet urgent humanitarian needs in the West
Bank and Gaza, such as emergency food and medical
aid. We all must do our part to make sure that those
needs are met. We urge all Member States concerned
about the conditions in which Palestinians live to join
the United States in contributing to UNRWA's appeal
and assisting those in need.

As we have repeatedly made clear, we can continue
to look to both sides to demonstrate with actions and
policies a genuine commitment to a two-State solution.
To that end, Quartet envoys travelled to the region
last month to meet with the Israeli and Palestinian
leadership to explore ways to preserve a two-State
solutio. The envoys will meet again early next month in
Europe. We also encourage the parties to take steps to
address the issues underlying these challenges, such as
opening Gaza border crossing points, streamlining the
civilian workforce, addressing infrastructure needs and
promoting broader economic recovery.

Preventing the supply of illicit arms to Gaza is
crucial, as is supporting a process that results in the
Palestinian Authority's effective control of Gaza.

We understand the enormous political challenges
involved in grappling with those tough issues on both
sides, particularly in a climate of increased security
threats, terrorism and distrust. But, as we have seen,
the passage of time will only make those tough issues
harder, not easier, to resolve. We encourage leaders
to take steps that will preserve the possibility of two
States and further prospects for peace.

On Syria, we continue to be horrified by the
immeasurable human suffering caused by the country's
brutal conflict. We have spoken repeatedly here
and elsewhere about the atrocities and inhumane
conditions - all of them man-made - that the Syrian
people have been forced to endure, and yet the situation
just keeps getting worse.

According to the Secretary-General's most recent
report, an estimated 13.5 million people are now in
need of humanitarian assistance in Syria, 1.3 million
people more than in 2014. Six million of those in need
are children, nearly 1 million more than a year ago.
Those numbers raise the question: with all that we, as
the Council, know about the dire situation of the Syrian
people, and with all the resolutions we have adopted in
this Chamber to address this humanitarian catastrophe,
how can it be that the numbers continue to rise?

The conditions are particularly abysmal in besieged
areas, where, according to the United Nations, nearly
400,000 people are waging a daily struggle to merely
survive. The Secretary-General's report describes
United Nations access to these areas as "pitiful". Less
than 1 per cent of civilians in besieged areas received
food aid per month in 2015, and only 3 per cent
received health assistance. We have all seen the ghastly
consequences ofthese sieges in the reports on the 40,000
people trapped in Madaya. An anaesthesia technician
who works in Madaya's medical clinic, which had to
be moved to a basement after the above-ground facility
was bombed, told a reporter that he has started to give
the most malnourished children syrupy medicines
so that they could have some sugar. Maleka Jabir, an
85-year-old woman in the city, told a reporter, "I don't
go anywhere. Ijust crumple up and stay in bed", as she
was so stricken by hunger and health problems. Parents
told aid workers that they were giving their children
sleeping pills so that they would be spared being kept
awake by hunger pains.

Ifany here have not seen the haunting photos ofthose
children, you must force yourself to look at them and
see the anguish being inflicted on the most vulnerable
among us. We have a collective responsibility to hear
their pleas. Yet, while the suffering in besieged areas
has been vehemently condemned around the world, the
parties to the conflict continue to block humanitarian
aid from reaching those in need. And here I stress
particularly the Syrian regime. According to the
Secretary-General's report, of the 15 besieged areas,
two of them are besieged by armed opposition groups,
one by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL),
and 12 ofthe 15 by the Al-Assad regime, which sits here
at the United Nations as a Member State. Out of a total
of 113 inter-agency convoy requests sent by the United
Nations, tha Member State approved and completed
only 13. That is 13 approved and completed out of 113.
That means that 100 dire requests last year were not
completed. And for 80 of the requests, the Al-Assad
regime, again a United Nations Member State, did not
even bother to respond to the United Nations within
three months. This is not an isolated practice applied
in one place for a limited period of time. It is part of
a deliberate, systematic strategy aimed at killing and
displacing civilians.

It is true that a handful of convoys carrying food
and medical assistance were able to reach Madaya over
the last few weeks, and we commend the brave staff
of the United Nations and international humanitarian
groups and local actors who have pressed relentlessly
for the delivery of lifesaving aid. However, it would be a
grave mistake to think that starving people in besieged
areas will now survive. Much more aid is needed.
Fewer than two dozen people in serious need of medical
treatment who, according to the United Nations, will
die if they do not get out - only a subset of the 400
identified - have been evacuated from Madaya. And,
specialized medical and nutrition teams have been
denied re-entry, having paid brief visits before.

The 4 February conference in London, where
the United States delegation will be led by Secretary
of State John Kerry, provides an opportunity for the
international community to fill the growing gaps in the
United Nations funding of humanitarian appeals for
Syria. We urge all Member States to put forward robust
pledges aligned with the rising needs of the Syrian
people. However, the mobilization of funds has to be
accompanied by a much more aggressive mobilization
of political pressure on those who are cruelly blocking
aid from reaching desperate civilians and families.

We also must not forget that starving people to
death is far from the only form of suffering the parties
are inflicting on civilians. The Syrian regime continues
to drop barrel bombs on civilian areas, reportedly
killing at least 12 children in December and maiming
many more. The Syrian regime also continues to carry
out air strikes, such as the one that hit a crowded
market in Jisreen on 4 December, killing approximately
26 civilians.

The regime does not act alone, as we know. It has the
help of powerful supporters, including Russia. Credible
monitoring organizations have documented the effects
of Russian air strikes in Syria, which continue to target
opposition groups and have killed many hundreds of
people, the vast majority of them in non-ISIL controlled
areas and with no connection to ISIL whatsoever. In
Deir ez-Zor, not only has ISIL besieged the city, the
group has also, reportedly, executed and abducted
hundreds of civilians. The Secretary-General's report
described one video released by ISIL in December,
which showed six civilians being executed after being
accused of collaborating with the Syrian regime. The
United Nations reported that the executioners appeared
to be children under the age of 15.

All of that suffering and barbarity underscores the
urgency of working towards a political solution. To
that end, we welcome Staffan de Mistura's invitation
with regard to the talks to begin this coming Friday
in Geneva. The initiation of United Nations-facilitated
Syrian negotiations to reach a political transition in
accordance with the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) is a critical step towards ending the conflict in
Syria. We are encouraged that the high negotiations
committee assembled a broad representation of the
Syrian opposition and has demonstrated a genuine
commitment to participating in the political process.

Finally, let me turn very briefly to Lebanon. The
Council has stressed repeatedly that the Lebanese
people deserve and, indeed, require a fully functioning
Government to safeguard Lebanon from the threat of
ISIL and other terrorist groups, as well as to address the
country's significant economic challenges, including
those accruing by virtue of their hosting more than
1 million Syrian refugees, giving Lebanon the highest
per capita refugee concentration in the entire world. As
Lebanese discussions over the presidency continue, we
support adherence to the constitutional process to elect
a president, rather than any one candidate. It is critical
that Lebanon's leaders respect the Government's
policy of disassociation from regional conflicts, first
enshrined in the June 2012 Baabda Declaration. As
the Council has emphasized for years, Lebanon should
focus on strengthening its institutions, resolving
difficult internal disputes and building up the rule of
law. It should not become involved in Syria's civil war.

