The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Croatia, in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nobilo
(Croatia) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/ 1995/951, letter dated 15 November 1995 from the
Permanent Representative of Croatia to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/l995/979, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Argentina, the Czech Republic,
France, Germany, Honduras, Italy, the Russian Federation,
Rwanda, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and the United States of America.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following other documents: S/ 1995/843,
letter dated 6 October 1995 from the Permanent
Representative of Croatia to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council; and 5/1995/964,
letter dated 15 November 1995 from the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to vote on the draft resolution before it. Unless
I hear any objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the
vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I shall first call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements before the voting.


