Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): I wish to thank Mr.
Annabi for his useful and informative briefing on the
situation in East Timor. My delegation appreciates the
continuing progress in the work of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
regarding the administration, rebuilding and
rehabilitation of East Timor.

We note with appreciation that the National
Consultative Council has been carrying out its
functions. We would be most grateful to hear from Mr.
Annabi specifically on how progress in national
reconciliation among the people of East Timor is
proceeding. We believe that this is one of the very
important elements of the peace process in East Timor.

We commend in particular the personal efforts of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello. The inauguration of the
Civil Service Academy is a very positive achievement,
since the Academy will play a vital role in the future
development of the human resources of East Timor.
Similarly, the establishment of the first television
broadcast in East Timor and the opening of the first
land-border crossing between East Timor and Indonesia
are positive developments. The important role of the
media during peacekeeping operations cannot be
overemphasized.

The safe return of refugees from West to East
Timor remains one of the main outstanding matters
regarding the situation in East Timor. It is unfortunate
that the militias are continuing their campaign in the
refugee camps in West Timor. We regret the large
number of deaths and widespread destruction caused
by the intense flooding that continues to ravage West
Timor. It is unfortunate that at this crucial juncture
nature should add to the deaths and large-scale
displacements. We express our profound sympathy and
heartfelt condolences.

We commend UNTAET for its efforts to rescue
and assist the victims of these floods. We trust that
enough resources will be made available to salvage the
situation. In particular, we wish to echo the importance
of next month's Lisbon donors' conference.

