Mr. Ihsanoglu (Organization of Islamic Cooperation): At the outset, I would like to express
our thanks and appreciation to the Government of
Azerbaijan for taking the initiative of organizing
this unique and timely meeting. The fact that the
SecurityCouncil has accepted to convene today's
debate on cooperation between Organization of
Islamic Cooperation (OIC) and the United Nations
shows the importance it rightly attaches to it. I should
also like to highlight the importance of the excellent
ideas contained in the concept paper prepared by the
delegation of Azerbaijan (8/2013/588), which further
develops that important issue. I would also like to
take this opportunity to congratulate Azerbaijan for
its outstanding performance during its tenure as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council and in
the chair for this month.

I wish to express my gratitude to the Secretary-
General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his tireless efforts
in bringing increasing significance to the existing
relations and cooperation between the United Nations
and the OIC. I personally would like to thank him for
his kind words just now. We share his vision about the
strategic cooperation between the two organizations.

During my term in office as OIC Secretary-
General, I have established an important working
relationship with Mr. Ban Ki Moon. We have discussed
on a regular basis many issues that also top the agenda
of the Security Council, such as the Middle East, Syria,
Somalia, Mali and Afghanistan.

In his recent statement before the OIC Annual
Coordination Meeting of the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs on 27 September, on the sidelines ofthe general
debate of the General Assembly, the Secretary-General
requested that the OIC strengthen its partnership with
the United Nations in all areas of mutual concern and
interest. From our part, we attach great importance
to the relationship with the United Nations and stand
ready to develop an effective partnership with it to
promote peace, justice, human rights and development.

Based on our firm belief that the critical role
the international organizations play, we have made
tremendous efforts to build and sustain a network of
close cooperative relationships with the United Nations
and other international, regional and subregional
organizations in order to secure an inter-organizational
platform for the benefit of global peace, security and
economic development.

International peace and development are now
faced with many difficulties and challenges, and it
is imperative to respond to them collectively at the
national, regional and international levels. In a rapidly
changing world, strengthening cooperation between
the United Nations and the OIC will both promote
multilateralism and boost the international collective
security mechanism.

Proceeding from its new vision and mission of
moderation and modernization, the OIC has continued
to play an important role in the prevention, management
and resolution of conflicts, promoting post-conflict
reconstruction, defusing humanitarian crises,
combating terrorism and promoting socioeconomic
development in its member States as an important
contribution to global efforts in the promotion of
international peace and security. In that regard, the
OIC has expressed on many occasions that it stands
ready today to develop an effective partnership with
the United Nations to enhance cooperation in all fields
and to evolve early responses to disputes and emerging
crises.

As the second-largest political intergovernmental
organization, with 57 member States and five observers,
and with a mission to defend the interests andjust causes
of its member States, the OIC, based on its charter, was
established on the noble principles of peace, harmony,
tolerance, brotherhood and the equality of all human
beings, as preached by Islam. The preamble ofits charter
reaffirms the commitment of its member States to the
Charter of the United Nations. It has therefore, since
its establishment, set for itself as a primary task the
realization of the principles and purposes of the United
Nations, and it has striven to play a positive role in the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
perceptions of the member States of the organization,
all of which are also Members of the United Nations,
are identical to those of the vast majority of the United
Nations membership on important international issues.

The OIC charter stresses the importance of all
member States adhering to the principles of the
maintenance of international peace and security and
representing the national sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of other member States. An
OIC road map document, adopted in December 2005
and entitled 10-year programme of action to meet the
challenges facing the Muslim Ummah in the twenty-first
century, which parallels the Millennium Development
Goals, is one that we consider to be a blueprint for
reform, promoting moderation and modernization
in the Muslim world. It calls for strengthening OIC
activities in conflict prevention, confidence-building,
peacekeeping, conflict resolution and post-conflict
rehabilitation in cooperation with international and
regional organizations, the United Nations being the
first among them.

The OIC General Secretariat has made sustained
efforts to increase the role of the organization in the
maintenance of peace and security, conflict prevention
and conflict resolution. Under its programme and
agenda for reform, the Peace, Security and Mediation
Unit; a centre for the development of women; the
Independent Permanent Human Rights Commission;
and the International Cooperation and Humanitarian
Affairs Department have been established. Those
significant steps also indicate our understanding of
the importance of socioeconomic development, human
rights and humanitarian assistance in promoting peace
and security.

In that regard, the OIC has made valuable
contributions to the work of the United Nations in
the fields of conflict prevention, crisis management,
mediation, humanitarian assistance, the promotion
of human rights, the rule of law and sustainable
development through the many political, economic
and social instruments available to it. Accordingly, the
OIC has hosted at its headquarters in Jeddah a number
of international contact groups, such as those for
Afghanistan and Somalia, as well regional organizations,
mediation meetings and counter-terrorism workshops.
The United Nations-OIC general biannual consultation
meeting provides an excellent opportunity for both
organizations to identify all areas of cooperation with a
specific time frame for implementation.

We are also in the process of preparing a promising
joint action to support human development in Somalia.
The United Nations Office for South-South Cooperation
and the OIC General Secretariat are developing a project
for capacity in education, health care and sustainable
livelihoods in Somalia.

We look forward for more engagement with the
United Nations to enhance the capacity of the OIC on
the basis of its needs and strategic priorities to enable
it to act as an effective United Nations partner in
addressing the immediate and future challenges that
face the Muslim world. The United Nations-African
Union example of partnerships in the areas of peace,
security and development are good examples to be
followed in that regard.

Many of the issues on the agenda of the Security
Council relate to the Muslim world, and the OIC is
naturally seized of them. That fact demonstrates the
importance of having strong links of cooperation and
coordination between the OIC and the United Nations
in order to benefit from global and local approaches
to addressing those issues. At the same time, I would
like to emphasize the need of expediting the reform of
the Security Council by promoting its transparency,
accountability, adequate representation and full
democratization so as to enable it to play its full role in
the maintenance of international peace and security, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations. Our
principled position is that any reform of the Security
Council must ensure adequate representation for OIC
member States in any category of membership, given
that our organization represents 57 member States and
1.6 billion people.

While a period of extraordinary challenges is still
evolving in the Middle East, a credible peace process
towards a two-State solution remains a core priority for
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation. I would like
to reaffirm that the international community and this
organ in particular have a special responsibility to do
its utmost to solve the Palestinian question, according
to the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Arab
Peace Initiative and the Israeli-Palestinian agreements
reached within the framework of the Middle East peace
process.

The OIC believes that the key to reaching a
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East
lies in ending the Israeli occupation that started in
1967 and by establishing an independent and sovereign
Palestinian State. Therefore, we believe that the
ongoing direct Palestinian-Israeli peace negotiations
provide a valuable window of opportunity that should
not be missed. Creating conditions conducive to peace
also requires that all illegal and harmful acts, including
the construction of settlements, should be immediately
stopped.

At the same time, we remain committed to
assisting the Palestinian people in improving their
socioeconomic life. Therefore, the OIC is ready to build
a constructive partnership with the United Nations to
improve the socioeconomic life of the Palestinians in
the Palestinian territories, including occupied East
Jerusalem. The development agencies of both the OIC
and the United Nations can cooperate in creating a
better life for the Palestinians.

The OIC remains deeply concerned by the ongoing
conflict in Syria. We welcome all efforts aimed at
convening the "Geneva II" conference. However, we
believe that the Security Council needs to assume its
responsibility to do its utmost to protect the Syrian
people and to find a peaceful solution to the Syrian
conflict through political dialogue.

We are also concerned by Armenia's continued
occupation of the Azerbaijani territories of Nagorno
Karabakh, and we call for a resolution of that conflict
based on respect for the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and inviolability of the internationally
recognized borders of the Republic of Azerbaijan, in
line with Security Council resolutions in that regard.
Non-implementation of the Council's resolutions
undermines its authority and people's belief in justice
and in the possibility of peaceful political settlement.

While I commend the leading role played by the
United Nations and other partners in the restoration of
peace to two troubled OIC member States, Somalia and
Mali, we must continue to build on that partnership in
order to achieve durable stability in those two African
countries.

On the humanitarian front, the OIC and United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs conducted a joint needs assessment mission
in Syria in 2012 that resulted in a comprehensive
humanitarian response plan. Likewise, a similar
mission in the Sahel was conducted by our two
organizations, which visited the Niger, Burkina Faso
and Mali. Another joint mission was visited Mindanao
and the Philippines. Furthermore, several appeals have
been launched and some OIC member States have come
forward to alleviate the suffering of the vulnerable
and needy people in Mali. Our cooperation is also
continuing in Somalia. We have done our best to help
meet the humanitarian needs in Myanmar by facilitating
the provision of assistance from OIC member States
and civil society. We will discuss the matter with the
authorities of Myanmar during the expected Visit of
myself and a group of Ministers of Foreign Affairs
from the OIC member States to the country next month.
Under the mandate of its Charter, the OIC aims
to play a constructive role in helping non-member
countries with Muslim minorities to resolve any issues
with those minorities in order to strengthen their role
as bridges of friendship between their nations and the
Muslim world, in full respect for the national unity,
territorial integrity and sovereignty of the countries
hosting those minorities.

Polio eradication in affected OIC member States
continues to be a critical challenge for the OIC. We
are engaged in close cooperation with the World
Health Organization and the Global Polio Eradication
Initiative, as well as with the Bill & Melinda Gates
Foundation, in a wide campaign to eradicate polio in
our affected countries. We are involved in advocacy
and in mobilizing high-level political support for polio
vaccination programmes. We believe that more work
needs to be done before we are able to claim total polio
free-status in the OIC region. In that regard, we are
concerned by the recent spread of polio in the Horn of
Africa.

Due to the increase in the number of humanitarian
disasters in OIC member States, the OIC General
Secretariat has felt that there is a vital ned to establish
an OIC humanitarian emergency response fund in order
to promote collective humanitarian relief to the most
vulnerable segments of our populations whenever a
disaster strikes one of our member States.

One of the most daunting challenges facing the
international community is the radicalization of
communities based on religious faith and belief. The
religious and intercommunal hatred propagated by
some motivated and extremist individuals encourages
marginalization, negative stereotyping and racial
discrimination, posing a serious threat to global peace
and security. The OIC has been vigilant in exposing the
dangerous agenda of extremist elements and in raising
global awareness to combat religious intolerance,
stigmatization and negative stereotyping.

I would also like to emphasize the importance of the
political engagement and support of world leaders for
dialogue, mutual recognition, respect and cooperation
among the representatives of cultures, civilizations and
religions, as this issue has recently acquired greater
significance due to its implications for international
peace and security. The consensual passage of Human
Rights Council resolution 16/18 on combating religious
intolerance, which codified the eight points I identified
in my address to the fifteenth session of the Human
Rights Council, has been widely acknowledged as a
positive development and a triumph of multilateralism.
I would like to assure the Council that the OIC
will continue to work with its member States and the
international community as a whole to combat the
radicalization that leads to violent extremism and
terrorism. We believe that confronting that menace
requires political will and commitment on the part not
only of Governments but all segments of society.

The OIC has also been focusing on key development
issues, including the empowerment of women, children,
youth and civil society, in order to benefit from their
roles and contributions in the search for local remedies
to the challenges of conflict, underdevelopment and
radicalization. We also encourage all initiatives that
promote the positive contribution of religious and
traditional leaders to meeting those challenges.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that the OIC
is strongly committed to an active partnership with
the United Nations in promoting peace, security and
development. We have achieved a great deal together,
but I believe that more work remains to be done. With
the Council's support, both organizations can make our
world a much better place.

