Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the Secretary-General and Mr. Prendergast for
their briefings. We have listened carefully to both and
we agree that corruption erodes the economy, weakens
Government institutions and enables other, related
crimes, such as money-laundering and international
transfers of illegally derived funds, often used to
finance mechanisms in support of terrorist activities.
Similarly, corruption undermines the implementation
of the Sustainable Development Goals, in particular
Goal 16, regarding the building of robust institutions, a
challenge from which no State is exempt.

However, the fact that corruption affects all States
to varying degrees does not indicate that it constitutes
a threat to international peace and security per se. In
many cases, corruption derives from weak institutions
due to a lack of economic resources or regions with
armed conflict. It can also emerge where there is a
lack of State presence as a product of the key causes
of conflicts. We therefore believe that corruption is
fundamentally an issue that falls under the functions
and powers of the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council and the relevant subsidiary bodies
of the Organization. Those powers are set forth in the
Charter of the United Nations, and the Security Council
is duty-bound to respect that and to confine itself to
matters that constitute threats to international peace
and security.

The Security Council must identify threats to
international peace and security in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter, as stipulated in
Article 24, paragraph 2. The Council must also comply
with the Charter and with international law both in
its decisions and in its actions. The interference of
the Security Council in the functions and powers of
other organs of the United Nations is a distortion of the
purposes and principles of the Charter, undermines the
authority of those organs and violates the rights of all
Member States.

Including corruption as a threat to international
peace and security in the Council's agenda does not give
any added value and leads only to greater politicization
of the issue and heightened disagreement among States.
In that regard, Bolivia emphasizes that the Security
Council's decision to hold this informative briefing
should not be considered a precedent and should not
lead to undermining the authority or mandate of the
competent bodies in which the entire membership
participates or to the exploitation of this meeting for
ideological reasons. Likewise, it should neither lead
to the undermining of the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of States by using the Security
Council under the pretext of fighting corruption for
international peace and security, nor should it be used
for ideological reasons, as we said before. By the same
token, it should not be used as an excuse to undercut
legitimate and democratic Governments or to encourage
policies of regime change.

The Council should set an example of defending
and promoting the rule of law, respecting the sovereign
equality of States, the peaceful settlement of disputes
and non-interference in the domestic jurisdiction of any
State. Selective application and politicization of rules
that aggravate conflicts and weaken the credibility and
authority of the Security Council, and thus the United
Nations system, should be avoided.

The United Nations, and the international
community in general, should cooperate with Member
States in the creation and strengthening of their
institutions and the rule of law, assuming responsibility
themselves for fighting corruption, and I repeat, doing
that in strict respect for the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of States.

In Bolivia, President Evo Morales Ayma,
together with other authorities of the country, decided
voluntarily and for the first time in the history of
Bolivia, to renounce banking secrecy for the sake of
transparency - an example that should be replicated
throughout the world.

Moreover, at the international level, this year marks
the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of the United
Nations Convention against Corruption, which enjoys
broad international consensus and has served as an
international framework for cooperation to strengthen
prevention and mitigate the risks of corruption. At the
regional level, the member States of the Organization
of American States adopted the Lima Commitment to
tackle systemic corruption. Bolivia adhered to those
documents, as well as to the Inter-American Convention
against Corruption. There are also initiatives against
corruption in the framework of the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States and the Union of South
American Nations.

However, rules and regulations are not everything.
A strong political commitment to fight such a
phenomenon and take concrete actions to eliminate
that evil is needed. In that regard, it is necessary to
work on the elimination of tax havens, as well as to
design, adopt and implement measures to supervise and
control transnational corporations, which undermine
the sovereignty of States and in many cases encourage
corruption and the violation of human rights. As
Mr. Prendergast mentioned, the financial system is used
through those tax havens and banking secrecy, and in
conjunction with transnational corporations, to launder
money from criminal activities, including corruption
and the plundering of natural resources, which is used,
inter alia, to finance conflicts. That is why we must
fight corruption worldwide - first and foremost within
the global financial system.

In conclusion, we emphasize our conviction that
the promotion of the rule of law at the international
level is fundamental to make a reality a fairer world
and Organization that can deal with the phenomenon of
corruption effectively and in respect for the sovereignty
of all States.

