Mr. Mufioz (spoke in Spanish): Two years have
passed since Chile assumed the responsibility of
chairing the Al Qaeda and Taliban sanctions
Committee. It has been a demanding experience
requiring great sacrifices and, at the same time, an
honour and one of the most enriching experiences I
have acquired among my various duties during my
time on the Council, which now is under your
responsible and effective presidency, Mr. President.

In addition to sharing some objective facts on my
guidance of the Committee during the period, I would
like to reflect, from a personal point of view, on some
of the advances and challenges on which we should
continue working in order to improve the functioning
of this important Committee.

Over the past two years, we have held 80 formal
and informal meetings, with a constant workload. Now,
at the end of that period, I will focus my remarks on a
few principal points.

The first relates to the consolidated list. Since the
consolidated list is the main tool used by the
Committee, one of my major tasks as Chairman has
been to improve it, quantitatively and qualitatively. In
the first area, I would note that over the past two years,
88 individuals and 23 entities have been added to the
Committee's consolidated list. There have also been
more than 98 amendments to the list, with a view to
rectifying errors, adding information and clarifying
some points. Here, I have been able to count on the
valuable cooperation of the Secretariat staff working
with the Committee and on that of the Monitoring
Team.
Despite progress made, it is clear that much
remains to be done. The effectiveness of the list must
be enhanced, especially through cooperation on the
part of Member States. I urge them to continue to
propose in a proactive fashion for inclusion on the
consolidated list, recalling that resolution 1526 (2004)
reiterates that request to States and indicates that it is
necessary to propose such names unless to do so would
compromise investigations or enforcement actions. I
should also like to request that Member States should
continue to provide additional information so that the
quality of that information can continue to be
improved.

The report of the High-level Panel on Threats,
Challenges and Change (A/59/565) has just been
submitted to the General Assembly, and I would like to
make a preliminary reference to the chapter on
sanctions. Sanctions against Al Qaeda and the Taliban
and associated individuals and entities are not
traditional sanctions against countries: they are applied
by all States to a list of persons and entities, whatever
their place of residence or location. Frequently, the
subjects are elusive in nature or operate as charitable
organizations or legal or illegal enterprises. Moreover,
a large number of possible subjects do not appear on
the Committee's consolidated list and may not be
proposed by Member States for inclusion. But
paradoxically, those who are not listed could possibly
be the ones who could carry out the most serious
terrorist attacks, without any prior indication or
warning.

The report of the Panel requests that the Al Qaeda
and Taliban Sanctions Committee institute "a process
for reviewing the cases of individuals and institutions
claiming to have been wrongly included or retained"
(A/59/565, para. 152). That does not conform to
reality, as the Committee already has a process in its
guidelines to de-list individuals or entities. Moreover,
humanitarian exemptions were adopted in resolution
1452 (2002), which lists various reasons why we can
entertain such requests by States with respect to
individuals included on the list.

We think it highly important to continue to pay
great attention to the human rights dimension and due
process in using this instrument. This humanitarian
concern must be approached in a well-balanced fashion
with a view to ensuring that any concerns can be
addressed, without the list losing its effectiveness.

As I had said at a previous meeting, visits to
States have been very useful, both in obtaining useful
information on the implementation of the sanctions and
in promoting dialogue with Member States. During this
period I had the pleasure of visiting 21 countries:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Australia, Belgium in the context
of the European Union, Cambodia, Germany, Indonesia
twice, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy, the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Pakistan, the
Philippines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, Spain,
Switzerland, Thailand, Tunisia and the United Arab
Emirates. I believe that visits to selected countries are
of core importance in establishing dialogue and gaining
field knowledge of how sanctions are being
implemented, as well as what problems, successes and
suggestions may exist. Because other Committee
Chairmen will travel in the future, it would be a good
idea to consider joint visits when appropriate. It is also
important for dialogue with States to take place
periodically in New York.

I would like to emphasize that one of the most
recurrent features I have observed is the need for long-
term technical cooperation with countries that need it
in order to strengthen their capabilities to combat
terrorism. Many countries requested this during our
visits. Some of them, fortunately very few, naively
believe that, although they do not have the appropriate
legislation or the necessary instruments, since there
have been no terrorist attacks on their territory, they
are safe from this scourge and do not have to risk
damaging their economic or touristic image by
requesting cooperation. They are wrong. The greatest
security for a country is international cooperation to
strengthen its capabilities, as no country is exempt
from this global threat. Moreover, we should recall that
Security Council decisions are not optional in nature.
Rather, they are binding under Chapter VII. In any
case, the broad majority of countries understand this.

Another aspect that I have noted is the need to
continue close cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and with the Committee established
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1540 (2004).
This cooperation should be extended to other bodies
and agencies of the United Nations, as well as other
international bodies. Personally, I began some fruitful
collaboration with the European Union, Interpol and
others. I hope that this will continue and will be
consolidated. International cooperation in intelligence-
sharing is, as mentioned by many countries, essential.

There is another point that I believe is very
important. A continuous dialogue must be pursued
among cultures. We must avoid approaches based on
the "clash of civilizations" when combating terrorism,
nor should we identify the phenomenon with any
particular religion, culture or people. That could lead
to discrimination or intolerance, which, in the long
term, will only serve the purposes of terrorism.

With regard to certain radical interpretations of
Islam, authorities in many countries requested me,
during my visits, to pay more attention to statements
by moderate Islamic leaders who condemn Al Qaeda
terrorism and that of its associates. Indonesia,
Philippines, Thailand and others stated this very
clearly. In other words, terrorism must also be fought
on the ideological plane.

Another aspect that I have noted during this
period is that poverty, discrimination and social
exclusion abet terrorism. Youth frequently do not have
opportunities and find a sense of identity, esteem and
social support in terrorist organizations. It is only the
leaders of terrorist groups who come from comfortable
and wealthy sectors and have higher education, but
most of the base comes from a modest origin. It is clear
that, whatever the underlying causes, nothing can
justify terrorism.

I must add, as many studies on Al Qaeda have
said, that the war in Iraq has attracted and encouraged
"jihad" fighters, who are using that country as a theatre
of operations, a theatre of opportunity. As long as the
conflict in Iraq is prolonged and becomes more deep-
rooted, recruitment for Al Qaeda will flourish. The
expansion of democracy, the rule of law and pluralism
erode the support for the extremist ideology of Al
Qaeda.

I believe that the persistence of the conflict in the
Middle East also encourages the sense of injustice,
frustration and hatred, which serves as a breeding
ground for Al Qaeda terrorism. If progress is not made
on the road map and peace between Palestinians and
Israelis is not achieved, if the right of Palestine to be a
sovereign State living in peace and security, side by
side with Israel is denied, the perception of unequal
and degrading treatment will grow in the Islamic world
and this will be used by Al Qaeda, whose manipulative
message seeks to offer a palliative for the widely felt
injury to dignity and pride.

Finally I would like to speak of the relative
effectiveness of different sanctions measures. The
freezing of financial assets and economic resources has
been one of the greatest successes in the
implementation of the sanctions, and it has been
possible to freeze a substantial quantity of such assets.
More than $135 million deposited in the accounts of
individuals or entities has been frozen throughout the
world. Many countries have established financial
intelligence units and have implemented the
recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force.
However, since Al Qaeda has sought new ways to
finance its operations, it is essential that the Committee
continue to carefully monitor alternative means of
collecting and transferring funds.

Concerning travel bans, although there have been
no reports of persons having been detained at the
border control points, I think it would be excessive to
assume that the measure has been a failure. It is
possible that the Committee's travel ban has had an
important deterrent effect on individuals on the list. In
other words, there may be individuals who have been
prevented from travelling, or have been forced to do so
illegally. As a preventive measure, this has been very
important, although I must note that implementation
should continue to be improved, including through
cooperation with Interpol.

With reference to the arms embargo, I believe
that progress has been made. Terrorists have been
unable to gain commercial access to military weapons,
since States have exercised proper control. Now we
must make further efforts to ensure that Al Qaeda does
not continue to have access to small arms and light
weapons or, even more important, to dual-use material.
We therefore believe that there must be, inter alia, an
international instrument which would make it possible
to identify and trace small arms and light weapons.
Accordingly, the Council should promote the adoption
of good practices for the reliable regulation of
materials such as ammonium nitrate, practices which
already exist in some countries.

In that connection, it must not be forgotten that
the effectiveness of sanctions depends upon their
implementation by Member States and upon the
cooperation of those States in combating Al Qaeda.

There are clear distinctions in the implementation
of sanctions. While some States have greater means for
complying with their obligations, they have not yet
demonstrated in their reports that they have fully
implemented the measures. I believe that in future the
Committee, with the support of the Monitoring Team,
should focus on those States and that they should
together explore specific cooperative steps towards
raising the level of compliance.

In conclusion, I note that the sanctions regime is
relatively new, but it has evolved from suggesting a
few names for the list to providing sufficient
information to identify the subjects of sanctions and to
explain the reasons for which they have been added to
the list. It has grown from listing individuals and
entities to elaborating procedures for removing names
from the list and applying procedures for humanitarian
exceptions. The focus of the Committee has moved
from the preparation of reports on sanctions
implementation by States, to concrete, active dialogue
with States. Because of the unique nature of the
regime, other sanctions regimes provide no example to
follow or imitate. Frequently, members of the
Committee have had to create new procedures on the
fly.

I believe that the Committee is playing an
essential role in combating terrorism and that it should
therefore continue to act quickly and efficiently.

While the struggle against terrorism has made
headway, the international community is far from
winning the war against terrorism. As an extremist
ideology and an extremist message, Al Qaeda has
grown, and today enjoys greater support as a
decentralized network of terrorist groups than it did
when Osama bin Laden established it as a structured
organization. Therefore, the efforts of the international
community must be doubled, given that we are facing a
challenge that is not only military, but also eminently
political, diplomatic, sociological and ideological.
Accordingly, cooperation, through the United Nations
is essential and irreplaceable.

Finally, I want to thank the members of the
Security Council for their exceptional work in the
Committee. It has been an honour to work with a group
of diplomats who showed great professionalism,
dedication and enthusiasm, and who have spent long
days working on highly complex tasks. As an example,
I would mention Carla Serazzi of my Mission, a
tireless professional who often coordinated the work of
the members of the Committee. I would also like to
mention the support I have received from the panel of
experts, first of all those of the Monitoring Group, as
well as those of the Monitoring Team, headed by
Mr. Richard Barrett, whose work has been
professional, effective and important. Similarly, I
would like, in particular, to emphasize the invaluable
and dedicated work of the Secretariat, through its
sanctions section, and in particular, the work of
Ms. Tatiana Cosio, Mr. Ulrik Ahnfeldt-Mollerup and
other members of the team. In addition, all of my
colleagues in the Council have always given solid
support for our work - which is in the common
interest. Without their unwavering and tireless support,
we would have been unable to advance in so many
different areas. I thank them, one and all.

