Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Sir, for convening this meeting to enable me, as
Chairman of the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations, to share with Council members some of our
thoughts on the activities of that Group.

During its chairmanship of the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations in 2015, Chad has organized
nine thematic discussions on cross-cutting issues
related to peacekeeping operations. These have included
the following topics: traditional peacemaking versus
peace enforcement; the safety and security of United
Nations peacekeepers: asymmetric threats; lessons
learned from the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM); the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali: apeacekeeping
operation in the context of the fight against terrorism;
bilateral and multilateral support for capacity-building
for troop- and police-contributing countries; lessons
learned from the Force Intervention Brigade of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO);
the importance of regional peacekeeping initiatives
in the context of partnerships; and strengthening the
strategic dialogue among the Security Council, troop-
and police-contributing countries and the Secretariat.
In addition to the meetings on these eight topics, the
Group also held a special meeting with the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations.

All of these issues are important and have been the
subject of intense discussions in the Working Group,
but my remarks will focus on only some of them so as
to highlight the most salient points.

It has emerged from various recent reports on
peacekeeping operations and from discussions held
at various levels that there is a clear gap between the
classical doctrine of peacekeeping and the realities
of today's world. In that regard, while we understand
and respect the legitimate misgivings over the use of
force in peacekeeping, it should be noted that in certain
exceptional circumstances, the resort to the use of force
is inevitable. Despite the controversial nature of the
activities of the MONUSCO Force Intervention Brigade
in favour of peace in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo following the adoption of resolution 2098
(2013), the results of this intervention are instructive.

If United Nations doctrine cannot accommodate the
use offorce, even when necessary and despite the radical
change in the context ofpeacekeeping operations, it will
be essential to strengthen partnerships with regional
and subregional organizations by availing them of the
means necessary to maintain or enforce peace in their
respective regions. In this light, it is time to strengthen
the strategic, operational and tactical partnership
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
such as the African Union, including by addressing
the issue of financing African Union peace operations
authorized by the Security Council. AMISOM. is an
example of trilateral cooperation among the United
Nations, the African Union and the European Union
that has had tangible results. This operation, initiated
by Africa and supported by external partners in the

financial, logistical and technical areas, is a model that
shows the way forward.

Furthermore, given the multiple risks and threats
that are increasingly facing peacekeepers, it is urgent
to strengthen their safety and security, particularly
against improvised explosive devices. In that regard, I
welcome the commitment of all States members of the
Security Council, and thank New Zealand in particular
for having organized, together with Chad and the
International Peace Institute, a workshop on this issue.

The maintenance of peace is a collective enterprise
to which all United Nations Member States should
contribute to the extent of their possibilities. As such,
we should focus particularly on strengthening the
capacities of countries contributing troops and police
personnel, which put their best men and women at the
disposal of the Organization. It is extremely important
for the wealthy countries that enjoy an advantage
in technology, information, equipment and training
experience to share with those that do not.

In addition, regarding the strategic dialogue among
the Security Council, troop-contributing countries
and the Secretariat, it is critical that these three actors
enhance their consultations in informal and formal
meetings. In that regard, the major difficulties of such
dialogue, which is deemed to be inadequate, are, on
the one hand, the lack of meaningful consultation with
troop-contributing countries before the formulation,
adjustment or replacement of mandates and the
drawdown of operations; and on the other, the inadequate
exchange of information relating to the aforementioned
aspects. In that regard, the troop-contributing countries
are deeply frustrated at not receiving the necessary
information, or draft resolutions and presidential
statements on peacekeeping operations, with enough
advance time to share their views on these aspects of
mission mandates. The Council must respond to these
legitimate concerns.

Lastly, I stress the need to pay attention to the work
and recommendations of the Working Group so that
they can be translated into deed.

I cannot conclude without expressing my gratitude
to all who have shared their views with the members
of the Working Group. I refer in particular to officials
of the Secretariat and the African Union Commission;
the Permanent Observer of the African Union, the
Permanent Observer of the European Union and the
Permanent Representatives of Uganda, Mali, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Bangladesh and New
Zealand; and the Deputy Permanent Representatives
of the United States of America, France, Malawi and
Japan.

I congratulate Senegal, which will assume the
leadership of the Working Group in 2016, and wish it
every success in its chairmanship.

