Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation extends a warm welcome to you, Mr. Deputy
Foreign Minister, and congratulates Mr. Geir Pedersen,
Special Envoy Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, for his very informative briefing on the latest
developments in the political process in Syria. My
delegation welcomes his mediation efforts and good
offices at having the Syrian parties firmly commit to
dialogue and make the necessary compromises with a
view to creating the conditions for a lasting return to
peace and stability in Syria.

My country believes that it is imperative to make
the Constitutional Committee operational and to
place it at the heart of the political process to end the
crisis, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). We
therefore welcome the announcement by the Secretary-
General, on 23 September, of the decision of the Syrian
Government and the Syrian Negotiations Commission
to form a credible, balanced and inclusive Constitutional
Committee, of which the United Nations would be the
facilitator. Accordingly, Cote d'Ivoire calls for strong
support from the international community, and in
particular from the Security Council, to ensure that
the commitment by the Syrian parties is realized in
the near future. In addition, my delegation encourages
Mr. Pedersen to continue his consultations with
stakeholders in order to ensure that the Constitutional
Committee is inclusive, which is a prerequisite for its
credibility and effectiveness. We also very much hope
that the meeting scheduled for 30 October in Geneva,
under the auspices of the United Nations, will enable
the effective establishment of the Constitutional
Committee in order to inject new momentum into the
political process to resolve the crisis in Syria.

As vital as the Constitutional Committee is, it
remains but a link in the chain of requirements that
will determine the return of lasting peace and stability
in Syria. It is essential that current efforts towards a
political solution to the Syrian conflict benefit from a
calm environment, achieved through an immediate and
lasting cessation ofhostilities, which will allow for better
management of the situation of refugees and internally
displaced persons. In that regard, Cote d'Ivoire welcomes
the unilateral truce decreed by the Russian Federation
and Government forces in Idlib province on 31 August.
We fervently hope that the parties to the conflict will
take more confidence-building measures, including the
release ofprisoners. In addition, Cote d'lvoire urges the
belligerents to respect the ceasefire in order to allow
for, among other things, the delivery of humanitarian
aid to people in distress. My country also calls on
them to respect human rights law and international
humanitarian law, in particular by refraining from any
attacks on health and education infrastructure.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire once again welcomes
the commitment of Syrian actors to form a credible,
balanced and inclusive Constitutional Committee,
which is an encouraging step in the right direction. We
reaffirm our full support for the actions and initiatives
of the Special Envoy taken with a view to achieving a
peaceful and lasting settlement of the Syrian crisis in
keeping with resolution 2254 (2015).

