Mr. Owada (Japan): In his report of 12 January on
the United Nations Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA),
the Secretary-General states that although some progress
has been made toward concluding the peace process in
Angola, the persistent delays in implementing the Lusaka
Protocol continue to give us cause for deep concern. Japan
shares this assessment. As a member of the Security
Council, and as a country that has been contributing to the
peace process, particularly in the areas of demobilization
and demining, Japan considers these delays profoundly
regrettable.

Against this background, my delegation finds it
encouraging that a timetable for implementing the Lusaka
Protocol was agreed to and approved by the Joint
Commission on 9 January. As stressed in the draft
resolution on which we are about to vote, it is essential for
the Government of Angola and the Uniao Nacional para a
Independencia Total de Angola (UNITA) - urgently and
in accordance with this timetable - to complete the
implementation of all their obligations under the Lusaka
Protocol and to fulfil all remaining obligations under the
"Acordos de Paz" as well as relevant Security Council
resolutions. It is important that UNITA in particular bear in
mind the Council's readiness to review the sanctions
imposed by its resolution 1127 (1997) of 28 August 1997
or to consider additional sanctions, depending on
UNITA's implementation of its obligations according to
this timetable. In this connection, my delegation notes
with grave concern that aircraft are landing in territory
controlled by UNITA in violation of the sanctions
imposed by resolution 1127 (1997). We call upon all
Member States, and particularly Angola's neighbours, to
abide strictly by these sanctions.

In view of the commitment of both of the Angolan
parties to adhere to the timetable, Japan agrees that it is
appropriate to extend the mandate of MONUA, including
its military task force, for an additional three months,
until 30 April, as recommended by the Secretary-General.
I wish to emphasize that it is essential for the successful
completion of the tasks of MONUA that the Government
of Angola and, particularly, UNITA cooperate fully with
MONUA.

In this context, I should like once again to reiterate
the strong hope of my delegation that President dos
Santos and Mr. Savimbi will in the near future meet with
each other directly, at a venue within Angola, with a view
to further promoting peace and national reconciliation. For
all these reasons, my delegation is going to vote in favour
of the draft resolution before us.

At this juncture, my delegation wishes to express its
grave concern about the fact that, despite the repeated
calls of the Security Council for the withdrawal of all
foreign forces from the Republic of the Congo, Angolan
Government troops have not yet been withdrawn from
their intervention in the Republic of the Congo. This
situation is unacceptable. The immediate withdrawal of
Angolan troops from that country is called for.

I should like to close my brief statement by paying
tribute to the Secretary-General and to his Special
Representative, Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye, and all the
personnel of MONUA, as well as to the three observer
States for their ongoing and tireless efforts in the pursuit
of peace and stability in Angola.

