Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): We warmly welcome Her Excellency Retno
Lestari Priansari Marsudi, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Indonesia.

We align our statement to that to be delivered later
by Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent Observer
of the African Union to the United Nations.

I thank the presidency of Indonesia for having
organized this very timely high-level open debate. I
thank also the Secretary-General and the two briefers,
Lieutenant General Elias Rodrigues Martins Filho and
Mr. Bjorn Holmberg, for their edifying briefings.

Equatorial Guinea believes that moving towards
and investing in stable and lasting peace requires that
important social and institutional transformations
take place in a State. Decisive action is required that
guarantees the rights of each citizen; communities
must be responsible as concerns the rights and duties
of their peoples; and relationships among social,
public and private stakeholders must be based on
justice, transparency, citizen security, equity, care
for the environment, and respect for difference and
social dialogue.

Equatorial Guinea believes that however we may
live and interrelate, peacekeeping is the responsibility
ofeach one ofus within our respective societies. Success
in this area will require new skills and capacities,
through the contributions of all States Members of the
United Nations, and international, regional, subregional
and social organizations and institutions - in short,
cooperation among all States.

Peacebuilding must be seen as something that goes
beyond just ending war. Peacebuilding requires actions
aimed at tackling learnt prejudices, developing empathy
for others, promoting a change in mentality that opens
the way to new relationships in which violence and
force are not ways of achieving results and resolving
conflicts, and this must be done through dialogue and
in a peaceful way.

In order to achieve this complex set of actions,
society, as a whole and at the international level, must
bring to bear its full potential, deploy its full capacities
and create connections so that it can transform itself
as a society, including by seeking strategies that will
allow it to enhance well-being and respect for human
dignity and guarantee human rights, justice and equity.

Improving the security and the performance of
United Nations peacekeeping personnel undoubtedly
means including, valuing and implementing in practice
all the aspects contained in the Declaration of Shared
Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations, presented by the Secretary-General on
25 December 2018, during the seventy-third session
of the General Assembly. The same is true of all
the other strategies set out during the recent high-
level Peacekeeping Ministerial on the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative (see S/PV.8508), at which the
following main objectives were established: generating
specialized high-performance capacities for the United
Nations regarding peacekeeping so as to meet ever-
changing needs and tackle new challenges, in particular
increasing capacities for rapid deployment and the
training of units that speak the local language, and
strengthening compliance with standards of training
and performance, including in addressing security and
protection issues.

Additional objectives are revitalizing political
determination and networks to support the United
Nations in its efforts to reform and further galvanize
support for Member States so as to enable them to
meet their financing commitments for the effective
implementation of action for peacekeeping; and
undertaking substantial reforms to improve the
functional structure of peacekeeping operations,
making them more coherent, agile and effective.

My delegation welcomes the fact that the Action
for Peacekeeping initiative represents the main agenda
and is an agent of change that affects all aspects of the
laudable work done by United Nations peacekeepers
and strengthens missions charged with maintaining
international peace and security, thanks to the impetus
to collective action by peacekeeping personnel from
all Member States as well as the Security Council,
the General Assembly, financial contributors, troop-
and police-contributing countries, host countries,
intergovernmental and regional organizations and
the Secretariat.

In that regard, further efforts are necessary to
devise and adopt mechanisms aimed at putting into
practice, according to our shared, mutually-agreed-
on commitments, all the objectives listed as areas for
improvement pursuant to the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative and in line with the shared road map.

Allow me to conclude with an observation: it is
imperative for international peace and security that
the African Union be endowed with the resources
necessary to fulfil its subsidiary responsibility under
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. This
requires sustainable and predictable financing of the
peacekeeping operations carried out by the African
Union under a Security Council mandate, and also that
the troops undertaking these missions be provided with
the necessary training, capacities and equipment. This
is an issue of logic and justice that is key to achieving
our shared goal of silencing the guns in Africa and
across the world.

We conclude by paying well-deserved tribute
to the laudable contribution made by Indonesia to
peacekeeping operations.

