Sheikha Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
and your delegation on your election as a member of
the Security Council and on your assumption to the
presidency of the Council for this month. I wish you
every success. By the same token, I would like to
congratulate the other Member States that acceded
to the Council this year and to thank the outgoing
members. I also wish to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his briefing this morning.

Today we are discussing the situation in the Middle
East, including the question of Palestine, in the light
of international impetus resulting from the efforts of
the American Administration to reconcile Palestinian
and Israeli viewpoints and to reach an agreement
between Palestine and Israel. The peace process is the
best way to achieve stability in the region. The question
of Palestine is a critical issue for all Arabs. Qatar and
all Arab States reiterate the Arab commitment and the
basis and principles set out in the Arab Peace Initiative
to achieve the comprehensive peace in the region to
which they aspire. It is important that any agreement
recognize Palestinian national rights and be based on
putting an end to the occupation, the achievement of
self-determination, the restoration of the Palestinian
territories occupied since 1967, in accordance with
the Arab Peace Initiative, and withdrawal from the
occupied Arab territories. It must also underscore the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people.

In that connection, we would like to state that, in
order for any agreement to succeed, Israel must refrain
from threatening the establishment of an independent,
viable and sovereign Palestinian State. We would like to
reiterate our warning with regard to the consequences
of Israeli policies that are an obstacle to peace. Such
policies include in particular its fait accompli strategy,
its settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem, the use or threat
of use of force, the exploitation of Palestinian national
resources, especially water, the continuing detention
of Palestinians, the demolition of homes and villages,
expulsions, the ongoing attacks on the Al-Aqsa Mosque
and the blockade on Gaza. We underscore the need for
the Palestinian people to enjoy their inalienable rights
and we continue to express our solidarity with the
Palestinians. That people's acquisition of their national
rights is a precondition for the settlement and peace to
which we aspire.

We would also like to emphasize the need for
Palestinian national reconciliation on the basis of
the Doha and Cairo agreements. The international
community must pave the way for achieving such a
reconciliation.

The beginning ofa new year in the Syrian revolution
doubtless provides the opportunity to pause and reflect
on the grave human rights violations and war crimes
perpetrated by the regime with impunity. According to
international organizations and human rights groups,
the Syrian Government has used chemical weapons and
taken the lives of tens of thousands of Syrian civilians
at the hands of the regime and its loyal militia.

Is it possible that some people still listen to the
claims of that regime? We help to combat terrorism and
must remember some facts. As the new year begins, the
Syrian regime is continuing its indiscriminate bombing
of civilians and its criminal bombardment of Aleppo,
discharging barrel bombs on densely populated areas
and schools. The number of victims of barrel bombs
exceeds the total of chemical weapons victims. The
Syrian regime continues to besiege hundreds of
thousands of people and to pursue a policy of starvation
to death. It impedes access to humanitarian assistance.
There is also the deadly blockade of the Palestinians in
the Yarmouk camp. More than 40 children, women and
elderly people are dying of starvation. Is that part of
fighting terrorism or terrorism itself?

Syrian refugees continue to flood into neighbouring
States. We thank Jordan, Turkey and Lebanon and
all neighbouring States for their efforts to alleviate
the suffering of Syrian refugees. The international
community must continue to provide assistance to those
countries. I would also like to thank the Government
of Kuwait and the Secretariat for having convened
the second International Humanitarian Pledging
Conference for Syria.

The events in Syria require the international
community, including the Security Council, to shoulder
its responsibilities in the face of this unprecedented
humanitarian catastrophe, which has led to louder
voices calling for further pressure and the adoption of
a decisive resolution so as to stem the suffering of the
Syrian people, put an end to the criminal actions and
bring the perpetrators of such crimes to justice. The
convening of the second Geneva Conference on Syria
requires the international community to assume its
responsibility in achieving the aspiration of the Syrian
people for freedom and decent living conditions. We
hope that the Geneva conference will find a solution.
The Syrian regime must not be allowed to mark time
and continue its war of genocide against the Syrian
people.

