Ms. Bird (Australia): At the outset, Australia joins
others in strongly condemning the horrific bombing in
Kabul on 31 May - a shocking attack to take place
during the holy month of Ramadan. In a letter of
condolence to President Ghani Ahmadzai and in his
remarks to the Australian Parliament, Prime Minister
Turnbull restated Australia's commitment to supporting
Afghanistan in its fight against terrorism and its long-
term security and development.

Attacks like those only strengthen our resolve
to stand with the Afghan people to achieve peace
and prosperity. We stand with the National Unity
Government as it pursues unity and stability for
Afghanistan's future. We urge the people ofAfghanistan
to maintain solidarity despite their frustration and
suffering, and commend the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan in encouraging
political dialogue through the use of its good offices
in Kabul.

The events of the last quarter underline the
ongoing need for the international community as a
whole to stand with Afghanistan as it works to end
the cycle of violence. To that end, Australia recently
announced an increase to its military commitment in
Afghanistan to approximately 300 personnel so as to
support the development of the long-term capabilities
of Afghanistan's security forces. That important work
is part of our broader commitment to Afghanistan's
governance and reform agenda, because securing a
future for Afghanistan is notjust about security.

We commend Afghanistan's commitment
to implementing reform and note the important
progress achieved, including improved projections
for economic growth this year. The revised penal
code and anti-corruption initiatives are commendable
achievements in connection with governance and the
rule of law. Positive steps on human rights, particularly
withdrawing the reservation to the Optional Protocol
to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
are also welcome. To build on that progress, we urge
sustained momentum on electoral reform as a critical
building block for democratic progress. We were
encouraged to hear here today that an announcement
on a date for delayed parliamentary elections may
be imminent.

We also congratulate Afghanistan on inaugurating
the Kabul process initiative. Afghanistan's ownership
of the regional discussion about sustainable peace
demonstrates a commitment to seek fresh, smart and
practical ideas on how stability can be achieved. We
encourage Afghanistan's neighbours and partners
to join with the National Unity Government in that
effort. We welcome the recent constructive engagement
between Prime Minister Sharif and President Ghani
Ahmadzai. The international community stands with
Afghanistan and is ready to support Kabul as it leads
on finding solutions to Afghanistan's challenges.

In conclusion, Afghanistan remains at the forefront
of global counter-terrorism efforts. Recent events in
London, Manchester, Tehran, Egypt and Afghanistan
itself serve to underline the potential consequences
of failure. Afghanistan remains an urgent priority for
regional and international security, and it remains
essential that we act together in support.

