Mr. Vaultier Mathias (Portugal) (spoke in French):
I would like to commend you for convening this open
debate, Mr. President.

Portugal attaches particular importance to the
protection of civilians and aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered shortly by the observer of
the European Union. We would also like to make some
additional remarks in our national capacity.

The celebration of the seventieth anniversary of
the Geneva Conventions and the twentieth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1265 (1999), on the
protection of civilians, reminds us of the urgent need
to strengthen the protection of populations affected by
armed conflict, in strict compliance with international
humanitarian law. In that regard, Portugal subscribes
to the Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians,
which provide a committed and guiding framework for
our collective action, and we encourage other Member
States to accede to them.

Our first priority should be the application and
execution of existing directives and commitments. The
Security Council should enhance its activities for the
protection of civilians. As a member of the Group of
Friends on the Protection ofCiVilians in Armed Conflict,
we call on the Security Council to systematically
and consistently demand that Member States and
parties to armed conflicts fulfil their obligations
under international humanitarian law. In that regard,
it is deplorable that starvation is increasingly being
used as a weapon of war, in violation of international
humanitarian law. We therefore welcome the ongoing
debate among the States parties to the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court on altering the
current legal framework with regard to accountability,
as proposed by Switzerland.

The latest report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2019/373)
stresses the importance of prevention. As we are
aware, violence against civilians is often a predictor of
conflict. It is therefore all the more important for the
United Nations and Member States to further invest in
early-warning and early-action mechanisms to ensure
the protection of civilians. I would also like to express
particular support for the work of Adama Dieng, the
Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, and
Karen Smith, the Special Adviser on the Responsibility
to Protect.

Portugal's commitment to the principles of the
protection of civilians can be seen in its participation
in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
in which the Portuguese contingent plays a particularly
active role in protecting the population. Portugal ensures
that all its forces and national divisions are trained in
international humanitarian law and human rights so
that they can fully execute their tasks, including the
protection of civilians, when that is at stake.

Since protracted conflicts and extreme Violence
usually result in mass displacement, it is also essential
to ensure the protection of internally displaced
persons and refugees, without neglecting the issue of
missing persons.

In conclusion, and looking to the future, we
must build on the successes of the past 20 years and
strengthen our commitment to making the protection of
civilians a priority of the Security Council.

