Ms. King (Australia): I would like to thank the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
for her informative and valuable briefing to the Council
on the work of the Office of the Prosecutor in relation
to the situation in Libya.

Australia remains concerned about the volatile
political and security situation in Libya. We recognize
that delivering effective justice in Libya is dependent
on building stability and security in the country,
and the recent attacks on Libya's parliament and on
political leaders and security personnel are disturbing
reminders of the challenges the country faces. National
leadership, of course, is critical to addressing the
security situation and keeping the political transition
on track. We urge the Libyan authorities to continue
to support the ongoing constitutional drafting process
and rule-of-law reforms, and to continue their close
cooperation with the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya. Security sector reform is a crucial part of that
and must be a priority. As long as militias rather than
the State retain physical custody of detainees, as long
as witnesses are too scared to testify and as long as
judges are threatened, it will be difficult for justice to
be delivered in a manner consistent with international
standards.

We are concerned about the adoption of amnesty
laws that provide revolutionaries with immunity from
prosecution. We urge Libya to respect the principles
of the equality before the law and to ensure that those
believed to be most responsible for the commission
of serious international crimes are held to account,
regardless of what side they fought on. The Prosecutor
has again drawn our attention to the thousands of
conflict-related detainees who continue to be held
without due process, some of whom have reportedly
been subject to torture and other ill treatment. We
recognize the progress made, but we recall resolution
2144 (2014) and again urge Libya to ensure that the
detainees in question are transferred to effective
State control as swiftly as possible, that the basis of
their detention is judicially reviewed and that those
responsible for arbitrary detention or mistreatment are
held to account.

We acknowledge that the challenges facing Libya
are considerable. Its judicial system was all but
destroyed under the Al-Qadhafi regime. But it is vital
that Libya ensure that the rights of all those defendants
being tried for serious crimes are upheld in full.

Turning more specifically to the activities of the
International Criminal Court, we welcome the fact that
Libya has pursued its challenge to the ICC jurisdiction
in the SaifAl-IslamAl-Qadhafi andAbdullahAl-Senussi
cases in a manner that is consistent with the Rome
Statute. We are conscious that Libya remains under
a pending obligation to surrender Mr. Al-Qadhafi to
the ICC, notwithstanding its appeal of the Pre-Trial
Chamber's decision rejecting its admissibility
challenge. We also note that the admissibility decision
in the Al-Senussi case is under appeal. It is essential that
Libya do nothing to frustrate ongoing ICC processes,
pending the decisions of the Appeals Chamber.
We underline the importance of Libya meeting its
obligations to cooperate with the Court, including by
surrendering defendants in accordance with the ICC
decisions.

Australia welcomes the Prosecutor's advice on steps
taken to implement the memorandum of understanding
concluded between the Office of the Prosecutor and the
Libyan Government on burden-sharing in relation to
investigations, prosecutions and an arrest strategy. We
hope that continued engagement between the ICC and
the Libyan authorities will ensure that their respective
efforts can have a multiplying effect and serve as a
model for a collaborative partnership between the
ICC and States that have the will, but perhaps lack the
capacity, to hold all key perpetrators to account. We
furthermore hope that Libya's insights into the Rome
Statute system will encourage it to accede to the Statute.

Noting the Prosecutor's advice that several persons
of interest have fled Libya, Australia calls on other
Member States, particularly Libya's neighbours, to
cooperate with the ICC to ensure that those most
responsible for the most serious international crimes
committed in Libya are brought to justice.

It is equally essential that the Council continue to
offer its support to the ICC and to the Libyan authorities
as they take steps to end the impunity that for too long
prevailed in the country. The Council must take action
in support of the Court when necessary to help Libya
achieve justice and lasting stability.

