To say that 2020 has been a challenging year for many of us would be an understatement. Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) infections are spiking across the world. Recent tragic events remind us that the evils of terrorism and sectarian violence continue to find root. Wildfires have destroyed large swaths of land in Australia, Brazil and California. Coastal plains and island nations everywhere are at an ever increasing risk of being flooded. Water scarcity and erratic rain patterns cause tensions between herders and farmers and seriously impact livelihoods. The Atlantic hurricane season was so intense this year that we ran out of names for the individual storms. Large-scale climate events cause displacement, economic decline, food insecurity and social discontent. These circumstances are known as the root causes of fragility and offer fertile ground for instability and turmoil. They leave young people vulnerable to recruitment by armed groups. Many conflicts have more mundane political root causes. They simmer for a long time before erupting. What new threats, such as climate change, and more traditional threats to peace have in common is that they do not occur in a vacuum. Much like climate events can be a factor of instability, so can inequality or the erosion of respect for the rule of law and international standards. The curtailing of human rights is often an early indicator of tensions. Again, this does not always end in the blatant disregard for international standards like we are witnessing, for instance, in Syria today. But all too often, it does. Early action is about preventing new conflicts from arising, as well as keeping old conflicts from re-emerging. It is important that the Security Council be systematically alerted to serious tensions and security risks. As the Secretary- General rightly said at the beginning of this year, we still spend far more efforts maintaining peace than preventing it. Risks can arise from climate-related events, pandemics, rising inequalities, economic and food crises, serious human rights or international humanitarian law violations and so on. In this respect, we encourage the Secretary-General to use his right under Article 99 of the Charter of the United Nations to "bring to the attention of the Security Council any matter ... which may threaten the maintenance of international peace and security". Resolution 2532 (2020), for example, requests the Secretary- General to inform the Council on the security implications of COVID-19. The Climate Security Mechanism mobilizes existing expertise from sources within the United Nations system and makes it available to the Security Council. Similar initiatives on other emerging threats could be conceived. Belgium has, during its mandate, advocated horizon scanning briefings" on thematic issues. But having the necessary information on time is not enough. Ultimately, the relevance of early awareness depends upon the willingness of the Council to discuss the issues brought to its attention and the willingness to act upon them early and in a coordinated manner. As I said earlier, today's crises do not occur in a vacuum, and neither should the Council operate in one. As an elected member, therefore, Belgium has consistently pushed the Council towards a holistic and preventive approach. Indeed, the Security Council needs to foster coordination within the wider United Nations system with its partners in a proactive manner in support of early solutions. In that regard, I emphasize the key importance of regional United Nations mandates, like those of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel, the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa and the Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region, as well as the coordinating role of the United Nations Resident Coordinators. To achieve sustainable peace, we all need to ensure that our actions in the three dimensions of peace and security, sustainable development, and humanitarian assistance become part of a coordinated and coherent approach. As newly appointed Minister for Development Cooperation, I will give special attention to this nexus by addressing the root causes of crises and conflicts, coherently addressing people's vulnerabilities and promoting their resilience before, during and after crises. We should always prioritize prevention, invest in development, wherever possible, and, whenever necessary, support humanitarian action according to humanitarian principles. Respect for human rights should be at the heart of all such interventions. This October, the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations served as amoment to reflect on what we have achieved together since its foundation. Now we need to look at our collective future. The Security Council needs to embrace the full scale of its mandate to ensure that the future is peaceful and that no one is left behind, for the sake of future generations and for its own continued relevance.
