Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French):
The Council is discussing the question of Lebanon three
days after our previous meeting on the same subject.
Fighting has continued. Hundreds of thousands of refugees
have been forced to take to the roads. Men, women and
children have been mown down. The French Government
has expressed its feelings about the appalling tragedy which
took place this morning. Today, as the Egyptian
Ambassador said at the beginning of this meeting, it is time
to act.

Diplomatic efforts have been taking place since the
beginning of hostilities; they must be supported. These
efforts are aimed at restoring lasting peace. We must first
stop hostilities - that was the Council's immediate
objective. It was with that objective in mind that we
decided in voting on the two draft resolutions to vote for
the draft resolution contained in document S/ 1996/304,
which was capable of receiving a unanimous vote in favour,
because it is essential to create as broad support as possible
for an immediate cessation of hostilities by all the parties.
The President of the French Republic expressed the urgent
need for that today, saying:

"This spiral of violence in northern Israel and
southern Lebanon was, unfortunately, foreseeable, and
it is humanly unacceptable. I solemnly appeal to all
the parties involved in this conflict to establish a
cease-fire immediately. Since the onset of hostilities
initiatives have been undertaken, notably by France
and the United States. I ask all the parties involved to
accept an agreement on the basis of the various
proposals put forward, or to be put forward, to put an
end to this crisis. In that spirit, all who are working
for peace must unite their energies and their efforts."

That appeal has just been confirmed by the unanimous
vote in the Security Council. I wish to express the very
deep and sincere gratitude of the delegation of France to
Ambassador Elaraby. This vote, cast despite the difficulties
and qualms to which he referred, reflects the constant and
unshakeable determination of a great and responsible
country - Egypt - to build peace.

This resolution supports the diplomatic efforts
carried out in this regard. It also reaffirms - and this is
equally important - a fundamental principle recalling all
the previous resolutions on the situation in the Lebanon,
including resolution 425 (1978) of 19 March 1978, which
established the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon.
The Security Council is reaffirming its commitment to the
territorial integrity, sovereignty and political independence
of Lebanon within its internationally recognized borders,
as well as to the security of all States in the region, and
it calls upon all concerned fully to respect these
principles. That is equally essential.

This resolution contains necessary provisions to
protect the civilian population and to ensure the security
of UNIFIL, and it rightly insists on the need for
humanitarian assistance. France, which has for several
days endeavoured to provide assistance to the
Government of Lebanon, hopes that this request,
addressed by the Council to Member States, will be
followed by action, that humanitarian assistance will be
sufficiently generous to mitigate the suffering of the
Lebanese people, and that the Government of Lebanon
will be assisted in its efforts to reconstruct the country.
The Council's unanimity, which has just been
expressed, will, we hope, give full weight and backing to
the resolution and enable it to produce results: the
cessation of hostilities by all the parties. We hope that the
unanimous support given this evening to the diplomatic
efforts under way will breathe fresh life into the peace
process.

