Mr. Wittig (Germany): We welcome the initiative
of the United States to streamline United Nations
action on illicit trafficking and movement of persons
and goods in areas where there is overlap, and we
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing. We agree
that there is a need to discuss efficient structures for
assisting States in dealing with widespread illicit cross-
border trafficking and movement of goods, funds and
individuals, which can pose or exacerbate threats to
peace and security. In that regard, we would like to
stress that the Council has already repeatedly addressed
threats to international peace and security posed by
cross-cutting issues such as drug trafficking, organized
crime and human trafficking.

In our view, it is important to bear in mind that
open borders in themselves should not be seen as
threats. Interconnectedness and the free legal
movement of goods and people are things to aspire to,
not to condemn. However, they need to be balanced
with effectively fighting some very real threats posed
by illicit transfers, which can be exacerbated by poorly
managed borders. We would therefore commend an
assessment of United Nations capacities as an essential
step towards identifying possible fields of overlap and
room for improvement. We believe that the Secretary-
General would be well placed to undertake such a task.

I would like to make a few brief observations.
First, we should bear in mind that there is a limit to
streamlining. Nuclear materials, weapons, dual-use
goods, drugs and people crossing borders each require
different approaches and means of cooperation. We
would also like to stress that streamlining should not
lead to decreasing the efficient implementation of
sanctions in any way. On the contrary, we see further
improvement in the implementation of sanctions as an
essential contribution to securing borders.
Secondly, illicit trafficking and movement of
goods, funds and individuals do not necessarily
constitute a threat to international peace and security.
In many cases they are adequately dealt with by
national law enforcement authorities. However, illicit
trafficking and movement can have an impact on
national and international security when issues such as
terrorism or arms proliferation are at stake. Organized
crime, drug traffickers and traffickers in human beings
obviously also benefit from inadequately managed
borders. The United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime therefore rightly
addresses the improvement of border management
structures.

Thirdly, when combating illicit trafficking and
the movement of goods, funds and individuals, States
face a number of challenges resulting from the overall
goal of maintaining free global trade, on the one hand,
and responding to safety and security needs on the
other. For example, long borders require high numbers
of personnel and highly developed risk assessments.
Border protection needs qualified and well-equipped
personnel. It is in the nature of illicit trafficking and
movement to seek to overcome existing border-
protection mechanisms. Therefore, reliable and
sustainable organizations are necessary that, besides
many other challenges, are resistant to corruption.

Looking at United Nations efforts to help
Member States tackle those challenges, we would like
to stress the importance of capacity-building and
institution-building. Those elements are key to
enabling functioning State institutions to adequately
differentiate among the various goods and persons
crossing their borders. With regard to capacity-
building, I would like to mention that Germany has
supported a number of projects, such as providing
technical aid in the framework of a customs data
project.

Also, in peacekeeping operations, the
reconstruction of border control capacities should be
given particular attention where appropriate at an early
stage. In that regard, it might be worthwhile to explore
how United Nations police could assist in enhancing
such capacities by providing support for the early
reconstruction and capacity-building of border
protection entities. In that regard, Germany supports
the African Union Border Programme, aimed at the
demarcation of borders, cross-border cooperation and
capacity development.

Last but not least, national border-management
efforts should be embedded in close international
cooperation with neighbouring States as well as
regional and international organizations. In the case of
the Schengen Area in Europe, regarding the movement
of persons and goods inside the single European
market, there are generally no internal border controls.
Border control, monitoring and security are not
primarily ensured by each sovereign State member,
individually, but through regional cooperation.

The draft presidential statement that the Council
will adopt today also rightly stresses the important role
of regional organizations and underlines the need for
regional strategies and United Nations support for
regional cooperation.

Germany has for a long time been committed to a
comprehensive approach to curb the illicit trade of
small arms and light weapons and to prevent the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. For
several years now, Germany has been a strong
supporter of projects of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) aimed at capacity-building
in the security sector. I would also like to mention our
support for the UNODC Global Container Control
Programme, aimed at ensuring effective control of
container cargo in some West African countries in
order to suppress and prevent drug trafficking.

Within the European Union (EU) framework, we
contribute to the EU Sahel strategy, which addresses
both development and security issues and aims at
strengthening regional cooperation.

