Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): At the outset, let me
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting
and congratulate you on your work as President of the
Council for the month of June. I would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his most recent report
(S/2010/318) and Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Staffan de Mistura for his briefing
today - his first in his new role.

Mr. De Mistura and the leadership and staff of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) have made exemplary efforts in Kabul. In
less than three months, Mr. De Mistura has proven
himself admirably able in gathering all stakeholders,
including regional actors, together around issues and
principles of common concern. We are grateful to him,
and I would like to say that I look forward to working
with him and his colleagues closely in the coming
years.

This meeting comes less than a week after the
Council's visit to Afghanistan, which I had the honour
to be part of. Let me thank all Council members, and
particularly Ambassador Apakan of Turkey for his
work in leading the mission.

The Council's visit came at a crucial time for
Afghanistan. It was an opportunity to assess the current
situation and to prepare for the future. More important,
it was also an opportunity to better understand the
hopes, fears and expectations of the Afghan people. As
was evident last week, Afghans are focused in
particular on the increased role of their Government in
the reconstruction and stabilization process, their
expectations of the international community and how
to address the insurgency. Our success in the coming
7

years will depend on our ability to further involve
Afghans in those crucial issues.

Seven months ago, President Karzai presented a
comprehensive national agenda to re-engage the
Afghan people and enable them to take increased
responsibility for the governance, development and
security of their country. It was subsequently endorsed
by the international community in London.

The Afghanistan that we saw last week has made
visible progress in the past months towards meeting its
commitments, which is also reflected in the report
before us today. The Afghan National Army and the
Afghan National Police, now operating with increased
operational capability, are on schedule to reach their
combined target size and strength. In partnership with
the international forces, we have begun to take back
the initiative from the Taliban in some key parts of the
country.

In addition, the Afghan Government is
increasingly focused on efficiency and effectiveness,
cracking down on corruption and promoting the rule of
law. President Karzai recently called for initiatives to
prevent nepotism in the awarding of high-level
contracts and to require businessmen related to high-
level officials to disclose their assets. The Government
of Afghanistan has also taken steps to prioritize
development, particularly in the agricultural sector, in
an effort to ensure a sustainable economy, and is
investing in minerals and human resource development
to promote long-term prosperity.

Furthermore, last month's Peace Jirga brought
together a broad and representative cross-section of
Afghan society around the common desire for security,
peace and justice. The Jirga marked an important step
towards building an inclusive and unified Afghan
approach to peace and reconciliation and identified
concrete steps to be taken in that direction.

At the same time, the Afghan-led parliamentary
election process is well under way, with 2,577
candidates, including 406 women, standing for 249
seats. There is a broad commitment on the part of the
newly restructured Independent Electoral Commission
and the Electoral Complaints Commission, as well as
civil society and the candidates themselves, to ensuring
that it is a transparent, fair and credible process that
learns from the lessons of the past. In that regard, we
appreciate the assistance of the United Nations and the
international community in providing financial and
logistical support and in helping us to guarantee the
security that is essential for a credible election, as was
emphasized by Mr. De Mistura. The election will be an
important step on the path towards strengthening the
engagement of the Afghan people in the establishment
of a democratic system.

Three weeks from now, the Government of
Afghanistan will convene the international Kabul
Conference on Afghanistan, which will allow us to
renew the partnership between the international
community and the Afghan Government and people,
crystallize our shared strategy and begin to implement
concrete action plans. It will be chaired jointly by
Afghanistan and the United Nations and attended at the
level of foreign minister, including representatives of
countries, international and regional organizations, as
well as financial institutions. It is not a pledging
conference, but a chance to detail the objectives
reflected in President Karzai's inaugural platform and
the London Conference outcome.

Afghans have great hopes and great expectations
of our international friends and allies. They are well
aware that Afghanistan would still be under the bloody
reign of the Taliban and Al-Qaida without the support
and assistance of the international community.
Nevertheless, they are disturbed by the ongoing
debates among and between our international allies and
are concerned that sustainable progress may be
difficult to achieve if we do not show patience,
fortitude and long-term commitment.

The renewed partnership between Afghanistan
and the international community must embody the
recognition that trust and responsibility are equally
important to all partners, rather than being the sole
preserve of any one of us. We must continue to work
together jointly to meet our own expectations and those
of our partners.

To build the confidence and trust of the Afghan
people, efforts should be geared towards, first,
ensuring that the transition strategy is implemented in
practice through capacity-building, empowering
Afghans and avoiding waste; secondly, re-engaging the
people in the transition process; thirdly, ending the
negative perceptions that have favoured the enemy;
and fourthly, ensuring visible progress in both the short
and the long terms. The Kabul Conference and the
subsequent parliamentary elections will be
opportunities to achieve some of those goals, but our
efforts should continue and intensify across the board.

The Afghan people have suffered from violence
and conflict for over 30 years, and they understand that
most of our current enemies are not driven by ideology.
My Government has made it a priority to undertake a
process to end the insurgency and consolidate security
throughout the country.

The Peace Jirga outcome document recommended
several steps to be taken towards an inclusive Afghan
peace process that would weave Afghan fighters and
enemy leaders back into the fabric of Afghan social,
economic and political life. The Government of
Afghanistan has already started to implement many of
those recommendations. We are creating a high-level
council to oversee the implementation of the peace and
reconciliation process. We have also begun to review
detention records with a view to releasing Taliban who
are being held without adequate evidence, and have
requested this Council to extend the review process of
the consolidated list as we prepare to submit a
preliminary de-listing request.

However, let us be clear. We will not sacrifice the
progress that has been made or the principles on which
our constitution is founded. We will begin negotiations
with any disenchanted Afghans who are ready to
distance themselves from Al-Qaida and to participate
in a peaceful and stable Afghanistan.

Partnership with the Afghan people has been
critical to the progress made thus far and will be
critical to the success of the current transition strategy.
As was seen last week, there is intense interest and
some concern among the Afghan people, but at the
same time there is also strength of resolve both in the
Afghan Government and in civil society and the pride
that Afghans feel in their historic nation. We are eager
to build a Government and society that will do justice
to that pride. The international community has been a
true and steadfast friend to the Afghan people in that
struggle, and we look forward to a partnership that is
closer, more concrete and more focused.

