Mr. Kolby (Norway): My delegation too would
like to join in the tributes paid to Ambassador Kamel
Morjane; I wish him well in his important new post.

My delegation welcomes this open briefing, as it
is an opportune occasion to take stock at a crucial
moment in the peace process and to hear the views of
other Members of the United Nations. The challenges
we face in the Democratic Republic of the Congo are
enormous and complex, and they continue to pose a
threat to regional stability. In our View, that makes it all
the more important for the Security Council to seek
broad guidance and support for its continued handling
of the situation.

We all agree that the only Viable solution to the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
through a political settlement. The continuation of
warfare will only cause even deeper wounds on a
population already heavily marked by the crisis and
will drive the country further into chaos and
devastation. Although we have recently seen some
positive signs in terms of implementation ofthe Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement, we remain concerned about the
slow speed with which the parties are honouring key
commitments, as well as about the appalling
humanitarian situation in the country.

While we welcome the progress that has been
made so far in the disengagement of forces, we remain
deeply concerned at reports indicating that the
demilitarization process is behind schedule and that
Government as well as rebel troops are still holding
positions which according to the Agreement should
have been abandoned. That is unacceptable, and it
threatens to undermine the entire peace process. In that
regard we appeal in particular to the Rassemblement
congolais pour la democratic (RCD) to take swift
action to withdraw its troops and in that way to
contribute to the full demilitarization of Kisangani.

Moreover, the full withdrawal of all foreign
troops from the territory of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo also needs to be addressed without further
delay. In that context we urge all parties to contribute
fully to the preparation and implementation of the
process of disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and repatriation or resettlement. Appropriate measures
in that regard constitute fundamental criteria for a
lasting peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and in the region as a whole. For that reason, resolution
1355 (2001) authorized the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) to assist the parties in carrying
out the process of disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation or resettlement. However,
for MONUC to play a role here, the parties need to
express their readiness to go ahead. We regret to note
that such communications are in many cases overdue,
and we therefore call on the parties to take swift action
in that regard.

In the wake of the disengagement process there is
a real danger that unarmed civilians, particularly in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
will fall Victim to reprisals owing to their ethnic
background or political affiliation. Also, among the
armed groups to be demobilized there are large
numbers of children who, following the demobilization
process, will be particularly vulnerable. Norway
therefore supports the call for the rapid deployment of
human rights and child-protection officers as a means
to address the plight of civilians and thereby contribute
to the smooth implementation of the process of
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation or resettlement.

The sustainability of the peace process depends
heavily on the involvement and commitment by the
various actors within the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The international community can contribute by
means of peacekeeping and peace-building measures,
but the road towards lasting peace must be paved by
the Congolese themselves. The inter-Congolese
dialogue constitutes a cornerstone in this process, as it
clearly has the potential to reunite various groups and
factions in the effort to restore peace, security and
respect for human rights. We therefore join others in
calling on all Congolese parties to the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement to cooperate fully with Sir Ketumile Masire
in his continued efforts to move the process forward.

The success of the dialogue will be very much
dependent on its accessibility and transparency. Full
freedom to express opinions and beliefs is an absolute
prerequisite in that regard. Recent reports of detention
and intimidation of human rights defenders and civil
society actors associated with the inter-Congolese
dialogue are therefore troubling signs. This is
unacceptable and is counterproductive to the peace
agenda. We therefore call on the parties to refrain from
preventing any group or individual from participating
in the dialogue. We also urge the donor community to
provide the necessary financial support to facilitate the
different initiatives under the auspices of the dialogue.

As we make strong efforts to address the various
technicalities of the peace agreement and the level to
which the parties have honoured their commitments, it
is easy to forget that, in this as in any other devastating
conflict, it is the civilian population that pays the real
costs. Recent reports relating to the humanitarian
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo are
indeed shocking and disturbing. According to
humanitarian agencies, more than 1 million internally
displaced persons in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo are currently receiving no humanitarian
assistance whatsoever. As members of the international
community, we therefore need to continue and step up
efforts aimed at meeting the desperate humanitarian
needs. In that regard, we also reiterate our call to all
parties concerned to immediately facilitate the safe and
unhindered access of humanitarian agencies.

Another topic which requires urgent
consideration in this context is the impunity prevailing
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. There can be
no lasting peace without justice and accountability for
the violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law that occurred from the outset of the
conflict. A failure to address that issue could seriously
hinder reconciliation and could lead to further
atrocities and conflict. An accurate, impartial and
thorough investigation of the facts is needed. Secondly,
appropriate and effective mechanisms to bring the
alleged perpetrators to justice need to be considered.

Finally, let me reiterate Norway's full support for
the peace process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

