Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): Allow me at the outset to congratulate France
on its presidency of the Council over the past month and
to assure Germany of our full support for its presidency
this month.

As has been recalled, on 12 August we will mark
the seventieth anniversary of the Geneva Conventions,
four universally ratified treaties with no fewer than 196
States parties, that is, more than the number of States
Members of the United Nations.

But the reality is quite different. We all know
that the norms of international humanitarian lower
are being increasingly flouted, as was noted by other
speakers this afternoon. The issue of safeguarding the
humanitarian space, the topic of our meeting today,
shows very clearly the main challenge that we are
facing. Humanitarian actors all too frequently have
to deal with major obstacles in the framework of their
activities in conflict areas.

So how can we strengthen the implementation of
international humanitarian law? Belgium would like to
share with the Council five good practices.

First of all, we must promote the dissemination
of information about the norms of international
humanitarian law. National humanitarian law
commissions play a key role in that regard by providing
advice and assistance to the public authorities. The
Belgian national commission was created in 1987, so it
is one of the oldest ones around. It is prepared to share
its experience with States wishing to establish similar
bodies. I would like to also underscore the central role
played by the national Red Cross and Red Crescent
societies in the dissemination of information about
international humanitarian law in their capacities as
auxiliaries to the public authorities.

Secondly, it must be ensured that there is adequate
training ofthe armed forces on this issue. We in Belgium
make certain that international humanitarian law is part
of the curriculum in the training of military personnel.
We also invest in training troop-contributing countries
on the protection of civilians, including in French.

Thirdly, States that provide support to parties to an
armed conflict, be it in the framework of a coalition
of States or through support for a non-State armed
group, must ensure that they bring pressure to bear on
the combatants so that the latter abide by the norms of
international humanitarian law.

Fourthly, we must prohibit measures within the
framework of combating terrorism that impede the
work of humanitarian organizations, whose activities
are neutral, independent and impartial. It is therefore
essential to take into account the potentially adverse
effects on the humanitarian situation of the policies
we adopt against terrorist groups operating in war
zones, as well as sanctions measures that could have a
negative impact on carrying out humanitarian work in
specific contexts.

Fifthly, in line with their obligations under
international humanitarian law, it is incumbent upon
States to have the necessary means to ensure that the
perpetrators of violations are accountable for their
actions, thereby serving as a deterrent for committing
atrocities. It is for that reason that combating impunity
is important. In that regard, I would point out the
contribution of the International Criminal Court in
combating impunity for the most serious crimes,
including war crimes.

The Security Council also has a key role to play. It is
in a position to encourage the training of peacekeepers
in the field in the area of international humanitarian law,
provide adequate space for international humanitarian
law in the efforts to rebuild the rule oflaw in post-conflict
situations, inscribe on sanctions lists perpetrators of
the most serious crimes and make better use of existing
monitoring and investigative mechanisms.

In the face of the hundreds of daily casualties in
armed conflict, it is the duty of us all to renew our
commitment to respect international humanitarian law.
That is why we welcome the initiative announced in
that regard by Ministers Le Drian and Maas.

