Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank Mr. Salame
and Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni for their briefings.

I also warmly welcome and thank Ms. Sharief, our
civil society briefer, who conveyed a very powerful
message and eloquently highlighted the importance of
an inclusive peace process that includes, in particular,
women and youth. Perhaps as a follow-up to the
discussion, it would be helpful to hear more from the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya about how it
integrates the gender perspective in its work.

Let me begin by welcoming the update of Special
Representative Salame' on the political process and by
reiterating the United Kingdom's full support for his
work. In our presidential statement of 14 December
2017 (S/PRST/20l7/26), we in the Security Council
urged all parties to support the political process in a
spirit of compromise for the sake of the Libyan people.
That must include support for the efforts of Special
Representative Salame' to secure consent to amend the
Libyan Political Agreement and commitment to the
sequencing of the United Nations action plan.

As Ms. Sharief highlighted, civil society has an
essential role to play in ensuring that the voices of the
people are also heard during discussions on the future
of their country. All Libyans, regardless of their age,
gender or where they are from, must feel represented
and understood by their political leaders. That will
encourage Libyans to support their political leadership
and build trust in the political process. The greatest
immediate need is the establishment ofa more inclusive
political platform, which is essential to creating an
executive better able to improve the security, human
rights and economic conditions in Libya. A more
inclusive political settlement would also build a context
more conducive to preparing for elections. We welcome
the Special Representative's emphasis on ensuring
the right conditions are in place ahead of elections,
including the necessary political, legislative and
security preparations to guarantee their success.

As we saw from clashes at Mitiga Airport on
Monday, the security situation in Libya remains of deep
concern. As we have stated, there can be no military
solution in Libya. All parties must exercise restraint
and express their support for national reconciliation,
which must include the reconciliation of the security
forces. Unified security forces, under the command
of the civilian Government, which represent and work
for all Libyans will also enable the threat posed by
extremist groups to be tackled in a sustainable way.
They will help bring an end to the impunity of armed
groups, which are inextricably linked to the gravely
concerning human rights situation.

Ungoverned spaces in Libya create the conditions
for abuses and violations of international humanitarian
law, which take place against civilians, internally
displaced persons and migrants. We fully support the
work of the African Union-European Union-United
Nations Task Force in tackling slavery in Libya. We
call on all parties that are suspected of committing,
ordering or failing to prevent such human rights abuses
and violations to be fully investigated, and if found
guilty, to be held to account for their actions. We also
stand ready to consider the sanctioning of individuals
involved in people trafficking in modern slavery.
We are also concerned by reported restrictions of
civil and political freedoms and the intimidation of
civil society organizations, public servants, religious
groups and national minorities, including recent attacks
on Sufi shrines and Amazigh representatives. These
groups must be allowed to participate in Libyan society
and the political process.

Finally, with regard to the economic situation, the
Council needs to continue to protect the Libyan people
from economic hardship, including by supporting
the restoration of the economy and the delivery of
service across the country. We must act robustly
against attempts to illicitly sell oil and establish
parallel institutions. We need to continue to ensure that
sanctions measures keep up with the situation on the
ground. That includes the work we have done to address
fuel oil smuggling. However, we should also be ready
to rectify inadvertent consequences, such as addressing
the depreciation of frozen Libyan Investment Authority
funds, which remain frozen at the Libyan Government's
request until their eventual return for the benefit of the
Libyan people.

A stable, unified, inclusive Government is the best
way to improve the security conditions, the economic
fortunes and human rights situation for millions of
Libyans. It will also improve global peace and security
and our ability to address the challenges of migration.
We must continue to stand together in support of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Salame's
efforts to achieve this. We, like him, urge Libya's
political leaders to put their country first.

