The President: I should like to inform the
Council that l have received a letter from the
representative of Somalia in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
ofthe Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Hashi
(Somalia) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Somalia, document S/2003/987.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf ofthe Council.

"The Security Council, recalling its
previous decisions concerning the situation in
Somalia, in particular the statement of its
President of 12 March 2003 (S/PRST/2003/2) and
welcoming the report of the Secretary-General of
13 October 2003 (8/2003/987), reaffirms its
commitment to a comprehensive and lasting
settlement of the situation in Somalia, and its
respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity,
political independence and unity of the country,
consistent with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.

"The Security Council reiterates its firm
support for the Somali national reconciliation
process launched under the auspices of the
lntergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) and led by Kenya. The Council
commends the progress made and acknowledges
the challenges ahead.

"The Security Council welcomes the
relevant decisions made by the tenth Summit of
lGAD and the first Ministerial Meeting of the
lGAD Facilitation Committee on the Somali
Peace Process in October 2003.

"The Security Council urges all Somali
leaders to participate constructively in the
Leaders Meeting planned by the lGAD
Facilitation Committee in Kenya in November
2003 to bridge their differences and to reach
agreements on a viable government and a durable
and inclusive solution to the conflict in Somalia.

"The Security Council commends the
Government of Kenya for its crucial role in
facilitating the Somali national reconciliation
process, and President Yoweri Museveni of
Uganda for joining in the facilitation work, and
encourages the Facilitation Committee to work
concertedly towards a successful conclusion of
the process.

"The Security Council also commends the
support given by the African Union to the Somali
national reconciliation process, including its
participation in the process and its commitment to
deploy a military observer mission to Somalia
once a comprehensive agreement is reached.

"The Security Council calls on the
international community to continue its efforts to
support lGAD in its facilitation of the Somali
national reconciliation process, and calls on the
donor countries to contribute to the process, the
Trust Fund for Peace-building in Somalia and the
United Nations consolidated inter-agency appeal
for Somalia.

"The Security Council expresses serious
concern regarding the humanitarian situation in
Somalia, and calls on the Somalia leaders to
facilitate the delivery of much-needed
humanitarian assistance and to assure the safety
of all international and national aid workers.

"The Security Council welcomes

forthcoming mission of the Committee

established pursuant to resolution 751 (1992) to
Somalia and States in the region from 11 to 21
November 2003 as a step towards giving full
effect to the arms embargo. The Council calls on
the

relevant States and organizations to cooperate
with the above mission.

"The Security Council reiterates that a
comprehensive peace-building programme with
special emphasis on disarmament,
demobilization, rehabilitation and reintegration
will be important to post-conflict Somalia.

"The Security Council expresses its
readiness to assist the Somali parties and support
IGAD in implementation of the agreements
reached in the Somali national reconciliation
process."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2003/19.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at I] am.

