Mr. Gee (United States): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for her
briefing. I also join others in welcoming the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Cote d'Ivoire to the Security
Council and congratulating him on his country's
election, today, as a non-permanent member. We also
congratulate the other new members elected today
and look forward to working with all new members
next year.

It is a momentous occasion when a peacekeeping
mission can close after having successfully completed
its work to stabilize and support a country emerging
from conflict. We applaud the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, her staff and all the staff of
the United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI)
who have contributed to the mission over its 13 years.

In just four weeks UNOCI will shut its door for
good, bringing to an end a mission that provided
critical support during the 2003 peace agreement and
the 2010 political crisis. UNOCI supported efforts to
protect civilians, promote good governance, human
rights, security sector reform and humanitarian
assistance. Cote d'Ivoire is a success story and a
model of how peacekeeping can benefit a country if its
Government is committed to overcoming conflict and
restoring peace.

We look forward to seeing the Government of
Cote d'Ivoire maintain that positive momentum and
cement the peace and security that has taken root with
the support of the international community. Despite
significant progress on key reforms, recent events
have shown that challenges remain. The January and
May mutinies in the armed forces over pay grievances
resulted in the disruption of commerce, the closure of
schools and increased civilian insecurity. The mutinies
and accompanying protests also led to scores ofinjuries
and several fatalities in confrontations with authorities.
We urge the Government to work transparently,
inclusively and without delay to accelerate and deepen
efforts to reform the security sector, including by
shaping a clear structure and purpose for the military
based on the threats Cote d'Ivoire faces.

Finally, as we approach the end ofUNOCI, we know
that smart planning between a mission in transition,
the Government, other international partners and a
United Nations country team has been essential during
the handover of mission tasks. In Cote d'Ivoire, a high
level of cooperation in planning for the future led to
the smooth transition happening today. We encourage
the United Nations to institutionalize lessons learned
and apply them to other missions in transition, such
as those in Liberia and Haiti. We also encourage other
countries hosting peacekeeping missions to recognize
the importance of strong cooperation between
the Government and the United Nations without
impediments to movement and access in performing
the missions' mandated tasks.

Once again, we congratulate all who worked
together to bring peace and stability to Cote d'Ivoire
over these past years.

