Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM).

I would first like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on Egypt's assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I would also like to express our
appreciation to you for holding today's open debate and
for the briefings provided earlier this morning.

The Non-Aligned Movement welcomes the
enhanced relationship and cooperation of the United
Nations with regional and subregional organizations,
in particular the African Union (AU), in accordance
with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
NAM. has always commended the African Union, the
Economic Community of West African States, the
Economic Community of Central African States, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
the East African Community and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development for their indispensable roles
and contributions to peace and security in various parts
of Africa. We encourage making the political process a
priority, while emphasizing the importance of focusing
on development assistance in regions affected by war,
since peace and development are mutually reinforcing.

NAM. supports the continued efforts to strengthen
African peacekeeping capabilities and emphasizes the
importance of implementing the Ten Year Capacity
Building Programme for the African Union and the
joint action plan for United Nations support to the
African Union in peacekeeping in the short, medium
and long term and in all relevant areas. NAM. has also
recommended enhancing the effective partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union
in order to improve the planning, deployment and
management of African peacekeeping operations.
At this juncture, I would like to reiterate NAM's
principled position on peacekeeping by stressing that
the establishment of any peacekeeping operation, or
the extension of the mandates of existing operations,
should strictly comply with the purposes and principles
of the Charter and the principles that have evolved
to govern such operations and have become basic to
them - that is, the consent of the parties, the non-use
of force except in self-defence, and impartiality. NAM
stresses that respect for the principles of the sovereign
equality, political independence and territorial integrity
of every State, and of non-intervention in matters that
fall essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of
States, should also be upheld in that regard.

The leaders of the African Union expressed their
determination to achieve the goal of a conflict-free
Africa through the framework of the African Peace
and Security Architecture, which is now a key pillar of
the AU's visionary Agenda 2063. The African Union
has established its own thematic priorities and has
developed two road maps to help the Peace and Security
Architecture reach its stated objectives. Finally, NAM
hopes that today's open debate can help to identify
the partnership opportunities between the various
pillars involved in the maintenance of international
peace and security, and to generate new momentum
for strengthening peace and security cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union, in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter.

