Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I am grateful to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
her briefing.

Our thoughts are with the people of Haiti and the
region affected by Hurricane Matthew. Along with
many partners in Haiti, the United Kingdom is working
to establish the extent of the damage and the most
pressing humanitarian needs. We are stepping up to
support those affected. We have already sent experts
and relief suppliers to the region and have allocated
£5 million to Haiti. We would like to express our
solidarity with those hit by the devastating hurricane.
The people of Haiti are unfortunately no strangers to
the destructive effects of natural disasters. They have
shown their resilience as a country time and again, and
I hope that the months and years ahead will see homes
rebuilt and livelihoods restored.

Democracy is an essential part of Haiti's path
forward, but speedy elections cannot come at the
expense of those who desperately need to rebuild.
As a result of the hurricane, the decision to postpone
the elections is unfortunate but understandable in
the highly unusual circumstances. Considering the
loss of life, displacement of people and significant
disruption of infrastructure, we support the decision,
which will ensure that the authorities can focus fully
on the recovery effort. We urge the Haitian authorities
to ensure that as soon as it is feasible for voters in all
parts of the country to be able to participate they move
towards rescheduling the elections.

The recent events highlight the continued relevance
of the full range of the work of the United Nations in
Haiti, and the importance ofdeciding the role that we the
Council should play in it. I join the Secretary-General
in thanking everyone involved in the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti and the United Nations
country team for their ongoing commitment to Haiti.
With hundreds of lives lost and images of yet another
round of devastation dealt to Haiti, it would be easy
to lose sight of the achievements that the country has
made in recent years. The security situation, although
fragile, remains stable, and the performance of the
Haitian National Police continues to improve. We must
now ensure that progress is consolidated and continues
to evolve. Getting the Haitian National Police to a
stage where they can stand on their own feet, without
assistance, is paramount.

Haiti is at a turning point on the path towards the
consolidation of stability and democracy, and although
significant challenges remain, we must ensure that the
presence and future role of the United Nations in Haiti is
adapted to best suit the conditions there. Recent events
have demonstrated Haiti's vulnerability to natural
disasters and the fragility of gains. Its significant
needs are clear - long-term development assistance,
resilient infrastructure, support in establishing durable
and diverse livelihoods and ongoing backing for the
creation of a professional and effective police force.

The United Kingdom stands ready to help on
those fronts, but we do not believe that a peacekeeping
mission is the best vehicle any longer for responding to
those needs. We therefore look forward to the results
of the forthcoming strategic assessment mission, and
welcome the continuing preparatory work on a joint
transition plan aimed at consolidating Haiti's success.
We must ensure that the Mission quickly hands over
responsibilities where other actors on the ground,
including the United Nations country team, have a
comparative advantage in conducting them.

