Mr. Diallo (Senegal) (spoke in French): Senegal
commends your initiative, Mr. President, in convening
this debate on peacebuilding in the aftermath ofconflict.
It is as important to address this challenge as it is to put
an end to situations of open hostility. Allow me, on this
occasion, to reiterate my warmest congratulations on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council and,
at the same time, to commend the skillful way in which
your predecessor, Ambassador Majeev Singh Puri,
guided this body in the month ofNovember. No one has
any doubt that, as we take stock, the Council has done
useful work under the wise leadership of Morocco, a
friendly country whose contribution to peace in Africa
is well known and appreciated by all. I would therefore
like to assure you, Sir, that my delegation will always
be ready to support you for in pursuit of a resounding
success to your presidency.

The topic that brings us together today places the
Council at the very heart of the issue of the viability
and sustainability of peacekeeping in the world.
Through this debate, therefore, we are called upon to
look at the tools that could be utilized to ensure that
lasting peace takes hold in countries emerging from
conflict. As recalled by the World Bank in its World
Development Report 2011, 90 per cent of conflicts
between 2000 and 2009 occurred in countries where
civil war had already taken place. That alarming fact
leads us to take a critical look at the factors that might
explain the relapse into conflict. The factors differ,
depending on whether they arise from an unfavourable
international context or from an unstable internal
situation. The impact of trans-border situations and the
presence of international criminal groups can therefore
contribute to bringing about an unfavourable climate
for transitions, which are often already fragile.

Equally, the lack of consensus on the political
process, discrimination or social inequalities, added
to the dramatic impact of the economic situation, can
provide fertile ground for the resurgence of crisis
situations. Post-conflict peacebuilding would therefore
seem to be less effective and efficient in conflict
reduction than prevention of conflict in the first place.

Success in such a volatile phase of peacebuilding
more often than not requires that multiple needs be met.
That fact clearly attests to the breadth and complexity
of post-conflict situations, for both national authorities
and the international community. That is why setting
priorities for transition plans is truly essential.

In doing so, it is crucial to ensure effective reform
of the security sector beginning with disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, in order to better
protect civilians. As the backbone of any national
reconciliation process, an inclusive political dialogue
remains necessary to guarantee the holding of free and
democratic elections and in order to build the rule of
law, based on robust institutions. That dual political
and security foundation should be supported by
strengthening national capacities to meet social needs,
focusing on health, education and training, while
also ensuring an economic recovery that is capable
of promoting development, especially in the areas of
agriculture and infrastructure.
Seconding the Secretary-General's recommendations
in his latest report on peacebuilding in the aftermath of
conflict (S/2012/746), my delegation attaches particular
importance to real and active participation by women
in the transition process. Having considerable
advantages in achieving the requirements I mentioned,
women have always made an invaluable contribution
to peacebuilding throughout the world, as witnessed by
the many female Nobel Peace Prize winners, including
Betty Williams, Mother Teresa, Aung San Suu Kyi and
Kenya's Wangari Muta Maathai. We are pleased to note

that the report mentions considerable efforts in the area
of eliciting women's participation.

Within this relatively narrow scope, it is important
to engender an impetus for effective, sustained support
from the international community. In that regard, the
Peacebuilding Commission(PBC), as the relevant
interactive intergovernmental body, has a major role to
play, including in mobilizing the necessary funds for
transition.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations should also be encouraged and
strengthened. We therefore take this opportunity to
welcome the quality of the strategic partnership that
the African Union continues to develop with the United
Nations through peacekeeping missions, such as those
deployed in Somalia or Darfur. Such cooperation is all
the more welcome for Africa because most countries on
the PBC agenda are African.

In conclusion, I would like to draw the Council's
attention to the need to provide the support I have just
described as soon as hostilities end, because, even
though that period is the most fragile, it is still the
most conducive to the success of a skilfully conducted
transition to lasting peace and development.

The Council can be assured of Senegal's unflagging
and ongoingly renewed commitment, along with all
peace-loving countries, to the realization of the ideal
that today unites all people the world over.

