Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): At the outset,
let me join others in thanking you, Madam President,
for organizing this open debate on the threats to
international peace and security posed by illicit cross-
border trafficking and movement. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.

Trafficking by non-State actors in nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons, their means of
delivery and related materials, and the movement of
terrorists and their funds challenge international peace
and security. Moreover, there are situations where
international peace and security is exacerbated by
illicit cross-border trafficking in arms and drug
trafficking. In such cases, Security Council
pronouncements have invariably listed those
exacerbations and sought to control them.

At the same time, there are a number of United
Nations bodies and agencies that have their identified
and Charter-mandated areas of specialization in
connection with illicit cross-border trafficking and
movement. It is important that the Council respects the
mandates of other organs of the United Nations and its
specialized bodies.

Of late, there has been a concerted push to bring
several global issues onto the Council's agenda under
the pretext of their affecting international peace and
security. That needs to be avoided. The Charter
provides for a clear division of responsibility between
the General Assembly, the Security Council, the
Economic and Social Council and other specialized
bodies. We must respect that separation of functions in
letter and spirit.

General norm-setting must necessarily belong to
relevant organs and agencies of the United Nations.
The Security Council should step in only where there is
threat to international peace and security, and in the
context of specific situations, such as in conflict and
post-conflict situations, and under sanctions regimes
established pursuant to resolutions 1540 (2004), 1373
(2001) and 1267 (1999), under Chapter VII of the
Charter.

The United Nations has played a seminal role in
the capacity-building of Member States. States need
assistance to fulfil their international commitments, to
strengthen their internal institutions, including those
dealing with law and order, and to secure their borders.
Such an exercise must always be demand-driven and
led by Member States. We commend the efforts and
commitment of the relevant United Nations agencies in
developing the capacities of countries in conflict and
post-conflict situations. Commitment to the capacity-
building of States in different sectors requires greater
financial and technological support, and we should be
willing to provide the same to them.

However, the connected issue is how the relevant
United Nations agencies can help interested Member
States secure their borders against illicit cross-border
trafficking and movement. The first fundamental
principle in that regard is respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the State seeking assistance.
Secondly, donors and the relevant United Nations
agencies must respect the prerogative of the Member
State concerned in securing its own borders. Thirdly,
assistance in capacity-building must be provided only
upon request and as mutually agreed.

The challenges we are discussing today are global
in nature, and their interlinkages make them even more
complex. They call for strong collaborative action,
involving all Member States working together in a
manner that is legitimate and appropriate.

