Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I wish
to thank Ms. Sandra Honore' for her briefing. I align
myself with the statements to be made on behalf of the
European Union and the Group of Friends of Haiti.

Since the arrival of United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), Haiti has made
enormous progress. The adoption of an electoral law
last October is evidence of the ongoing normalization
and progressive strengthening of the rule of law. We
look forward also to the forthcoming partial local and
senatorial elections that have been postponed several
times.

In addition, the progress made by the Haitian
National Police is encouraging. The significant decline
in crime noted in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2014/ 162) is an important step forward. We are also
pleased to note that an increasing number of cadets
are graduating every year and that a growing number
women are joining their ranks. Cooperation between
the police component of MINUSTAH and the Haitian
National Police is fruitful and useful. In a context of
reflection on the size and mandate of the peacekeeping
operations, the example of Haiti gives us food for
thought.

We also note with satisfaction the progress made in
the humanitarian sphere. The return of refugees to their
areas of origin and the drop in the number of people
affected by food insecurity are encouraging signs.
The wounds opened by the earthquake are gradually
disappearing, thanks to the joint work of the Haitian
Government, the people, MINUSTAH and the United
Nations country team.

Much remains to be done, nonetheless. The rule
of law and the country's institutions need to improve
their efficiency, transparency and accessibility. The
many protests by the civilian population illustrate the
frustration, even exasperation, of the citizens who care
to participate in the political life of their country. The
launch of an inter-Haitian political dialogue in January,
which is a praiseworthy initiative, should lead to an
inclusive agreement. We therefore welcome the signing
of the memorandum of understanding on 19 March. We
call on all parties to engage resolutely in the road map
it defines.

In the field of human rights, we welcome the
appointment of a human rights ombudsman on
4 December, the authorities' willingness to renew the
mandate of the independent expert of the Human Rights
Council and the denial of the appeal of Jean-Claude
Duvalier, accused of crimes against humanity. Those
decisions are encouraging, but violations of human
rights continue. It is the responsibility of the State to
pursue a proactive policy in that area.

Finally, the remaining humanitarian challenges are
substantial. We are very concerned about a possible
resurgence of the cholera epidemic during the next
rainy season. We fully support the action and the
commitment of the United Nations in its efforts to
completely eradicate the disease. For those challenges
that persist, the United Nations should support and
complement the action of the Haitian State, but it
cannot and should not replace it. The Haitian State
must mobilize more resolutely to exercise its regulatory
functions independently.

MINUSTAH was deployed in 2004 in a context of
acute crisis. That crisis was exacerbated a few years
later by the earthquake. Ten years later, as described
by the Secretary-General in his report, the progress is
real. MINUSTAH must therefore adapt and reflect the
positive developments, which are proof of its success.
A consolidation plan already oversees the reduction
process initiated since 2013. That process will be
completed in 2016.

We must go further and more quickly. Starting
today, we must reflect on the post-MINUSTAH period
and on the future ofthe United Nations presence in Haiti.
In that regard, we welcome the five scenarios presented

by the Secretary-General for the reconfiguration of the
Mission beyond 2016. We consider them to provide the
framework for the reflection that we want to undertake.

In that context, a strategic review conducted by the
Secretariat as soon as possible will be invaluable to the
Council. Based on an accurate assessment of needs on
the ground and presented to the Security Council by
August 2014, such a review will allow members of the
Council to define what type of mission is best suited
after 2016 to the political and security situation in Haiti.
Moreover, between now and 2016, it could also tells us
whether it is possible to adapt the Mission more quickly
and more radically.

Beyond its mission of good political offices
policies, it seems essential at this point that the future
United Nations mission in Haiti will maintain a strong
police component. Needs in terms of public order and
of training and support of the Haitian National Police
and, more broadly, the building of the rule of law, are
indeed the main challenges Haiti is facing and for which
a response of the United Nations is the most relevant. It
will be the heart of the future mission. We will therefore
have to determine its contours in close coordination
with the Haitian authorities and the Friends of Haiti.

