Mr. De Coninck (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Belgium commends the initiative of the Angolan
presidency ofthe Security Council in convening today's
debate on the Great Lakes region.

We subscribe fully to the statement delivered earlier
by the observer of the European Union. In our national
capacity, I would like to add the following comments
on the opportunities and challenges presented by the
current situation.

The Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
Agreement for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region is an essential foundation that has lost
none ofits relevance for peace in the Great Lakes region.
In that regard, we would like to welcome the Regional
Strategic Framework for the region that the Secretary-
General has just presented. Belgium would also like to
express its support for the work of the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General, Ambassador Said Djinnit.

We welcome the recent holding in Kinshasa of a
conference on private investment in the Great Lakes
region, which brought together several hundred
representatives of Governments, financial institutions
and private investors and enabled them to better
comprehend the region's enormous potential. It should
now receive concrete follow-up.

The situation in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is still not sufficiently stable,
despite bursts of progress. Armed groups, including
the Allied Democratic Forces-National Army for the
Liberation of Uganda and the Forces democratiques
pour la liberation du Rwanda, continue to threaten
the civilian population while committing countless
acts of violence. The problem of the ex-combatants
of the Mouvement du 23 mars is still unresolved.
All those factors hinder economic development,
encourage the illegal exploitation of natural resources
and illicit trafficking and have a very negative impact
on regional stability. However, Belgium welcomed
the announcement of the resumption of operational
cooperation between the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) and the Congolese army. We hope
that they will be able to speedily neutralize the main
armed groups. That issue should be kept in mind when
considering the renewal of MONUSCO's mandate.

The issue ofrefugees in the countries ofthe region is
another major concern. The presence of approximately
250,000 Burundian refugees in neighbouring countries
is not only a tragedy for those affected but also an
additional threat to regional stability.

For more than a year now, Burundi has been beset
by an internal crisis involving unacceptable violence
and numerous violations of human rights. The recent
measures taken by the Burundian Government to calm
the situation are certainly a step in the right direction, but
they should be expanded and rendered irreversible. We
believe that only an inclusive dialogue, mediated from
outside, is capable of bringing the factors required for a
lasting solution to the serious crisis facing the country.
We hope that the efforts of the East African Community,
the African Union and the United Nations can converge
to achieve a political solution in the spirit of Arusha. We
welcome the appointment of former President Mkapa as
facilitator of the East African Community. The dialogue
should bring together a significant number of political
actors, without preconditions or exclusivity, and should
start soon. In that regard, the deployment of a credible
United Nations police mission is important to efforts to
calm the situation.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo has made
significant progress over the past 15 years, both in
terms of unity and economic and democratic stability.
It is crucial for the country and for the whole of Central
Africa to ensure that this progress is consolidated and
broadened. The Congo is at a crossroads. In that regard,
Belgium is very concerned about the political impasse
that is becoming entrenched and hardened in the
Democratic Republic ofthe Congo. We are also worried
about the shrinking political sphere and the pre-election
violations of human rights that we have seen. For
the country to emerge from that impasse, a dialogue
between the various political actors is essential. Under
regional or international facilitation, it should result
in the achievement of consensus on the modalities
of organizing free and open elections and on respect
for public order, human rights and the Constitution.
Belgium hopes that such a dialogue can be launched
as soon as possible. MONUSCO should play a role in
supporting both logistics and securing the elections
that should be better reflected in its new mandate.

In conclusion, Belgium urges the Security Council
to keep the situation in the Great Lakes region on
its agenda.

