The discussion on climate and security proposed for today's open debate should give us all pause to reflect on the question at hand, but more so on the scope of the mandate, for the maintenance of international peace and security, given to the Security Council by the Charter of the United Nations. Climate change is a complex and non-negligible issue, which is being addressed by the international community and should continue to be considered within the international regime formed by the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, and regulated by the principle of common but differentiated responsibility and the respective capacities of States. While remaining sensitive to the impact of climate change on the most vulnerable countries and considering ways through which development issues can be better integrated into peace efforts, Brazil is of the opinion that the international community must also avoid taking steps that could lead to an undesirable securitization of the climate change agenda. We should thus proceed with utmost caution before branding emerging concerns as outright threats to international peace and security. By recognizing that climate change has broad implications and multiple dimensions, Brazil emphasizes that the most significant and accurate relationship is not the alleged link between security and the environment. Climate change is above all an issue to be discussed within the context of sustainable development, as it requires simultaneous political, economic and social approaches, rather than security responses. As we move into the twenty-first century, dealing with issues as demanding and multifaceted as climate change, it is key that we remain watchful of the upsurge of discourses that are reminiscent of the so-called droit d'ingerence - the self- declared right to intervene in the affairs of sovereign States on dubious grounds. Theuseofcontroversiallanguage suchas "climate-security nexus" and "climate- related security risks", is potentially misleading and can prove counterproductive to the goal of addressing the adverse effects of climate change. These terms might reinforce a fundamentally mistaken and even dangerous assumption that climate change inexorably leads to conflict. In fact, the outbreak of conflict often relies upon manifold structural factors, rather than one single indicator alone. Attempting to use military action as a preventive response to climate change is completely counterproductive. There is no precise tool that allows the international community to determine, with certainty, when and how environmental distress will eventually convert into potential security threats, since conflicts are context-specific and stem from a complex and interdependent set of factors. Experts have pointed out that, while it is a far-fetched proposition to establish an automatic, direct link between climate change and armed conflict, singling out one among several root causes of conflict might bring about simplistic answers to complicated matters, thus endangering the solution to threats to international peace and security in the first place. The Security Council must come to terms with the understanding that each individual conflict has its own specific underlying causes and that no one-size-fits-all formula applies when it comes to preserving peace. In other words, there is no single template for peace. The conditions that may lead a society to the paths of peace or conflict are complex in nature and require an in-depth understanding of the various social, economic and cultural fabrics in their unique specificities. The environmental dimension of sustainable development, on the other hand, can only be effectively addressed in conjunction with its social and economic components. It is therefore crucial to factor in the intrinsically indivisible nature of sustainable development. The purported climate-conflict nexus has yet another harmful side effect for our efforts to build and sustain peace - it encourages the development of a culture of security risk analysis, in which security risks tend to attract more attention than development priorities. From Brazil's perspective, climate change and environment challenges are phenomena that lack any military context and can have no possible military solution. They are challenges that must be dealt with through development tools. We should rather acknowledge that they fall primarily under the development domain and should not be unduly securitized. Rather than investing further in securitizing the climate agenda, developed countries should channel energy and resources into fostering those financial mechanisms that aim to compensate the most vulnerable States for loss and damage due to climate change. In fact, it may be detrimental to international security if the countries listed in UNFCCC annex I do not take the necessary measures to meet their emission-reduction commitments. It is crucial that any thematic discussion on climate and environment issues remain open to the entire membership of the United Nations. It is incumbent on Member States to be watchful of the division of labour among the different bodies of the United Nations system, seeking synergies and complementarities, while retaining their respective mandates and competencies. The Security Council is mandated to deal with concrete, immediate threats to international peace and security. Therefore, it should, as a principle, abstain from adopting blanket statements on the proposed topic, opting instead for assessing threats to international peace and security on a case-by-case basis.
