Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the briefers for their comprehensive statements. I also
welcome the presence in the Chamber today of Prime
Minister Aristides Gomes of Guinea-Bissau, and thank
him for making the journey to New York to participate
in our work, which is a very positive signal.

I have five brief comments. First, France welcomes
the positive developments in recent months in Guinea-
Bissau, including the appointment of Mr. Aristides
Gomes as a consensus Prime Minister in a first
important step towards the implementation of the
Conakry Agreement, which we continue to believe is
the only way to bring the country out of its long political
and institutional crisis. I would also like to welcome the
central role played by the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and more generally by the
group of five international partners - ECOWAS, the
African Union, the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries, the European Union and the United
Nations - in achieving those results. It will be crucial
to ensure that Guinea-Bissau continues to benefit from
strong regional and international support in the months
and years to come, and that is a particular responsibility
of the Security Council.

Secondly, while encouraging progress has been
made over recent months, we expect to see further
significant measures over the next few weeks - first
and foremost, the holding of elections in November in
accordance with the announced schedule. In our View
that will be a significant test of the genuine will of
the various stakeholders to make progress towards the
full implementation of the Conakry Agreement. We
expect the Guinea-Bissau authorities to fully engage in
the technical preparations for the elections, including
voter registration, for which the necessary resources
must be made available as soon as possible and the
funds allocated for it in the national budget disbursed
without delay.

Thirdly, the international community must play its
full part in supporting the upcoming electoral process,
whether through the provision offinancial aid by leading
donors or technical assistance by the United Nations
Development Programme and the European Union. We
have equally high expectations of the Guinea-Bissau
authorities. The proper holding of the forthcoming
elections is also a prerequisite for any potential lifting
of sanctions. In that regard I want to welcome the
position of non-interference in political affairs taken by
the military authorities in Guinea-Bissau.

Fourthly, in the medium term, lasting peace and
stability in Guinea-Bissau will be re-established
through progress in other areas, such as the review
of the Constitution, which should enable the Bissau-
Guinean institutional system to avoid the impasses we
have seen in recent months. Those areas also include
the fight against organized crime, particularly drug-
trafficking - which will not only require resolute
commitment from the Guinea-Bissau authorities but also
sustained support from the international community,
especially the various United Nations actors on the
ground - as well as security sector reform, without
which there can be no long-term stability in the country,
as recent history has shown.

My fifth and last point is that France fully supports
the strategic review of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau that has begun
under the leadership of former Special Representative
Mr. Joao Honwana. We hope the process will be
guided by an unrestricted and objective evaluation of
the situation and the needs on the ground independent
of the positions that the various stakeholders have
expressed on the issue in the past few months. We
View this as a useful opportunity to reflect on how
to strengthen the scope of the good-offices role of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
improve coordination among the various international
community actors on the ground and provide the most
effective possible technical support, which Guinea-
Bissau needs more than ever.

It is still too early to say whether Guinea-Bissau is
safely on the path to long-term stability. The next few
months, and the legislative elections of November in
particular, will supply more answers to our questions
in that regard. The supportive role played by the region
and, more broadly, by the international community and
the Security Council, is all the more important in this
decisive period.

