Mr. Ducaru (Romania): At the outset, allow me
to express my gratitude for the opportunity to address
the Security Council once again during your able
presidency, Sir, on a topic of great importance for the
specific work of this organ of the United Nations.

I would like to welcome Mr. Joao Bernardo de
Miranda, the Foreign Minister of Angola, and to
express my appreciation for the introductory remarks
of Ambassador Ryan in his capacity as Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 864 (1993).

My delegation fully subscribes to the statement
delivered by the Permanent Representative of Sweden
on behalf of the European Union and associated
countries.

At the same time, I would like to take advantage
of the relevance of this debate to stress the Romanian
Government's determination to contribute to solving
the problems raised by the report of the Monitoring
Mechanism. We commend the professional and
objective manner in which the experts of the
Mechanism conducted their investigations. I will
refrain from elaborating on this subject, but allow me
to emphasize just a few particular aspects regarding
Romania's position on the arms trade and conflict in
Angola.

First, Romania is a committed participant in the
discussions, processes and developments regarding the
illicit trafficking in small arms, within the framework
of the Wassenaar Arrangement, of the European
Union - as an associated country - and of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.

Secondly, we are actively involved in improving
the internal mechanisms aimed at increasing the
efficiency of controlling Romanian exports of arms and
related military equipment. In this context, I would like
to mention the latest development relevant to our
discussion. The National Agency for the Control of
Strategic Exports and Ban of Chemical Weapons, the
main authority supervising the export of military
equipment, has been integrated within the new
structure of the Romanian Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
This institutional change, with political leverage, will
improve coherence, efficiency and effectiveness in
controlling arms exports.

Thirdly, we consider that the recommendations of
the Mechanism on arms and military equipment,
especially in paragraphs 228, 229 and 231 of the
report, should be given effect by this Council. It is very
important for every Member State to benefit from
additional information about third parties involved in
order to avoid any undesirable doubts about its
commitment in implementing such regimes.

We are engaged in the long-standing efforts to
bring peace and stability to every region of the world,
including through United Nations peacekeeping
missions. Relevant from this perspective is the
Romanian participation in United Nations

peacekeeping missions in Angola - the United
Nations Angola Verification Mission and the United
Nations Observer Mission in Angola - where the

Romanian contingent has always been appreciated for
its work in the field. This constructive approach on the
ground is consistent with our general political attitude
and action vis-a-vis the situation in Angola.

