Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I
too want to join in welcoming you, Mr. President, to
the Security Council today and for making yourself
available for this important meeting. This is a topic of
great importance to all members of the United Nations
community. I want particularly to thank the Secretary-
General and the Deputy Secretary-General for their
efforts to move this Organization from reacting to
crises to seeing if we can do a better job of preventing
them. We have a very thoughtful report before us
today; it provides a lot for us to consider and look at in
the future as we think about this important issue.

I want to call attention in particular to the
Secretary-General's observation that the primary
responsibility for conflict prevention rests with
national Governments, with civil society playing an
important role. The main role of the United Nations
and the international community is to support national
efforts for conflict prevention and to assist in building
national capacity in this field.

I think maybe one of the most useful services
provided by the Secretary-General's report is that,
while it reviews the mechanisms and institutions that
are available to assist in the prevention of conflict, it
really highlights the need for leadership and political
will in dealing with crisis. It is our task to find ways to
support prevention, but the primary need in most
crises, if not all crises, is for someone - an actor of
some sort, the Secretary-General or a regional
organization - to take the lead. With that leadership,
the question then becomes how the Security Council,
the United Nations, the General Assembly and other
United Nations bodies can support that impetus and
that initiative to head off a conflict.

In that regard, the report is very useful in
clarifying how the various parts of the United Nations
system can improve cooperation and coordination. We
fully agree that the Secretary-General, the Security
Council, the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council, the International Court of Justice and
the various United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes all have contributions to make. It is also
necessary - as is increasingly happening, I am glad to
say - that the various parts of the United Nations
system improve communication with one another to
forge new partnerships. But we have seen repeatedly in
our work over the past year how that sometimes does
not happen. We need to rededicate ourselves - all of
us, as United Nations Members and not just as Security
Council members - to breaking down barriers to
communication and false attitudes that prevent United
Nations bodies and institutions from talking to one
another and from cooperating.

We strongly support the recommendation that the
Security Council and the General Assembly make full
use of the information and analysis provided by United
Nations and other human rights mechanisms, as well as
by non-governmental organizations, in order to identify
massive human rights violations and to take early
action. In our view, that should be a central element of
trying to address crisis; we are seeing it play out now
in various parts of the world. We can do better in
supporting that.

The Security Council is already moving in the
direction of many of the Secretary-General's
recommendations, and I think we have improved our
work over the past year. In recent years members of the
Council have drawn upon the advice and information
provided by United Nations officials responsible for
the protection of children in conflict, AIDS prevention
and humanitarian response, in support of their
mandated work in maintaining international peace and
security.

I think that the Council is receptive to making
further use of the great expertise and experience
reflected throughout the United Nations system - I
know my delegation certainly is - and we are
increasingly doing so.

I wanted especially to applaud the Secretary-
General's commitment to enhancing his own role in
conflict prevention through four significant initiatives.
He proposes to authorize more fact-finding and
confidence-building missions to volatile regions; to
build relationships between the United Nations and
regional partners; to seek the help of panels of eminent
persons for conflict prevention; and to improve the
capacity within the Secretariat in support of conflict
prevention. All of these have our strong support, and it
goes back to the point I made at the outset about the
need for leadership.
We also applaud the Secretary-General's
recognition of the important role that must be played
by civil society and private economic interests in
conflict prevention. In volatile areas of potential
conflict, the activities of international non-
governmental organizations, both in relief efforts and
in efforts aimed at creating and strengthening social,
political and economic institutions, are indispensable.
This is another barrier that we need to overcome. We
simply cannot expect economic progress and
development to take place without the involvement of
private entities and non-governmental organizations.

My comments are by no means an exhaustive
review of the advice and recommendations provided by
this thoughtful report. This Council and the other
constituent parts of the United Nations system will
need time to evaluate it and time to work to fully digest
the details and the recommendations. But it is a good
basis - indeed, an excellent basis - for going ahead.
Our hope is that we will be able to use it to devise
better means to prevent conflicts and build on the
progress that we are already making. Our goal is for us
to need fewer interventions, peacekeeping missions or
massive humanitarian relief efforts in future. We are
making progress, but I want to note again the need for
leadership and will to act before crisis instead of
afterwards.

