Mr. Akram (Pakistan): First of all, I would like
to express our happiness at seeing Deputy President
Zuma of South Africa grace the Security Council once
again with his presence and to thank him for his
eloquent presentation to the Council. We welcome the
positive role which South Africa and in particular
Deputy President Zuma have played in facilitating the
peace process in Burundi.

I would also like to take this opportunity to note
with appreciation the thoughtful statement which has
been made here today by the President of the Economic
and Social Council, Ambassador Gert Rosenthal.

Pakistan is encouraged by the recent positive
developments in the Burundian peace process,
especially the participation of the National Council for
the Defence of Democracy-Forces for the Defence of
Democracy (CNDD-FDD) in the Transitional
Government's power-sharing arrangement. We hope
that an agreement will be reached soon which will open
the way for the FNL to sign the ceasefire and join the
peace process. We continue to urge all parties to abide
by the Arusha Agreement.

Pakistan also supports the efforts of the African
Union, particularly its peacekeeping mission. We
endorse the appeal made by the Union, which was
echoed here by Deputy President Zuma, for further
logistical and financial support in order to enable it to
fulfil its mandate - a mandate which the Council has
supported in its resolution 1375 (2001).

We urge donor countries and organizations to
provide the requisite assistance. The United Nations
should also examine the possibility of contributing to
peacekeeping efforts in Burundi, subject to the
agreement of all parties. A joint peacekeeping effort by
the United Nations and the African Union has also
been mentioned as a possibility by Deputy President
Zuma.

While these important steps are being taken
towards strengthening peace in Burundi, we still have
to deal with the human consequences of the conflict.
Humanitarian problems, including in particular the
problem of the repatriation and resettlement of
refugees and internally displaced persons, and the issue
of the cantonization and reintegration of armed fighters
are among the issues that must urgently be addressed.

The situation in Burundi is complex and requires
a comprehensive approach, not just in political terms
but also in its social and economic dimensions. In the
first instance, therefore, more generous assistance is
required for socio-economic recovery in Burundi. The
political process, without such appropriate economic
support, will not be sustainable.

In addition, we need to explore ways by which
the United Nations, particularly its three principal
organs, can assist in peace, reconciliation, recovery and
rehabilitation in Burundi. In that regard, we welcome
the Economic and Social Council resolution of 17 July
establishing an ad hoc advisory group. We should now
perhaps begin to consider other ways in which the
Economic and Social Council and the Security Council
can work together comprehensively to address the
problems in Burundi, for example, through the
establishment of a composite committee.

The African Union, working together with the
United Nations, including the Security Council, can
succeed in realizing the dream of all our members here
and the people of Burundi for peace and stability in
their country, which they so richly deserve.

