Malta thanks the French presidency of the Security Council for organizing this important open debate on children and armed conflict. Malta fully aligns itself with the statements submitted by the European Union and on behalf of the Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict. Malta is pleased to note that progress has been made since the adoption of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict, 20 years ago, and of resolution 1612 (2005), 15 years ago. However, we remain gravely concerned that children continue to be subjected to multiple forms of intersectional risks and vulnerabilities. The coronavirus disease pandemic has only heightened the gravity of the situation, and Malta avails itself of this opportunity to once again reiterate its support for the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire. Malta thanks the Secretary-General for his report on children and armed conflict (S/2020/525). It is shocking that the United Nations has verified 25,000 grave violations against children and 7,747 instances of recruitment of children. We stress that the killing, maiming, torture and rape of children are completely unacceptable, and the fact that such cases are happening all around the globe further underscores the need for collective action. We strongly condemn all attacks on schools and hospitals, which are in complete violation of international humanitarian law and show the utmost contempt for human life. Accountability, especially in such cases, is of crucial importance, as those crimes cannot go unpunished. In that connection, Malta also highlights the role of international mechanisms, including the International Criminal Court. We are proud to have co-sponsored the General Assembly resolution establishing 9 September as the International Day to Protect Education from Attack (resolution 74/275), as we stand convinced that education is not only an investment in the future of individual children but also an investment in society and international peace. Malta joins Special Representative Gamba de Potgieter in urging the inclusion of child protection provisions, such as securing the release of all children associated with parties to conflict, prioritizing their reintegration and immediately ending their recruitment and abuse. In that connection, we would like to underline the psychological impact that conflict has on children and the need to make sure that the mental consequences of conflict are duly addressed. It is crucial that we do not give up on children who have been involved with armed groups and exposed to extremist ideologies.
