Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, we wish to thank you for having
convened this meeting and also to thank Ambassador
Joanna Wronecka, Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005), concerning the
Sudan, for her detailed 90-day report on the work of
the Committee and for her important work at the helm
of the Committee. We would highlight in particular
the briefing given by Ms. Pramila Patten, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Sexual
Violence in Conflict, who informed us ofthe deplorable
situation faced by the Sudanese people, particularly
women and children, who are the primary victims of
this scourge, perpetrated by State and non-State actors.

In this regard, we note with concern the fact that
despite the improvement in the security situation in
many areas of Darfur, the number of victims of sexual
violence remains alarming. In addition, some cases
are not reported for various reasons, including fear
of reprisals, stigmatization or a failure to implement
the law. We underline the urgent need to bring those
responsible for these atrocity crimes to justice. We
support Ms. Patten's recommendations and wish
to stress in particular the importance of including
sexual violence as an independent listing criterion
for sanctions.

In this regard, as stated by the Secretary-General
in his most recent report, we believe that selective
sanctions are an important tool to address this
problem and that the Security Council can contribute
to preventing such crimes. Moreover, we note with
concern the fact that rebel groups in Darfur continue to
receive financing from various sources and countries in
the region. This poses an ongoing threat to the relative
stability in Darfur and, ultimately, runs counter to
efforts to achieve sustainable peace in the country.

We would highlight the importance of all parties
complying with the established arms embargo. We
deplore the repeated violations thereof and call on
the Government of the Sudan and Member States to
implement this international obligation; comply with
measures relating to the assets freeze; and cooperate
with the Panel of Experts.

We also note with concern the continued clashes
between the Government of the Sudan and the rebel
groups in the Jebel Marra area. The resulting violence
leads to further displacements and grave human rights
violations and abuses against civilians.

Finally, we congratulate and thank once again
Ambassador Wronecka for her work at the helm of the
Committee and pledge her our cooperation to continue
contributing to efforts aimed at bringing about a
definitive cessation ofhostilities and reaching a political
agreement that would allow for the consolidation of
sustainable peace in Darfur.

