Ms. Garcia Gutierrez (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation would like to thank you,
Madam President, for convening today's important
debate. We would also like to thank the Secretary-
General and the Director-General of the International
Committee of the Red Cross for their briefings.

Costa Rica aligns itselfwith the statements made by
the Permanent Representatives of Qatar and Panama on
behalf of the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to
Protect and the Human Security Network, respectively.

A year ago, we met in this Chamber to discuss the
progress made in the implementation of resolution 2286
(2016) (see S/PV.7951). A year later, we have an even
more devastating situation, where millions of people
are victims of the cruellest consequences of conflict,
forced to abandon their homes and deprived of the
most basic necessities. The urbanization of conflicts
exponentially increases the direct impact on civilians,
which further worsens the landscape we face.

The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/462) confirms that the challenges in this area
are becoming increasingly complex and profound, with
the most vulnerable populations, including women and
children, being the most affected. We agree with the
Secretary-General that the priority in such cases should
always be to prevent conflict and avoid its recurrence
or escalation, and we support his efforts in this regard.
However, the assistance and guarantee of human rights
protection and basic security guarantees to civilians
in conflict are responsibilities of all parties. We also
reiterate that the protection of medical and humanitarian
personnel, as well as medical facilities and hospitals,
must be a priority.

It is also imperative that all parties to armed
conflict, including non-State armed groups, make
commitments and take concrete measures to fulfil
their obligations to protect civilian populations, as well
as medical and humanitarian personnel and medical
facilities and hospitals. These obligations derive directly
from international law, international humanitarian law
and international human rights law, and from various
Security Council resolutions. In that regard, we would
like to highlight France's declaration on the subject,
adopted on 31 October last year. I would like to take
this opportunity to say that my country is pleased to
confirm its commitment to that initiative.

Restrictions on the provision of and access to
medical and humanitarian assistance in situations of
conflict not only contradict basic ethical principles of
humanity, they also constitute a flagrant violation of
international humanitarian law. Similarly, deliberate
attacks on medical personnel, medical facilities and
places of refuge for the sick and injured are considered
war crimes under international law. Parties to conflict
must cease such attacks once and for all, withdraw
from urban centres and refrain from using explosive
weapons in cities and other densely populated areas.
Such attacks not only result in a large number of victims
among civilians but also cause large-scale destruction
of homes, essential infrastructure and basic services,
which further aggravates the humanitarian situation of
people in conflict.

The use of explosive weapons in urban areas is
simply unacceptable and constitutes a huge humanitarian
challenge in current conflicts. We also condemn the
use of improvised explosive devices, in line with the
Secretary-General's report and the recommendations of
the International Committee of the Red Cross, and we
are deeply concerned about the reports of the ongoing
use of cluster munitions and chemical weapons. In
that regard, we believe that the situation will continue
to deteriorate until there is greater control of the
international arms trade. Legislation on arms exports
must comply with international humanitarian law
and international human rights law, and regulations
on their illicit use should be introduced in order to
prevent their unregulated circulation from continuing
to fuel conflicts. We therefore join the call made by the
Secretary-General to States that have not yet done so to
ratify the Arms Trade Treaty as a further measure for
addressing that issue and its terrible consequences for
civilian populations.

Costa Rica reaffirms its support for Secretary-
General's recommendations in his report. We reiterate
the importance of the Secretary-General continuing to
make use of the tools provided for in the Charter of
the United Nations by remaining vigilant, reporting
regularly to the Security Council and making direct
recommendations in order to protect, but above all to
prevent, attacks and violations of human rights against
the civilian population.

Particular attention should be paid to developing
national regulatory frameworks that establish
institutional responsibilities for the protection of
civilians, as well as to strengthening institutions and the
rule of law, in the context of respect for human rights
and the norms of international law. It is equally vital to
put an end to widespread impunity in such cases. My
country supports initiatives such as the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011. We advocate strengthening the Mechanism by
including it in the Organization's regular budget.

The Security Council must fulfil its obligation
to protect and see that justice is done for victims. It
is therefore urgent that it begin taking action by
referring crimes of mass atrocities to the International
Criminal Court in order to ensure accountability and
end impunity in cases where the national authorities
do not meet their obligations. In that regard, we once
again call on Council members to implement the code
of conduct promoted by the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group, and we urge the permanent
members in particular to refrain from using the veto,
appealing above all to their sense of humanity and
respect for life.

