Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): It is good to see the
High Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, Ms. Federica Mogherini,
back in the Security Council. I wish to thank her for the
range and depth of her comprehensive statement.

As the representative of Sweden mentioned, it is
fitting that we meet today on what is both Europe Day
and the Time of Remembrance and Reconciliation for
Those Who Lost Their Lives during the Second World
War. The Europe Union (EU), just like the United
Nations itself, emerged as a direct consequence of that
terrible conflict. Born of the same scourge of war, both
organizations have shared the same values since their
inception, cooperating closely to advance international
peace and security, democracy, the rule of law and
human rights.

Those values are just as relevant today in a world
that faces a different sort of challenge than those that the
founders of the United Nations and the European Union
envisaged. Terrorism, violent extremism, organized
crime, uncontrolled migration, Climate change and
globalization have created even more protracted and
complex conflicts and humanitarian crises. In the
face of these challenges, the United Nations and the
European Union need each other more than ever. Today
we need to develop smarter approaches to ensure that
efforts across both organizations are complementary
and collaborative in order to resolve conflicts, promote
peace and build long-term development.

From Russian aggression in Ukraine and the
annexation of Crimea to instability in Libya, the Horn
of Africa and the migration crises, Europe is sadly all
too familiar with the threats to security in its region and
across the globe. In those cases, the EU has demonstrated
its ability to support the United Nations as a global
security provider. We see that in our peacekeeping
partnerships in Somalia, in Mali and the Central African
Republic, where EU, United Nations and African
Union peacekeeping missions are doing a vital job in
maintaining peace and providing security and training.
As others said, Operation Sophia continues saving lives
in the waters of the Mediterranean, bringing traffickers
to justice, countering illegal migration and interdicting
weapons that can fuel violent extremism. As the High
Representative said, Security Council support for that
has been absolutely vital. In Ukraine, the European
Union is using targeted sanctions to help that country
in the face of Russian aggression.

The European Union also helps the United Nations
to resolve conflict through its mediation capacity as an
honest broker and a bridge-builder. We see that in Syria
and the Horn of Africa, where the European Union
is supporting the United Nations to foster political
dialogue with key actors so as to provide urgently needed
humanitarian assistance. Such activism can also be seen
with regard to Iran, where the EU, through the Office
of the of the High Representative, continues its key role
as coordinator of the joint commission contributing to
the implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action. As the High Representative said, the EU
approach links security, development and human rights
just as many of us seek to do in the Council.

The United Kingdom is proud to play its part in
that regard. Tomorrow's London Somalia Conference,
hosted by the United Kingdom's Prime Minister, the
Secretary-General and the President of Somalia, will be
an important moment to accelerate progress on security
sector reform and to support Somalia's movement
towards a political settlement. We are delighted that
the High Representative will also be present at that
conference. Furthermore, the European Union and the
United Nations are working together to deliver inclusive
development in protracted crises by implementing
new approaches that bring together peacebuilding,
development and humanitarian finance and expertise.
In response to the Syria crisis, the EU and the United
Nations are working together with refugee-hosting
countries so as to address more effectively the needs of
Syrian refugees and host populations.

But United Nations-EU cooperation goes well
beyond conflict resolution. As the Secretary-General
said in this Chamber, the United Nations needs to
reform so as to better contain and prevent modern-day
threats and build peace after conflicts end. We need
a United Nations that can prevent crises as well as
end them. The United Kingdom shares the Secretary-
General's commitment and the commitment that the
High Representative just reiterated on behalf of the
EU to reforming the United Nations so that there is a
further strengthening of the nexus between peace and
security, sustainable development and human rights. We
must all stand with the Secretary-General to implement
and deliver reform. That will be crucial for the United
Nations and for collaboration with the European Union
as we seek to tackle future threats to international peace
and security together and strengthen the effectiveness
of the multilateral system.

