Mr. Al-Shafi (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Sir, I would like to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month and to thank you for convening this meeting on
the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question, in the form of an open debate,
which gives us an opportunity to discuss the issue,
which is of paramount importance for security and
development in our region and throughout the world. I
also express our appreciation to Mr. Oscar Fernandez-
Taranco, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, for the briefing that he presented on behalf of
the Secretary-General.

We continue to witness the effects of the recent
Israeli military aggression on Gaza, the destruction and
damage that it left behind and the deteriorating
humanitarian situation resulting from the Israeli army's
use of disproportionate force and banned weapons such
as white phosphorus in heavily crowded residential
areas, as well as its targeting of houses of worship,
schools, hospitals and United Nations facilities. This is
considered a war crime, and those responsible for it
must be held accountable. Moreover, the new Israeli
Government is moving ahead with its predecessor's
obstruction of access to humanitarian aid and
reconstruction materials.

These extremely serious practices are targeting
the population at a time when the international
community's concern for the security of civilians is
heightened. The Security Council periodically
discusses the issue of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict and a few days ago the General
Assembly began its consideration of the responsibility
to protect. Moreover, international organizations and
non-governmental organizations continue to focus on
the need to protect the human rights and human
security of civilians throughout the world.

Despite all this, the suffering of Palestinian
civilians as a result of Israeli occupation and illegal
Israeli practices not only continues but is also being
intensified. Human conscience requires that we expose
the truth about all human rights violations committed
during that armed conflict. We must ensure that the
perpetrators of these crimes do not go unpunished.

We await the report of the fact-finding mission
appointed by the Human Rights Council to investigate
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law perpetrated in Gaza. The Israeli
Government must cooperate with that independent
international mission and with its Chairman, who is
known for his impartiality. The Secretary-General has
briefed the Security Council on a summary of the fact-
finding team's report. This team was formed over two
months ago, and we are still waiting for the Council to
take concrete measures based on the team's
recommendations.

Israeli authorities continue to build the separation
wall and to expand their settlements in a quest to, de
facto, annex more Palestinian territories. This threatens
the contiguity of Palestinian territories, which is
considered a basic requirement for a Palestinian State.
This can therefore be considered as a deliberate act that
aims to eliminate any chances of a permanent solution
to the Palestinian situation and as a blow to
international mediation efforts, especially those of the
international Quartet.

The State of Qatar believes that the solution to
the Palestinian issue lies in the establishment of two
States, living side by side in peace. Qatar believes that
the Israeli Government's attempts to expand
settlements, especially those around East Jerusalem,
undermine the chances of a two-State solution based on
the 1967 borders. If the Israeli Government seeks to
justify the expansion of its settlements by what it calls
natural growth, then we stress that we categorically
reject this concept, because settlement activity is
illegal to begin with, and such growth is by no means
natural. The general policy in Israel encourages
settlement in occupied Palestinian territory, especially
in East Jerusalem. It does so by offering Government
assistance and incentives to encourage the transfer of
Israeli civilian residents to Palestinian territory, in
violation of international law.

Israel continues to violate Lebanon's sovereignty,
in particular its airspace, on an almost daily basis. In
addition, Israel continues to occupy some Lebanese
territory and the Syrian Golan Heights. In that regard,
we reiterate that Israel's decision to annex the Golan
Heights is null and void. We stress the need to return
the Golan to Syria and to return the remaining
occupied Lebanese territory to Lebanon.

Just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the
region can be achieved only on the basis of the
principle of land for peace, the terms of reference
embodied in the relevant resolutions of the United
Nations, and the Arab Peace Initiative. The latter was
reaffirmed at the Doha summit of March 2009, which
also noted that the continued offer of the Arab
Initiative was contingent upon the Israeli side's
09-42592
acceptance of it. The new Israeli Government must
therefore refrain from adopting extremist positions. It
must take advantage of the genuine Arab desire to end
the crisis in the Middle East.

In conclusion, my country's delegation reiterates
the need to ensure the participation of all Palestinian
factions so as to ensure the success of the peace efforts.
Our Palestinian brothers must seriously endeavour to
achieve national unity in the service of the Palestinian
people.

