Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I trust that, in the
interests of time, Ambassador Tanin and the others who
have reported to the Council will excuse me if I take
the thanks as read.

There is no doubt that today's Afghan
Government still needs strong support to meet the
challenges it faces, or that it needs an international
community prepared to provide that support. We are
therefore pleased at the significant developments of the
last quarter. I intend to focus on just three of those.

New Zealand supports President Karzai's efforts
to build a new and peaceful Afghanistan. We welcome
the priority that the President placed on these three
areas at the London Conference in January and his
personal commitment to making progress in them in an
integrated manner. Fighting corruption is key to
improving governance, just as failing to do so would
greatly impede economic development.

Similarly, improving security is a multifaceted
challenge that requires not only building up the
national forces, but also providing the conditions for
reconcilable insurgents to return to the mainstream and
for countries in the region to play a constructive role.

In that regard, we and other contributors, the
people of Afghanistan who supported democracy in last
year's elections and the military and civilians who risk
their lives are all entitled to expect, and to see, urgent
progress on improving governance, without which our
combined efforts to achieve peace will falter. A
functioning and credible executive is essential to
effective governance. New Zealand urges both the
Afghan Parliament and President Karzai to work
together to form a full and final Cabinet as a matter of
priority.

We also look forward to the necessary steps being
taken ahead of parliamentary elections in September to
ensure that electoral institutions are transparent,
impartial and independent.

As the Secretary-General's report (S/2010/127)
makes clear, corruption is corrosive. Corruption in
Afghanistan is corrosive: it hinders stability and it
inhibits growth. At the London Conference, we joined
those welcoming the Government's commitment to
fight corruption, address its causes and develop
benchmarks by which to measure progress.

We are pleased in particular to see the formation
of the anti-corruption unit and the appointment of
judges to an anti-corruption tribunal. We look forward
to further measures being implemented before the
Kabul Conference. In passing, we are pleased that that
Conference can take place in Afghanistan, and not
elsewhere.

New Zealand welcomes President Karzai's plans
to promote reconciliation. We agree that this will need

broad national support. However, we urge the
Government to ensure that reconciliation is not
achieved at the expense of human rights.

On economic development, we are pleased to see
efforts to prioritize and cluster components of the
National Development Strategy. New Zealand is in the
process of aligning its own development support to
prioritize agriculture and rural development. We
welcome the current efforts to simplify the
international approach to delivering development
assistance. We support the central role of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
in coordinating that assistance to support Government
priorities identified in the National Development
Strategy. We welcome UNAMA's revised mandate in
that regard.

On security, New Zealand, along with other
International Security Assistance Force partners, is
committed to providing a clearly defined pathway for
transferring primary responsibility for security to the
National Security Forces, thus allowing international
forces to draw down and for a shift in the focus of
international efforts to building civilian capacities.
Like other contributors, ideally we would like our
troops home as soon as possible. But the objective is to
leave the country secure and confident in its ability to
meet the security and development needs of its people.

In Bamyan province, New Zealand has already
committed to the progressive transfer of security
responsibility from the New Zealand-led provincial
reconstruction team (PRT) to Afghan authorities. We
aim to have an ambassador on the ground in Kabul
soon and to move leadership of the PRT to a civilian
role, to ensure better support for coherent civilian and
development assistance efforts.

As many have said here today and elsewhere, this
is a critical moment for Afghanistan. As always, time is
short. That said, Afghanistan needs time and space to
rebuild. New Zealand is committed to playing its part
in providing those opportunities. But there must be
measurable progress on all fronts, including
governance, economic development and security, as all
are interrelated. New Zealand fully respects the fact
that it is the sovereign right of the Government and
people of Afghanistan to decide how best to address
these challenges and deliver those outcomes. But
everyone with a stake in Afghanistan now knows that
failure to act is not an option. The risks of such a
failure are simply too high.

