Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I warmly thank
Under-Secretary-General Le Roy and the Force
Commanders for their briefings. Let me take this
opportunity to pay tribute to the work of the Force
Commanders, both those who briefed us and all the
others who are here today, and to the work of all of the
women and men who are under their command,
frequently, as we know, in very challenging
circumstances and at great personal risk.

As part of our collective efforts to strengthen the
Council's role in peacekeeping, in our presidential
statement of 5 August 2009 (S/PRST/2009/24),
adopted almost exactly a year ago, we acknowledged
the need to improve access to military advice. Since
then, we have made some progress, but more can be
done to improve the Council's understanding of the
operational demands placed on troops and police by the
peacekeeping resolutions we draft. If we are going to
write realistic and achievable mandates, we need the
best possible understanding of what is achievable. We
therefore very much welcome the fact, Sir, that you
have arranged this meeting today.

That is also the reason why the United Kingdom
supported changes to improve consultation and
interaction with troop and police contributors in the
lead-up to mandate renewal or change, and it is why
we support the convening of j oint political and military
expert meetings to discuss peacekeeping operations, in
particular before the United Nations dispatches a
technical assessment mission. It is also why we are
willing to explore ways to make the Military Staff
Committee more inclusive and relevant, in order to
help us make decisions that enable peacekeepers to
implement their mandates fully.

The ground has already been very well covered
by other speakers, but I just have a few comments and
questions for the Force Commanders. First of all, we
heard from a number of them about the challenge of
protecting civilians and the fact that in order to achieve
protection of civilian mandates, the forces need more
agility and more mobility. But at the same time, they
face a shortage of air assets and problems over freedom
of movement. So my question on this, for the Force
Commanders, is whether or not better technology and
intelligence could be an appropriate and effective force
multiplier to help them achieve those protection of
civilian mandates.

Secondly, with respect to robust peacekeeping or
deterrents, robustness in peacekeeping is, of course, a
sensitive concept, but we are not talking here about
peace enforcement. Nevertheless, in order to be
effective in today's highly complex peacekeeping
environment, United Nations missions must have the
capacity and the will to deter those who would derail
the peace process or threaten civilians and United
Nations peacekeepers.

As a team from my delegation saw at first hand
recently in Haiti, when the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) patrols
the streets of Cite Soleil in Port-au-Prince each night,
Brazilian troops demonstrate a credibly robust posture
that deters any would-be attackers. That is a conscious
and deliberate tactic - one which has created an
environment in which other United Nations agencies
and international organizations can operate safely
without the need for armed escort.

Earlier this year, the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations expressed its support for this
sort of deterrent posture. I would be interested to hear
the force commanders' views on this as a concept and
on the ability or otherwise of their own missions to
establish such deterrence.

On quick impact projects and reconstruction:
clearly, there are circumstances where peacekeeping
operations should get involved in such projects and in
reconstruction, not least in the early stages, to establish
credibility with the local communities. But we need to
make sure that our peacekeepers' willingness to help
does not crowd out those agencies better placed or
better funded to support early recovery and
reconstruction. We need to know that activities
undertaken in the short term will not prejudice long-
term sustainable development.

Where international peacekeepers provide the
only viable substitute for local services in the short
term, we must make every effort to build up local
capacity alongside such service delivery and from the
beginning. That is why the United Kingdom argues for
strict oversight and for limits to be set on funding for
quick impact projects and why we support closer

integration among United Nations peacekeeping
operations, local Governments and other United
Nations agencies, donors and international
organizations on the ground.

This area is one that General Cruz touched upon
in his very helpful briefing. It would be interesting to
hear a bit more from him about how he ensures that the
efforts of MINUSTAH on the humanitarian and
reconstruction fronts are coordinated with other parts
of the United Nations in the field to ensure that there is
coherence and that there are no problematic overlaps.

I would like to make a point on security sector
reform in Liberia. We heard from General Afzal that
progress on security sector reform in Liberia is slow. It
would be interesting to hear from him his views on
why that is the case and what we can do to address it.

Under the United Kingdom presidency of the
Security Council in August last year, we were fortunate
to hear from Lieutenant General Agwai, then the Force
Commander of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (see S/PV.6178), and it was
striking how succinctly and persuasively he cut to the
most pertinent challenges faced by that mission at that
point. And listening to the force commanders this
morning, I was reminded once again of the enormous
value of a view from the field. I would like to thank
them very much for taking time out of their annual
conference to speak to us. I hope that this tradition can
be maintained.

