Mr. Vrailas: Thank you, Mr. President, for giving
the floor to the European Union (EU).

The acceding country Croatia, the candidate
countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Montenegro and Iceland, the countries of
the Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Serbia, and the European Free
Trade Association country Norway, member of the
European Economic Area, as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align
themselves with this declaration.

First and foremost, I would like to congratulate
President Ramos-Horta and the Government of Timor-
Leste on the continued progress as manifestly spelled
out in the Secretary-General's report before us
(S/2012/43). The Government's leadership in fostering
peace, unity and development continues to bear fruit.
I would also like to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Ameerah Haq for her briefing.
Her team's efforts towards stabilization and recovery
deserve much praise. We also commend the thorough
way in which the team is preparing for the departure of
the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) and the necessary transition of the work of
the international community.

Over the years, Timor-Leste has accomplished
impressive progress in terms of stability, democracy,
the rule of law, human rights and economic growth. It
has demonstrated to the international community its
resolve to stay the course, with this year's elections as
yet another important milestone. The gradual
downsizing and proposed ultimate withdrawal of
UNMIT by the end of this election year are logical
steps on that path.

We share the Secretary-General's positive
appraisal of the steady progress in preparing the
presidential and parliamentary elections. Particularly
encouraging is the constructive and responsible manner
in which political leaders, security forces and civil
society have been interacting, at the national and local
levels, to ensure a safe and responsible electoral
process, consistent with previous occasions. In view of
the coming electoral period and the challenges created
thereby, continued close cooperation between the
Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste and the United
Nations police, as mutually agreed, remains important.

Next week an EU election exploratory mission
will visit Timor-Leste to assess the merit and feasibility
of an EU election observation mission for the
upcoming parliamentary elections. A decision on the
deployment of such a mission will be taken in the
immediate weeks thereafter.

In addition to consolidating democracy,
reconciliation remains an important precondition for
Timor-Leste's long-term stability. We call on the
National Parliament to resume discussions on the two
draft laws on the memorial institute and reparations,
and on the implementation of the recommendations of
the Commission for Reception, Truth and
Reconciliation.

Another element that in our view requires
continued attention is security sector reform. Although
considerable progress has been achieved as regards
higher standards of professionalism and discipline,
accountability mechanisms and the integrity of the
security forces, we encourage Timor-Leste to continue
and to consolidate its efforts.

Turning to the post-UNMIT landscape, we
believe that the necessary decisions need to be taken in
coordination between the Timorese Government and
the United Nations. Whichever setup is decided upon,
from a European perspective it should be designed to
ensure a smooth transition, without any significant
gaps, and to preserve the considerable achievements of
UNMIT's activities to date. We also believe that
appropriate follow-up needs to be ensured of UNMIT's
important work on, among other things, justice, the
rule of law and human rights, including through a
continuation of support to the Provedor for Human
Rights and Justice. In that context, the creation of a
local office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights could also be an option worth exploring.

We have stood by Timor-Leste's side through its
challenging times and remain committed to doing so in
the future. As the focus is shifting from security and
stability to development issues, the international
community should remain strongly engaged. With the
adoption of the Timor-Leste Strategic Development
Plan, the implementation of the new deal for
engagement in fragile States and the continuous efforts
of development partners, we are confident that Timor-
Leste will continue to be a successful example in terms
of State-building and socio-economic development.

In conclusion, we fully support the extension of
the Mission's mandate until 31 December 2012 and we
look forward to the next Secretary-General's report
assessing the elections and providing recommendations
on the way forward to the successful completion of
UNMIT's mandate and the eventual establishment of a
post-UNMIT United Nations presence in Timor-Leste.

