Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank the President of the Security Council for
convening this debate on Afghanistan. I also thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Afghanistan, Mr. Haysom, for his briefing, as
well as the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
Mr. Saikal, for his statement.

Recently, the security situation in Afghanistan has
worsened. Many conflicts and terrorist attacks have
occurred inside that country, resulting in heavy civilian
casualties. The Afghan Government of National Unity
has worked to maintain national stability, fostering
economic development and promoting national
reconstruction. However, Afghanistan still has a long
way to go before it can achieve comprehensive economic
and social development and enable all its people to
benefit from the peace dividend. That requires the joint
efforts of all people in Afghanistan and the support and
assistance of the international community. I would like
to emphasize four points.
First, efforts should be made to improve the
security environment in Afghanistan to avoid a reversal
of the situation. The international community should
vigorously support Afghanistan, including by helping
to build the capacity of its national security forces. That
should include intensified training for Afghanistan's
counter-terrorism and border control officials and
the improvement of its independent self-defence and
counter-terrorism capabilities. The parties concerned
should also comprehensively implement the Islamabad
declaration of the fifth Ministerial Conference of the
Istanbul Process, take effective security measures and
formulate common counter-terrorism measures to help
the Government respond effectively to the challenges
and threats of terrorism, transboundary crime and
drug trafficking.

Secondly, efforts should be made to support
effective administration by the Afghan Government
and to strengthen State governance. The Afghan
Government of National Unity has begun formulating
the new national development strategy. The
international community should, in the light of the
strategic priorities and specific needs of Afghanistan,
help the Afghan Government to improve the efficiency
of its administration and governance capabilities and
consolidate the fruit of State-building efforts there. The
parties in Afghanistan should also build solidarity and
continue to settle their differences through dialogue and
consultation in a commitment to achieve development
and prosperity in Afghanistan.

Thirdly, attention should be paid to the efficacy of
assistance to ensure that Afghanistan benefits in the long
term. The international community should continue to
provide assistance to Afghanistan, while placing equal
emphasis on providing such assistance and enabling the
country to assist itself, and promoting comprehensive
economic and social development in the country.
Additional international aid would mean added hope
for the Afghan people. The international community
should continue to provide Afghanistan with relief
in the form of humanitarian goods, and help ease the
pressing needs of the Afghan population. Cooperation
with regard to infrastructure and investment in trade
should also be intensified, and human-resource training
augmented in order to increase Afghanistan's ability to
function independently. Resolution 2274 (2016) calls
upon the parties to actively participate in economic
initiatives, such as the "One Belt, One Road" strategy.
This will provide new opportunities for the economic
and social development of Afghanistan. We hope that
the parties concerned will take proactive action in this
regard.

Fourthly, the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) should continue to play an
important role in coordinating international efforts. In
accordance with the Council mandate and in the light
of the aspirations of Afghanistan, the Mission should
comprehensively push forward international efforts in
support of Afghanistan's development and improved
governance.Inthepoliticalfield,UNAMAshouldsupport
an Afghan-led peace process, and should support the
Afghan parties in bolstering their confidence-building
measures. With regard to regional cooperation,
UNAMA should fully leverage Afghanistan's unique
geographical advantage as it assists the country in its
move towards regional cooperation and in boosting
the international community's confidence in a smooth
Afghan transformation.

The realization of extensive and inclusive national
reconciliationinAfghanistaniskeyto settlingtheAfghan
question. China supports a reconciliation process that
is Afghan-owned and Afghan-led. China has actively
participated in the Quadrilateral Coordination Group
on Afghan Peace and Reconciliation in an effort to
create an enabling external environment for achieving
reconciliationand to help the Government work out a
practicable road map for reconciliation. China is ready
to join all parties in continuing to play a constructive
role in achieving reconciliation and reconstruction in
Afghanistan, and in continuing to help bring about
the early attainment of lasting peace and prosperity
in Afghanistan.

