Mr. Mukerji (India): We thank you, Madam
President, for this opportunity. Given the paucity of
time and the large number of speakers, I will read out
an abridged version of our statement, which is being
circulated for the record.

We thank the briefers at this meeting and the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2013/689). We also
thank and congratulate you, Madam President, for the
concept note circulated for this meeting (S/2014/74, annex).

As the concept note reminds us, this year marks the
fifteenth anniversary of the Council's engagement on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. However,
the targeting of civilians is not a recent phenomenon.
It in fact predates the United Nations first large-scale
mission, which was launched in the Congo in 1960.
It certainly goes back to the two world wars of past
century, which saw large-scale killing of civilians in
concentration camps and indiscriminate air raids. We
also need to take cognizance of the grim conclusion
that dispatching foreign troops does not automatically
protect the civilian population.

We need to ask: who is the civilian and who is the
combatant? Are the civilians the tens of thousands of
Nuer who last December took refuge in the compounds
of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) in Juba? Or are they the equal number of
Dinka who were doing so in United Nations compounds
in Jonglei? We need to question whether a robust
mandate automatically translates into the protection of
civilians?

On 19 December 2012, some 2,000 armed youths
attacked the UNMISS base in Akobo that was
providing protection to Dinka refugees. The 40 Indian
peacekeepers were heavily outnumbered. They had
superior fire power and a robust mandate that would
have allowed them to use force, not just in self-defence
but also in defence of the mandate. Had they opened,
fire hundreds of lives would have been lost. Would
those lives have been civilians or combatants? And the
troops who availed themselves of their superior fire
power, would they have been peacekeepers or war-
makers?

Those are real-life situations. They are known to
those who have boots on the ground, and to those who
give up their lives in defence of the highest ideals of
the United Nations. While a bloodbath was avoided
on 19 December 2012, Warrant Officers Kumar Pal
Singh and Dharmesh Sangwan paid for it with their
supreme sacrifice. Were they exposed to risks that were
unacceptably high? That is a tragic but real conundrum
that cannot be ignored.

The concept note very correctly refers to the
disparity between mandated tasks and allocated
resources being an important challenge. The note can
certainly not be accused of overstating the case. The
Working Group on Contingent-Owned Equipment met
last month for the first time in three years. Troop-
contributing countries (TCCs) asked for a revision of
the daily allowance. It is now $1.28 per day, and has
been so for the past 20 years. The TCCs also asked for
a revision of the rest-and-recuperation allowance. It is
$10 per day, and has been so for the past decade. The
Committee could, however, only agree to an overall
increase of $0.75 per cent to the contingent-owned-
equipment rate. The challenge that the United Nations
faces in the disparity between mandates and resources
is truly an important one.

Turning to mandates and their interpretation, the
concept note again very wisely refers to the requirement
for consultation, including among the Council, the
Secretariat and troop-contributing countries, prior to
the establishment of and throughout the life cycle of
peacekeeping missions.

Troop-contributing countries put at risk the lives
of their soldiers in the service of the United Nations.
The TCCs know the situation on the ground better than
most, as they are in daily touch with developments and
can, on the basis ofpractical experience, advise on what
needs to be done. Their advice will be sound, objective
and unbiased. It can serve the Council well.

Some five decades ago when the first operation was
set up, in the Congo, there was a conflict within a State.
Regional Powers were involved. There was a collapse
of administration and the United Nations was invited
in. At one stage, India provided 6,000 of the 16,000
troops deployed. Fifty-three years ago, my predecessor
the Permanent Representative C.S. J ha spelled out why
India wanted to have an influence on the Council's
thinking. His words are just as valid today. He said,

"We cannot forget, nor should the Council forget,
that we have involved ourselves in the Congo at
very great sacrifice, and that involvement does not
mean merely the discomfort, the inconveniences
and sometimes the loss of life to our young men
serving in the Congo. This involvement is related
to the whole state of public opinion in our country,
and, ourselves being a democratic country, this
naturally has a great influence on our Parliament
and on our Government." (S/PV982, p. 4)

Alhough C.S. Jha voiced our Views on what needed
to be done, the views were ignored. Things started
to go bad. More than half a dozen troop contributors
withdrew from the Congo operations because they could

not agree with the way it was run by the Council and
by the Secretariat. That is, inter alia, why we ask that
consultations be held whenever there is a change in the
situation on the ground. The TCCs are the first to know
that things are going wrong. Consultations must be held
before the Council changes a mandate. The TCCs must
know and accept in advance material changes to the
terms and conditions under which they committed their
troops. That is also important for TCCs because their
Governments, Parliaments and their people want to
know why their soldiers have been sent into situations
not anticipated when the United Nations request for
forces was accepted.

We hear in the corridors of this building that
the mandate of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) is going to change. We have
not been told, but those who wield the pen would know.

We understand that you, Madam President, will
be organizing an open debate on the rule of law next
week. We do not know if we will participate. When we
spoke in the Council on 24 November 1961 our voice
was not heard. We fear that the same may happen today.
We hope that the consequences will not be the same.
In the event that we do not make ourselves heard on
19 February, we avail ourselves of this opportunity
to request the members of the Council to remind
themselves of the requirements of Article 44 of the
Charter of the United Nations. The rule of law, as far as
the Council is concerned, requires TCCs to participate
in the Council's decisions, and notjust be consulted on
them.

In conclusion, I will lay a few questions before the
entire membership of the United Nations, because it is
on their behalf that the Council acts.

Does the peacekeeper shoot to protect? Should
he have done so on 19 December 2013? Should he
do so in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
once a revised mandate is adopted for the entire
Mission that requires - not as an exception but as
a rule - MONUSCO to take on targeted offensive
operations against armed groups? Who will then be the
civilian and who will then be the combatant when we
cross the Mogadishu line in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo once again?

