Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): We regret
the two vetoes against the American draft resolution
(S/2019/186) - a draft resolution that could have
contributed to a political and peaceful resolution of the
crisis in Venezuela and relieved the suffering of the
Venezuelan people at a time when they are facing one
of the worst humanitarian crises in its history.

Contrary to what we have heard here in the
Chamber, the American text, which took into account
many of our requests, was neither a legal basis for the
use of force nor an attempt to undermine the sovereignty
of Venezuela. As everyone knows, France - along
with the whole of the European Union - has constantly
reiterated its repudiation of the use of force to resolve
the Venezuelan crisis, to echo what the State Secretary
of the Federal Foreign Office of Germany has just said.

The draft resolution of which we voted in favour
reflects not only the tragic reality of Venezuela today,
but also our commitment to a peaceful and political
resolution of the crisis. As many States, including
France, pointed out last Tuesday (see S/PV.8472), the
holding of free, credible and transparent presidential
elections should be the priority objective for the
restoration of Venezuelan democracy. It is a matter of
delivering a political solution to a political crisis. That
is the raison d'etre of the International Contact Group
launched by the European Union and Uruguay, of which
France is a member.

The stance of the countries that blocked the draft
resolution after having refused to participate in the
negotiations serves to protect Nicolas Maduro's regime.
Along with the majority of the Council's member
States, France believes that it is the responsibility of
the Security Council to strongly condemn the blockage
of humanitarian aid, as well as the use of violence
against women and men whose only crime is a desire to
provide help and assistance to their fellow citizens. The
use of the veto today serves to protect a regime that has
decided to starve its people.

Furthermore, the text submitted by Russia
(S/20l9/l90) clearly does not provide a solution to the
current crisis. It maintains the illusion that Venezuela
is in a peaceful situation and raises the spectre of
foreign invasion at a time when 3.5 million migrants
and refugees have fled the country and the majority
of the population has been plunged into total poverty.
The Russian draft resolution does not include a single
word on those tens of millions of people. Not once
does the word "humanitarian" appear in the draft
resolution. The Venezuelan population's access to
neutral, transparent and independent international aid
is an absolute necessity.

Today's impasse must not and cannot lead us to
resign ourselves to the situation. France will pursue its
efforts, in particular through the International Contact
Group. It is in that spirit that I wish to reiterate our
call for a peaceful and negotiated end to the crisis,
which entails the organization of free, credible and
transparent presidential elections as soon as possible,
as well as free access to humanitarian aid.

While Venezuela is now on the verge of collapse,
our responsibility is neither to supplant the Venezuelan
people nor to make decisions for them. On the contrary,
it is to give them a voice and allow them to express
themselves freely in order for them to take ownership
of their destiny. Therein lies the compass that guides
France's actions.
