Mr. Fowler (Canada) (spoke in French): The
international community is facing a situation in which a
Government at the heart of Europe is flouting the most
fundamental rights of its citizens using disproportionate
force to suppress dissidents, sending its armoured tanks and
artillery to destroy villages, killing innocent civilians and
forcing hundreds of thousands of persons to leave their
homes in the cold of winter.

For ten years we have been witnessing the tragedy
being played out in the Balkans: first in Slovenia, next in
Croatia and then in Bosnia. During the past year, the same
disproportionate violence against the civilians of an ethnic
group has prevailed in Kosovo.

The international community has spared no effort to
encourage the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to conclude
a peaceful agreement with the Albanian population of
Kosovo. Many diplomatic missions have been sent to
Belgrade, and the Security Council of the United Nations,
acting under Chapter VII of the Charter, has adopted
important resolutions identifying this conflict as a threat to
the peace and security of the region.

(spoke in English)

Resolutions 1199 (1998) and 1203 (1998) and the
October agreements among the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) impose clear legal
obligations on the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to
respect a ceasefire, protect its civilian population and limit
the deployment of its security forces in Kosovo. An
important element of these agreements was the creation of
a Verification Mission under the auspices of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe. Its
purpose was not only to monitor the ceasefire, but also to
build confidence in the region.

Most recently, the parties were convened at an
international peace conference in Rambouillet, where they
were urged to abandon their maximalist positions and
accept an honourable compromise for peace. Ultimately,
the Kosovars demonstrated courage and vision by signing
the Rambouillet peace agreement. The only holdout was
the Yugoslav President, who refused to move from his
utterly intransigent position.

Unfortunately, the intensive and exhaustive
diplomatic efforts of the international community did not
succeed. The looming humanitarian disaster caused by
President Milosevic's refusal to accept any peaceful
compromise leaves the international community with very
few options. Every day, the situation worsens and it is the
civilian population - principally women and children -
that suffers. According to the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, over 450,000 people have
been displaced by the conflict in Kosovo, including over
260,000 internally displaced within Kosovo. In the last
few days alone, over 25,000 persons have been forced to
leave their homes.

As long as it remains unresolved, the conflict in
Kosovo threatens to precipitate a far larger humanitarian
disaster and destabilize the entire region. In Canada, our
preference has always been for a diplomatic solution and
the diplomatic track has been given every chance to
succeed. The continuing oppression in Kosovo by the
Government in Belgrade, through its armed forces and
police; the continuing failure on the part of the Milosevic
Government to implement the agreements it has made
with the OSCE and NATO; and its continuing refusal to
act in compliance with the requirements of successive
Security Council resolutions - actions which, I repeat,
have only contributed to an increase in tension and have
created a major humanitarian disaster - have left NATO
with no choice but to take action.

 

NATO's objectives are to avert an ever-widening
humanitarian crisis. The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
must comply with its obligations, including respect for a
ceasefire, an end to violence against the civilian population,
and full observance of limits on the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia's security forces, as agreed on 25 October 1998.

Humanitarian considerations underpin our action. We
cannot simply stand by while innocents are murdered, an
entire population is displaced, villages are burned and
looted, and a population is denied its basic rights merely
because the people concerned do not belong to the "right"
ethnic group. We remain deeply concerned about further
atrocities, and those responsible should be well aware that
they will be held accountable.

