Ms. L¢j (Denmark): Mr. President, let me begin
by thanking your delegation for convening this meeting
on protection of civilians in armed conflicts.

I would also like to express our sincere gratitude
to the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, Mr. Jan Egeland, for his consistent and
unyielding determination to assist the millions of
innocent people who have been caught up in the
negative consequences of armed conflict. We wish him
all the best in his future endeavours.

Furthermore, I would like to fully associate my
delegation with the statement to be delivered later in
the debate by the Permanent Representative of Finland
on behalf of the European Union.

As the statement by Mr. Egeland clearly
illustrates, the efforts of the Security Council to
maintain peace and security continues to come up short
in the global perspective. It follows that the need to
protect civilians affected by armed conflict is an
ongoing imperative for the Council with no immediate
end in sight. For that reason, we cannot continue to
approach the question on an almost ad hoc basis.
Populations in need must be able to depend on our will
to come to their assistance, and perpetrators must be
assured that their crimes will not go unpunished.
Efforts by the Council and the international community
as a whole to protect civilians in situations of conflict
must be more predictable, timely and systematic.

A comprehensive framework for the protection of
civilians already exists, particularly in the large body
of international humanitarian law and in the three main
Security Council resolutions on the issue. The
immediate attention of the Council should therefore be
devoted to implementing the protection framework in
order to produce real improvements on the ground.

Emphasis should be placed on providing more
comprehensive peacekeeping by, inter alia,
incorporating the protection of civilians into the
mandates of United Nations peacekeeping operations
as a central element. Such mandates must be supported
with the necessary capacity and practical support,
06-64061

enabling the peacekeeping forces to properly address
protection needs on the ground, including by taking
firm action against sexual violence and by providing
protection to internally displaced persons.

The protection of civilians is a multifaceted
challenge, and so must our response be. We must put to
their best use the relatively limited number of tools
available to the Security Council. That includes
increasing our capacity to monitor and report on
violations against civilians - an effort that is being
successfully spearheaded on the issue of children
affected by armed conflict. But it also includes
referring violators to international courts, including the
International Criminal Court, and using targeted
sanctions to deter attacks against civilians, including
humanitarian workers, workers for non-governmental
organizations and journalists. The Council must
overcome its reluctance to fully use those tools if it
seriously wishes to move the protection agenda
forward.

Each individual State has the responsibility to
protect its population from genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.
Unfortunately, in some cases, States manifestly fail to
provide the necessary protection - or the perpetrator
is the State itself. In situations in which a State
embarks on waging war against its own population, the
responsibility to protect the civilians affected becomes
that of the international community. We have a moral
and political obligation not to turn our backs on the
many civilians who suffer from attacks carried out by,
or with the consent of, their own Governments.

Whether or not the concept of the responsibility
to protect needs further consideration is, as such,
irrelevant. Given the lack of action and engagement
elsewhere, the basic political commitment not to allow
another Rwanda or Srebrenica is the responsibility of
all of us, including the Security Council, as well as of
other United Nations bodies.

In that regard, Denmark welcomes the decision
by the Human Rights Council to convene a special
session on the human rights situation in Darfur. It is
high time that all actors engage in a comprehensive and
constructive dialogue on that unacceptable situation.
That in turn must lead to prompt and decisive action to
alleviate the suffering of the people of Darfur.

The reporting and dissemination of news from
areas entangled in conflict is often the only hope that
3
the affected populations have of influencing national,
regional and international actors to step in and address
the situation. Consequently, Denmark is deeply
concerned by the alarming increase in attacks against
journalists in recent armed conflicts. The continued
targeting of journalists, in flagrant violation of
international humanitarian law, is unacceptable and has
now reached a level where the Security Council must
express its clear condemnation of the situation. We
hope that the initiative on this important issue,
presented by France and Greece and supported by the
United Kingdom, Slovakia and Denmark, will find
general support in the Security Council.

