Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): The Secretary-
General has presented a catalogue of danger in the
Middle East, including Gaza, Yemen and Iraq. It is no
disrespect to those issues that today, like other speakers,
I will concentrate on Syria. The United Kingdom will
be ready to put its shoulder to the wheel on those other
issues when the time comes.

The situation we face today and the reason we are
in the Security Council today arise wholly and solely
from the use of chemical weapons on the Syrian people,
most probably by the Syrian regime - not just once,
but consistently and persistently over the past five
years. The highest degree of responsibility, to quote the
Russian Ambassador, is indeed what the Council, and
in particular its five permanent members, are for, and it
is our duty to uphold.

The British Cabinet met recently and concluded
that the Al-Assad regime has a track record of the
use of chemical weapons and that it is highly likely
the regime is responsible for Saturday's attack. This
is a further example of the erosion of international
law in relation to the use of chemical weapons, as my
French and American colleagues have set out, and it
is deeply concerning. But more important than that,
the use of chemical weapons cannot be allowed to go
unchallenged. The British Cabinet has agreed on the
need to take action to alleviate humanitarian distress
and to deter the further use of chemical weapons by
the Al-Assad regime. To that end, we will continue
to work with our friends and allies to coordinate an
international response.

The Secretary-General mentioned the Cold War.
Of course, the Cold War was bracketed by East-West
cooperation. We have been on the same side as Russia.
In April 1945, Russia liberated Vienna as part of our
joint efforts to bring peace to Europe. In 1995, it passed
the Dayton Accords at part of our joint efforts to bring
peace and stability to Bosnia and Herzegovina. But in
2018 the Russians refuse to work with us to bring peace
to Syria.

Instead, since the first attack on Ghouta and

chemical-weapons use, in 2013, the Joint Investigative
Mechanism has ascribed two uses of mustard gas to
Da'esh, three uses of chlorine to the Syrian regime and
one use of sarin to the Syrian regime before the latest
attack. As my French colleague has set out, the United
Kingdom, the United States and France are members in
good standing of the Chemical Weapons Convention.
We are members and supporters of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and its
Fact-finding Mission. In the debates in the Security
Council earlier this week, we would have dispatched
an investigative mission, had Russia and Bolivia not
blocked that effort (see S/PV.8228).

Syria is the latest pernicious chronology of Russia's
disregard for international law and disrespect for the
international institutions we have built together to keep
us collectively safe. This is revealed in actions over
Georgia 10 years ago, over Malaysia Airlines Flight
MH-17 and over the attack in Salisbury, which we will
return to next week.

Let me repeat what I said in the Security Council
last week. My Government and the British people are
not Russophobic. We have no quarrel with the Russian
people. We respect Russia as a country. We prefer a
productive relationship with Russia, but it is Russia's
own actions that have led to this situation.

What has taken place in Syria to date is in itself
a violation of the United Nations Charter. No purpose
or principle of the Charter is upheld or served by the
use of chemical weapons on innocent civilians. On
the contrary: to stand by and ignore the requirements
of justice, accountability and the preservation of
the non-proliferation regime is to place all our
security - not just that of the Syrian people - at
the mercy of a Russian veto. We will not sacrifice the
international order we have collectively built to the
Russian desire to protect its ally at all costs.

The Russian Ambassador set out what Russia is
doing on the ground in Syria. He thought that might
be inconvenient for me to hear. However, it is not
inconvenient for me to point out that Russia has given
$5.5 million to the United Nations appeal. The United
Kingdom has given a $160 million, and this is part
of a contribution totalling $3.5 billion in all. It is not
inconvenient for me to say that; it may be inconvenient
for the Russian Ambassador to hear it.

The Russian Ambassador also asked why we were
not joining in and trying to stabilize actions in Syria
and bring about peace. We have tried. Indeed, we have
tried very hard to support Staffan de Mistura in getting
the Geneva political process under way, and we shall
continue to so. But we do not join Russia, because,
sadly, its efforts have not been to try and restart the
Geneva process. Instead, their efforts have been to
support Syria in the use of chemical weapons and the
bombardment of the Syrian people. In the area known
as T-4, they helped the regime liberate this area but
they took their eye off the ball and Da'esh took it back.
They took it again, but, sadly, foreign fighters have
been able to re-establish themselves there. This is not
de-escalation. This is not political progress. This is a
gross distortion by Russia of what is actually happening
on the ground.

The circumstances that we face today are truly
exceptional. My colleagues from the United States
and France have set out in great detail the catalogue
of awful things that are happening to the Syrian
people. That catalogue goes to the heart of what the
Geneva Conventions, the non-proliferation regime,
the United Nations and the Security Council are
for. It is not only dangerous what Russia is doing in
vetoing our resolutions and in supporting the Syrian
regime's actions against its own people. It is ultimately
prejudicial to our security. Indeed, it will let Da'esh
re-establish itself. It is something that we believe we
need to take action to defend.

