Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2012/462).
We also thank Mr. Herve Ladsous for his briefing
and Ambassador Tanin for his helpful contribution.
We would also like to congratulate Mr. Jan Kubis on
the excellent work he has done leading the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
although he is not able to be with us at today's meeting.

We meet today at a time when we find ourselves at
a special crossroads of national sovereignty and mutual
responsibility and accountability between Afghanistan
and the international community. Security transition
is under way, and important international and regional
conferences have been held, such as those in Kabul
and Chicago, not to mention one of the most important
ahead of us, to be held in July in Tokyo.

The Secretary-General observes in his report that
there is scope for measured optimism with regard to the
situation in Afghanistan. However, our optimism hinges
on the extent to which the international community
upholds its commitments, Afghanistan fully assumes
its sovereign responsibilities, and the United Nations
consolidates its presence on the ground. According to
our assessment of the reporting period and that to come,
the challenges are immense. I would like to comment
on four areas.

First, we fully support the process of Afghan
reconciliation led by the Afghans themselves. We
welcome the fact that a Chair for the High Peace
Council has finally been appointed, particularly since
it is Salahuddin Rabbani. We are encouraged that the
process will be newly invigorated since, in the absence
of a consolidated reconciliation effort and in the light
of the exit ofNATO security forces by 2014, it is likely
that ongoing crises will continue to become more
complicated. The report confirms that the presence of
the United Nations will be indispensable beyond 2014.
We trust that we will prepare ourselves in a timely
manner for the new phase. Likewise, we fully support
the good offices of UNAMA.
Secondly, we note that the transition is proceeding
normally and we are satisfied that the recent NATO
Summit ratified its commitments and recognized the
need for its continued participation, including beyond
2014. Likewise, we take note of the announcement by
President Karzai of the beginning of the third phase
of transfer of security responsibilities to the Afghan
forces. However, we would highlight that the transition
cannot and must not be limited to security. The sources
of insecurity are not limited to physical security, but
also include food security, guarantees for human
development, human rights and respect for the rule of
law.

Thirdly, two days ago we held in this Chamber an
open debate on the protection of civilians, which gave
us much food for thought (see S/PV.6790). Guatemala
remains concerned about the protection of civilians
in Afghanistan. Although we note the recent fall in
the number of victims, we remain concerned about
the calibre of attacks, such as the assassination of
a member of the High Peace Council and attacks on
schools and people who work in the education system
in Afghanistan. We condemn all indiscriminate attacks
on civilians, including NATO air raids. Likewise,
we find the situation faced by women and children
in Afghanistan to be deplorable. We call for tangible
measures to be taken in order to protect and guarantee
their rights.

Fourthly, I should like to underscore the need for
international cooperation, without which the progress
that has been made to date could be reversed. That
progress must be sustained, and we must be prepared for
a long-term commitment in that respect. We are certain
that the Tokyo Conference will be the appropriate
forum for consolidating the advances made, with the
United Nations leading the process.

In that respect, we take note of the fact that
the Mission will be re-evaluating its activities and
optimizing its resources in order to focus its efforts on
the discharge of its basic mandate. We hope that that
exercise will guarantee the availability of the resources
necessary to ensure that the Mission's mandate is not
adversely affected. Also important are coherence and
coordination between humanitarian actors and those
involved in development efforts within the framework
of UNAMA.

Finally, we reiterate that Guatemala supports
Afghanistan's aspirations to move forward along the
path towards democracy, prosperity and stability. The
international community shares that vision and should
make that clear in the form of political will. The current
situation is testimony to the need to continue to make
progress in electoral reform in accordance with the
Constitution, strengthen regional ties and implement
confidence-building measures, as well the need for a
strong commitment on the part of Afghanistan to good
governance, the combat against corruption and drug
trafficking, the strengthening of human rights and the
consolidation of the rule of law.

