Mr. Nesho (Albania): At the outset, Sir, allow me
to express our delegation's appreciation for your
commitment to the problems of our region and to
commend your work as the President of the Security
Council for the month of September.

Let me also thank Assistant Secretary-General
Annabi for his comprehensive briefing today.

The issue of Kosovo has been broadly discussed
in the Security Council. This reflects the commitment
and the seriousness of the international community in
implementing Security Council resolution 1244 ( 1999)
and ensuring a sustainable democratic future for
Kosovo.

The attention that the Kosovo issue has attracted
constitutes a positive factor that has accelerated the
rhythm of significant transformations towards a multi-
ethnic, democratic society. While evaluating the
current situation in Kosovo, as a result of considerable
transformations due to the commendable work of the
United Nations and the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo, we are confident in
saying that substantial progress has been achieved.
This conclusion has been realistically highlighted by
the members of the Security Council and reflected in
the reports of the Secretary-General as well.

It is important to put special emphasis on the
establishment and functioning of the new Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government, which are a clear
indication of growing political maturity and
responsibility. There is an improved inter-ethnic
environment as well, as has been demonstrated, for
instance, by the appeal of the Kosovar leaders to all
displaced persons to return to Kosovo and to
participate in the democratic processes and in the
responsibility to rebuild together a new, multi-ethnic,
free and democratic society.

The latest incidents in Kosovo are tragic and
intolerable. They should be explicitly condemned and
considered to be acts of an agonizing violent past that
cannot halt the democratic processes and the
irreversible new realities. However, these incidents
cannot be condemned either by denying the substantial
progress in Kosovo or by using it for political, electoral
and nationalist interests. That would impede the
beginning of the necessary dialogue between Pristina
and Belgrade, to the accomplishment of which the
whole international community is committed.

Today, Kosovo needs confidence-building
measures and not a conflict-feeding process. Finding
itself between opportunities and difficulties, problems
and solutions, Kosovo requires all of us to become part
of the solution and the progress. The far-sighted policy
of the European Union to include Kosovo as an
inseparable part of the regional reality, drawn up at the
Thessaloniki summit, creates real grounds for its rapid
integration, first, into the regional community, and then
into the European family.

The improvement of stability and progress
suggests the need for the Kosovar leadership to take
part in the discussions of this body on Kosovo so that it
may share responsibilities and be fully committed to
the implementation of Security Council decisions.

The Albanian Government has always
appreciated the important work of the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General for Kosovo
and is thankful for the extraordinary results achieved in
a relatively short period of time. The Albanian
Government commends the appointment of Mr. Harri
Holkeri as Special Representative and will support his
activity. My Government strongly believes that his
mission will be carried out successfully and contribute
to the further development of Kosovo and the
implementation of the necessary standards before
status.

Albania has encouraged the political leaders in
Kosovo and Belgrade to give concrete expression to
their commitment to initiate a dialogue on technical
issues. My Government considers unacceptable and
unhelpful every effort that goes beyond the stabilizing
framework of the dialogue and increases the spirit of
conflict in the region.

The dialogue between the two parties and the
collaboration of mutual interests towards economic
development and regional integration will bring an
understanding of new realities. People can be ruled not
by the mentality of territories, but by that of respect for
their right to self-determination, freedom and
democracy - ideas that shape modern Europe today.

