Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to thank Malaysia for having convened this debate
on this crucial topic, as the protection of children in
armed conflict represents a universal moral duty. I
should also like to thank the Secretary-General for being
with us today, for his statement and his commitment to
this crucial issue.

As has been highlighted, important progress has
been made since the call to action made by Ms. Graca
Machel. This progress would not have been possible
without the praiseworthy work undertaken for several
years now by the Special Representative of the

Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, as well as the Executive Director
of UNICEF, Mr. Anthony Lake. On behalf of France,
I should like warmly to thank Ms. Zerrougui and
Mr. Lake and their teams for their exemplary action
and the statements they made today. I should like also
to thank civil-society actors, who play a vital role in
supporting the work of the United Nations.

However, in spite of this progress, children
continue to be recruited, torn from their families and
denied education and health care. They are the victims
of murder, mutilation, rape and other forms of sexual
violence. As the black list shows, non-State armed
groups are the perpetrators of most of these violations.
Among them, the terrorist groups Da'esh and Boko
Haram represent a particular threat, as they intensify
the horror by making children not only the direct targets
but also the perpetrators of terrorism, through suicide
bombings, executions and trafficking in human beings.
Above and beyond those children who are recruited and
kidnapped, we must also think about the fate of children
born to these armed groups, who risk perpetuating and
making extremist violence seem normal, as if it were
in their DNA.

The international community has a moral and
political obligation to undertake this crucial existential
combat for the sake of the children and of us all. The
required mobilization includes not only military action
but also tackling the root causes of this tragedy. That
is the thrust of the Secretary-General's Plan of Action
to Prevent Violent Extremism, which France fully
endorses. These root causes include education, which
plays a key role. In Syria, almost 4 million children
are deprived of access to education. France firmly
condemns attacks against schools and calls upon States
to uphold international law, in particular international
humanitarian law, and to spare no effort to prevent a
lost generation of children deprived of education, in
particular young Syrian refugees in Lebanon, Jordan
and Turkey.

Combating terrorism is a sine qua non, but it cannot
justify arbitrary detention. This is, however, the case in
a number of theatres of conflict, where thousands of
children are detained because of their affiliation with
armed groups or in a totally arbitrary manner. This
is the case in Syria, where many children, probably
thousands, have been beaten and tortured in the prisons
of the regime, often perishing there. That is not even
to mention the mass bombings of civilians, including
children, undertaken relentlessly by the Damascus
regime in Aleppo and elsewhere.

We must never forget that Governments bear
responsibility for protecting their people and must
deal with children associated with armed groups in
the most appropriate manner based on their age and
life experience, pursuant to international standards of
justice applicable to minors.

Given these weighty challenges, I would like to
briefly highlight three areas of action.
First, at the institutional level, the United Nations
has effective mechanisms to protect children in armed
conflict. The Security Council's Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict, currently chaired
by Malaysia, must continue to facilitate dialogue
with Governments in New York and on the ground.
The monitoring and reporting mechanism is also
particularly useful, because it helps to identify all
serious violations committed on the ground, so as to
add them to the Secretary-General's annual black list.
It is key for the United Nations and all States to ensure
that these mechanisms are impartial so as to preserve
their effectiveness.

We must also organize our actions at the
operational level. The United Nations Must continue
to deploy child protection advisers to identify and
prevent rights violations and to ensure the protection
of children is fully integrated into the planning of
peacekeeping operations.

Finally, we need to ratchet up our action at a
political level. In March 2016, the primary goal of
the Children, Not Soldiers campaign launched by
Ms. Zerrougui and UNICEF was achieved. Eight of the
States concerned signed a national action plan to halt
the recruitment of children in national security forces.
Now the full implementation of those plans is required
in order to reach a new goal, namely, a world free of
child soldiers. That should be our shared goal. We can
achieve it if we support and strengthen the mandate of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
by applying the Children, Not Soldiers campaign to
non-State armed groups so as to secure additional
concrete commitments on the ground.

Before concluding, I should like to pay tribute to
the commitment and determination of the Secretary-
General to combat sexual abuse within the United
Nations and with respect to national forces under a
United Nations mandate. France, as the Council is aware,
remains fully mobilized in the areas of prevention, the
training of staff and dealing with all allegations.

The protection of children in armed conflict
requires exemplary behaviour from everyone and an
unwavering commitment. France chose this path several
years ago. Since the adoption ofresolutions 1539 (2004)
and 1612 (2005), initiated by my country and which
form the cornerstone of our shared efforts, France has
continued to play a crucial role along these lines. It is
in this spirit that in February 2017 in Paris, along with
UNICEF, we will organize an international conference
on the protection of children in armed conflict, to mark
the lO-year anniversary of the Paris Commitments and
Paris Principles on Children Associated with Armed
Forces or Armed Groups, which have been signed by
105 countries to date. I call on all States to participate
in this event and endorse the Paris Commitments and
Paris Principles at this time in order to demonstrate
their commitment to the universal cause of protecting
children in armed conflict.

