Mr. Tadic' (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; interpretation provided by the delegation): We agree
that we do not live in an ideal world, a world in which
justice prevails in each and every place. But we also
agree that we cannot desist from pursuing what is just.
Insisting on right today, the main question before all of
us in the Security Council is whether we shall respect
international law, the Charter of the United Nations and
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Member
States - whether we shall respect the principles and
values upon which the modern world rests. What
happens if the principles and values on which this
world has rested for quite a number of decades, since
World War Two, are undone in one day? What happens
to United Nations Member States?

Today, I defend the rights of Serbia and of the
Serbian people. In defending the rights of my country, I
defend general principles and general views - the
rights of each and every small country whose
sovereignty and integrity are threatened.

I quite agree that the status process before the
United Nations cannot be blocked unilaterally, but this
process has been blocked precisely by the decision of
the Kosovo assembly to declare independence
unilaterally. That is a unilateral act, a one-sided act.
Serbia has not accepted such an act and will never
accept such an act. The unilateral declaration of
independence is not a compromise solution. It is an
illegal Violation. It is an act that undoes all the
principles of international justice and all the principles
on which the work of the Security Council is based, as
well as that of the United Nations itself.

A decision based on compromise is not the
Ahtisaari plan either. That plan rids Serbia of part of its
territory. That plan rids Serbia of part of its identity.
The Ahtisaari plan is in the position of a solution, but
one which the entire State of Serbia does not accept.
The Ahtisaari plan has no legitimacy, especially in the
parts of Kosovo in which Serbian people live as a
majority.

Representatives of some member States of the
Security Council feel that Kosovo should become
independent because a large majority of its population
wishes independence. Such an argument is neither
logically nor legally justified.

I shall remind the Council that it knows very well
that the large majority in all secessionist regions of the
world want independence. If we were to establish this
principle, the world of today would not have the same
borders. Many new countries would be created, and
stability in the entire world would be undermined. No
region in the world would be able to avoid security
risks, economic destruction and human casualties.

Many Security Council members have again said
that Kosovo should be granted independence because
of the crimes that took place during the 1990s, thus
criminalizing the present authorities in Belgrade. But
in the whole history of the Balkans, whoever held the
power committed the crime. We should uphold
common values and make an attempt, with respect to
our common Balkan history, to do all possible to
reconcile with each other.

As the twice democratically elected President of
Serbia, I extended my apologies to all Balkan
countries, against whom some committed crimes in the
name of my people. I did so earnestly, with deep
conviction in the common European future of the entire
region. But I did not receive any apologies for the
crimes committed against my people, and I am still
waiting for their apology. That apology is also a
prerequisite for our future.

I remind the Council of a simple fact: all
Albanians who lived in Kosovo prior to the arrival of
KFOR continue to live in Kosovo today, whereas two
thirds of the population of Kosovo who lived in
Kosovo before the arrival of UNMIK and KFOR do not
live in Kosovo now. Today, 250,000 Serbs live in
refugee camps in central Serbia. We all know that the
independence of Kosovo means the legalization of
ethnic cleansing. Each State that recognizes the
independence of Kosovo legalizes, in practical terms,
the expulsion of Serbs from their homes in the
province of Kosovo. I am saying that clearly so that the
Council knows the position of Serbia. I want to say it
here, because truth is one of the values on which
modern society should be based.

That is why I call on the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, to implement clearly a legal
measure to annul the act adopted by the Kosovo
institutions without Serb participation and without the
will of the Serbian people, who also have full rights in
Kosovo, in Serbia, in the Balkans and in Europe. I also
request that Mr. Riicker, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, implement the binding powers
defined in the Security Council's decision, to which the
Council committed him.

I shall repeat: if Kosovo, in this illegal and
unlawful way, becomes independent, from this moment
on the world will not be the same. The only question is
which country will next be affected by this new
principle, this new precedent, this new illegal act.

I wish to point out in particular that Serbia, like
other countries of the former Yugoslavia, experienced
difficulties in the 1990s - the destruction of the culture
and identity of all the peoples of the former
Yugoslavia. Not much time has elapsed since that very
difficult period, which surprised not just us, but the
entire world.

I wish to point out that if regional States,
especially those of the former Yugoslavia, recognize
Kosovo, they thereby commit non-recognition of the
territorial integrity of Serbia. Non-respect for borders
was at the core of the conflict in the former Yugoslavia
and caused the destruction of human life. It was also
the cause of great violence, which pushed the entire
region an entire decade backwards, forcing the region
into economic backwardness. It needs to be borne in
mind that such recognition would lead our bilateral
relations to a lower level.

In no country of the former Yugoslavia has the
respect for law been raised to the European level. All
countries are aiming for that standard, believing in the
civilized world and in a common European future. That
respect has not been achieved in any country, not even
in Croatia, which is a member of the Security Council.
Here, I am thinking in particular of apartments owned
by Serbs.

Members of the Security Council are obliged to
help integration of the Balkans and not to instigate new
conflicts and new disagreements. I shall never abandon
the integrity of my country, just as I will not give up
the European future of my country and of the entire
region.

I also wish to send a message to members of the
Security Council that are members of the European
Union. By recognizing Kosovo as an independent
country, you are not helping the European future of
Serbia. It is not a friendly act towards my country or to
its contribution to Europe. By recognizing Kosovo, the
entire region is pushed into instability and all countries
will have a problem, because there are many Kosovos
in the region.

Let me be quite clear. Serbia will not resort to
violence. Serbia will remain lastingly committed to
peace. Serbia is a legitimate democracy that has full
right to be a member of the United Nations and the
European Union. Serbia defends its right to Kosovo
and Metohija by arguments based on its values,
identity and democracy. It requests the right to protect
its borders and its integrity. Serbia will not conduct a
war. Serbia is a European culture and a legitimate
democracy.

I call on the Council, before it takes an
administrative decision, to think deeply. We wish the
best relations with all countries of the world, but we do
not expect that such acts as being deprived of parts of
our territory and Violation of our tradition, culture and
borders can be understood by some countries as acts of
friendship. We shall defend our interests legitimately,
but at the same time the United Nations, the Security
Council and the Secretary-General have obligations
defined by international law, on which the entire world
is based.

Serbia remains committed to peace. It remains a
dignified Member of the United Nations. The Council
can count on Serbia.

