Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Madam President, first of all, we would like to
welcome you as you preside over this session. We
thank the Secretary-General and the President of the
Economic and Social Council for their statements. We
would also like to welcome the representatives of
CARE International and the International Center for
Transitional Justice to our discussion today.

Our debate today is significant, not only because
the role played by civil society organizations in the
international arena has attracted increasing attention,
but also because the Panel of Eminent Persons on
United Nations-Civil Society Relations has just
published its report, entitled "We the peoples: civil
society, the United Nations and global governance"
(A/58/817). In recent years, many organizations from
civil society have actively participated in the
prevention and settlement of conflicts and post-conflict
peace-building. They have done a lot of work that
deserves to be recognized for promoting peace in the
African countries concerned, for helping the
reconstruction in Afghanistan and calling for a fair and
just resolution to the issue of the Middle East. These
actions have valuably supplemented the efforts of the
international community in ameliorating humanitarian
situations and accelerating the peace process. We
encourage and support civil society organizations in
continuing their constructive role in post-conflict
reconstruction.

I would like to take this opportunity to make the
following comments: First of all, the involvement of
civil society organizations in post-conflict peace-
building should be guided by the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter, which are the
most powerful instruments for promoting the peace,
development and progress of humankind and thus also
provide crucial guidance in the proper settlement of
conflicts and peace-building. Governments and the
international community should not be the only ones to
strictly follow these principles. Civil society
organizations also have an obligation to abide by them.
Only by so doing will civil society be able to maintain
its correct orientation while engaging in relevant
activities. Also, and of equal importance, the will of
the Government and people concerned in a conflict
should be attentively heeded. Local culture and
religious traditions should be fully respected. At the
same time, the principles of objectivity, justice and
neutrality should be upheld. Involvement with any
party to the conflict should be avoided. In this way, the
efforts of civil society organizations will be welcomed
by the local general public and will be able to get twice
the results with half the effort.

Secondly, civil society organizations should
actively complement the efforts of the international
community, in particular the United Nations, in helping
post-conflict countries and regions seek sustainable
peace. The main responsibility for post-conflict
reconstruction in various fields should no doubt be
borne by the United Nations, other international and
regional organizations and the Governments concerned.
Civil society organizations should support the central
role of the United Nations, assisting in the
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, and should enhance their coordination and
cooperation with the various United Nations agencies.
They should also actively offer ideas and advice on
how to accelerate peace and reconstruction. On the
other hand, the United Nations should also strengthen
its communication with civil society through
appropriate means and heed its opinions and
suggestions. The Arria formula meetings and the
contacts between the Security Council missions and
civil society are both very useful experiments. In this
respect, we note that the report of the Panel of Eminent
Persons has put forward several recommendations on
strengthening relations between the Security Council
and civil society. Those recommendations deserve our
careful study. I would like to emphasize that the
international community should pay more attention to
civil society in the developing countries and encourage
them to participate more actively and, if necessary, to
provide support for them.

Thirdly, the focus should be on assisting in
economic reconstruction and sustainable development.
Civil society organizations possess advantages of
resources, expertise and skills. Not only do they have a
role to play in such areas as providing humanitarian
relief, promoting the administration of justice and
advocating national reconciliation, they also have
much to do in mobilizing international support to help
countries in conflict areas develop their economies,
eradicate poverty, increase employment, restore
infrastructure and enhance national and local capacity-
building.

Conflicts today are increasingly complex and
varied. In such circumstances, integrated and
systematic strategies must be adopted to realize the
goals of post-conflict reconstruction. All actors
concerned in the international community should be
actively involved in this process, carry out their own
mandates and do what they can while strengthening
cooperation.

In resolution 57/337, the General Assembly
reaffirmed the importance of civil society's supporting
role and invited it to pursue practices that foster a
climate of peace, help to prevent or mitigate crisis
situations and contribute to reconciliation. We expect
civil society organizations to continue their efforts
towards that end.

