Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Sir, for convening this debate on the complex issue
of institution-building. There can be no lasting
emergence from conflict without reconstruction and
national institution-building; when they are lacking,
conditions conducive to Violence can quickly re-emerge.

As previous speakers have said, and as
subsequent ones will as well, there is broad consensus
in the Council on the subject of our debate today,
namely, on the need to address as soon as possible the
process of institution-building in the aftermath of
crisis. Peacekeeping and peacebuilding are two sides of
the same coin. They must be planned in a forward-
looking and integrated manner. There are three ideas
that I would like to develop here: the need for national
ownership of the process, as my German colleague has
already mentioned; the need to define priorities as
early as possible; and the importance of long-term
funding for these new institutions.

First of all, with regard to national ownership of
the process, the building of national institutions, the
establishment of the rule of law and the development of
practices of democratic governance are essential
elements of any stable and peaceful political life. These
things cannot be improvised. While it is possible to
temporarily set up institutions in the aftermath of war ~
as we saw in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
with the International Committee for Support of the
Transition - lasting national institutions can only gain
full legitimacy where there is national political will,
validated by the people through a referendum or
democratic elections. Such national ownership also
makes it possible to ensure that the intellectual and
human resources of a country are used appropriately and
that newly created institutions are adapted to the

national context and make it possible for development
to occur. Should it gain independence following the
referendum that has just been completed, what takes
place in Southern Sudan will of course be an
exceptional process that the Council will have to
monitor very carefully.

Priorities will also have to be defined better. We
have to take into account the stakes involved in
governance. Corruption is a threat to the stability and
security of societies, as it undermines institutions,
democratic and moral values and justice. It also
compromises lasting development and the rule of law.
It is therefore important to define strategies and
oversight mechanisms that can enable new institutions
to defend themselves against this scourge, in
conjunction with the whole host of international
partners.

In order to avoid a resumption of conflict,
attention must also be paid to the development of
institutions in the immediate post-crisis context:
democratic and representative bodies, public services
that address primary needs and security institutions
that ensure the stability of the State while guaranteeing
respect for human rights and the rule of law.

Guinea, where everything has to be rebuilt even if
it is not emerging from civil war, is a good example of
this. President Alpha Conde has indicated that he wants
to make security-sector reform one of the areas for
immediate attention, along with setting up basic
services and encouraging inter-communal dialogue. His
project of having military engineering corps participate
in public works is also an interesting way of cleaning
up a military institution while placing it at the service
of the development of the country.

There is no single way of rebuilding institutions.
All partners involved must therefore support a strategy
that is fully endorsed by the legitimate authorities of
the host country.

My third and last point relates to the need for
long-term funding. We must address the issue of
sustainable funding for newly created or consolidated
institutions from the very outset. As a State emerging
from crisis rarely has the necessary resources to do so,
the international community has to lend support. Let
me cite the example of the press, which can be an
important pillar for peacebuilding and the promotion of
human rights. In that regard, the role played by United
Nations Radio in the Great Lakes region must be

1l-21268
acknowledged. The issue of funding radio services
following the departure of United Nations missions has
to be considered.

The Peacebuilding Commission must also play its
role fully in building institutions. It can do so if it
adheres to the three requirements that I have just
mentioned, namely, national ownership, good
governance and financial commitment. We trust that
the 2010 review of the Peacebuilding Commission will
make it possible for it to better focus its action and
bolster its contribution to institution-building in the
post-crisis stages.

