Mr. Cevik (Turkey): At the outset, I wish to
express our appreciation for the participation of His
Excellency Mr. Jalil Abbas Jilani, Foreign Secretary of
Pakistan, as he presided over the debate this morning. I
commend your efforts, Mr. President, as the Permanent
Representative of Pakistan, as well as those of your
able team, in preparing the comprehensive concept note
(S/2013/4, annex) and in the adoption ofresolution 2086
(2013), both ofwhich highlight the issues and challenges
that need more attention. The convening of today's
debate and the adoption of the resolution are a clear
reflection of the longstanding exemplary commitment
of Pakistan to United Nations peacekeeping efforts
throughout the world. I would also like to also thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing.

Peacekeeping operations play a critical role in
supporting a country in providing a better future for
all its inhabitants. Such operations may have different
functions, depending on the unique circumstances
of each host country. Security is a precondition for
development, and development generates more security.
Therefore, although assisting a country in creating a
physically more secure environment is one of its primary
tasks, supporting national peacebuilding efforts
should lie at the heart of peacekeeping operations. We
therefore welcome the concept of peacekeepers being
early peacebuilders.

Over the past year or so, the Secretariat and the
Security Council have spent considerable time and
energy in developing a new conceptual framework for
peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities. Thanks to
those efforts, we now have a better and more thorough
understanding of those issues. In particular, the
clarification of the nexus between peacebuilding and
peacekeeping was highly useful and important.

Peacemaking should also be added to that nexus.
We believe that it is essential to use all three tools within
a coherent, integrated and strategic framework, in order
to achieve sustainability. Turkey placed particular
emphasis on those issues during its membership of the
Council in 2009-2010, including by holding a summit-
level meeting in September 2010 (see S/PV.6390), and
an informal retreat for the members of the Council in
Istanbul, in June 2010, on this subject. Together with
Finland and the Group of Friends of Mediation, we
are currently working on how to further the concept
of mediation in all stages of conflicts, including in the
peacekeeping and peacebuilding phases.

Now that we have a better conceptual framework
and a better understanding of the interlinkage between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, the next step should
be to concentrate on translating that framework into
concrete action, both in the Security Council and in
the field. In that regard, producing clear and achievable
mandates and adjusting them as needed to reflect
changing circumstances is necessary for successful
outcomes. Actively supporting national authorities
in building their capacities is essential, particularly
when we take into account the fact that peacebuilding
is primarily a national responsibility. Accordingly, we
welcome the civilian capacities initiative.
Furthermore, as peacekeeping missions are
economic forces in their own right, it is important to
further strengthen their link with local economies.
Indeed, that is a peacebuilding measure in itself. On the
other hand, we have to be realistic and recognize the
fact that there is considerable local resentment, reaction
and opposition to peacekeeping missions. One of the
priorities of any peacekeeping mission should be to win
the hearts and minds of local populations, which can
primarily be achieved by demonstrating the path to a
better future. In that regard, carefully addressing root
causes is to the benefit of the international community
at large.

Ensuring coordination and coherence within the
United Nations, including through the exchange of
information and consultation among the Security
Council, the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council and the Peacebuilding Commission,
is clearly a prerequisite not only for a more effective
outcome in New York, but on the ground as well.
Partnerships are equally important. Actors with
similar peacekeeping and peacebuilding capabilities,
especially regional and subregional organizations,
should be supported. Such streamlining could also be
viewed as a sound investment in a time of austerity.
In addition, there is also a need for more regionally
coordinated approaches. The involvement of regional
stakeholders will increase the chances of success
and the sustainability of peacebuilding efforts, even
after the peacekeeping missions have completed their
mandates.

The peacebuilding element of peacekeeping
operations is also important during the transition and
withdrawal phases. We must ensure that transition
from a peacekeeping setting will not lead to a loss
of interest in and support for the relevant country.
Ironically, many peacebuilding tasks are needed even
more after the withdrawal stage. Therefore, when
peacekeeping contingents are being scaled down, the
level of support for peacebuilding tasks should not
dwindle. If the conditions for preventing a relapse are
not properly established and sustained, it will ultimately
be impossible to avoid duplication or the wasting of
precious human and material resources.

Last but not least, let me also underline the
importance of mainstreaming women's participation
in all stages of the peace process. We welcome the
increasing awareness within the United Nations
system and among Member States of the importance
of removing the constraints on such participation,
and look forward to seeing further enhancement in
the role of women in peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding endeavours.

Before concluding, I wish to pay homage to the men
and women serving as Blue Helmets, and to express our
condolences for the peacekeepers who have sacrificed
their lives in the line of duty.

