Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): As this is
the first time that I take the floor under the Kuwaiti
presidency of the Security Council, I would like to
congratulate and honour Kuwait's assumption of the
presidency by trying to offer my thanks in Arabic:

(spoke in Arabic)
Thank you, Mr. President.
(spoke in English)

I would also like to thank Ms. Nakamitsu for her
comprehensive and clear briefing.

I will address three issues today: first, reports
of the renewed use of chemical weapons in Syria;
secondly, the need for accountability; and, thirdly, the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) report at hand (S/2018/84, annex).

With respect to the renewed use of chemical
weapons in the past weeks, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands is shocked at the recent reports of chemical
attacks in Syria, including this weekend and last night.
We are outraged. In Douma, in eastern Ghouta, and last
night in Saraqeb, in Idlib, innocent civilians, including
children, have become victims once again of horrible
chemical-weapon attacks. Such attacks deserve the
strongest condemnation of the Security Council as
violations of international law. Furthermore, recent
OPCW laboratory tests show that samples of the
chemical attack on Ghouta in August 2013 correspond
to the chemical-weapons arsenal declared by the Syrian
regime in 2014 and the Khan Shaykun attack in 2017.
This confirms once again that the Al-Assad regime
uses chemical weapons against its own population. We
pay tribute to the work of the White Helmets, who have
saved more a 100,000 civilians from the rubble of the
Syrian war.

The use of chemical weapons should never go
unpunished. Impunity erodes the important prohibition
against the use of chemical weapons. It is inconceivable
that impunity now reigns, which brings me to my
second point, namely, the need for accountability.

As others have said, we had a well-functioning
and professional mechanism to ensure accountability
for the use of chemical weapons in Syria, the Joint
Investigative Mechanism (JIM). The JIM. repeatedly
determined the use of chemical weapons by the Syrian
regime and by Da'esh. It had a strong mandate to
investigate and identify perpetrators independently
from the politics of the Security Council. And it did so
accordingly, but the renewal of its mandate fell victim
to the repeated use of the veto.

However, that does not mean that we now need
to settle for less. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
is prepared to work together on any proposal that
strengthens accountability and the international rule of
law. But let me emphasize that a weak accountability
mechanism is not an option. For us, the fundamental
characteristics of any accountability mechanism
are the principles of impartiality, independence,
comprehensiveness and effectiveness.

In order to uphold those principles, a mechanism
should at least meet the following requirements. First,
it should operate independently from the Security
Council, including when it comes to the attribution of
guilt. It should be impartial. The separation of powers is
necessary to prevent undue politicization. Secondly, the
mechanism should be effective; it should independently
decide how it will conduct its investigations, including
when it comes to analysing facts and assessing the
quality of evidence. Lastly, it should be comprehensive
and investigate and identify perpetrators among all
parties to the armed conflict - both State and non- State
actors. The draft resolution that is currently being
discussed has not yet met those important principles.

That brings me to my third point, namely, the
fifty-second OPCW report (S/2018/84, annex), which
the High Representative presented very clearly in her
briefing. The report points out that, unfortunately, too
little progress has been made by the Syrian authorities
in addressing the outstanding questions that the OPCW
posed about the declaration of the Syrian authorities.
It is essential that the Syrian authorities cooperate
seriously with the OPCW. The Kingdom of the
Netherlands supports the continuation of the work of
OPCW Fact-finding Mission. We call on all States to
ensure that the Fact-finding Mission can continue its
work independently.

In conclusion, we stand ready to adopt the draft
press statement, as circulated before. We are convinced
that the Security Council cannot allow the continued
use of chemical weapons to go unpunished. Impunity
is a curse; accountability is a must. The Council has to
act. As long as the Council is blocked from achieving
accountabilitybytheuse ofthe veto,wewillalso continue
our efforts outside the Council. We therefore strongly
support other accountability initiatives for Syria,
such as the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic and the
Human Rights Council's Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic.
We also support the International Partnership against
Impunity for the Use of Chemical Weapons, which was
just highlighted by our French colleague. However, let
me repeat what I have said in the Chamber before, the
Council should refer the situation in Syria, especially
the mass atrocities committed in the conflict, to the
International Criminal Court in The Hague.

