Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): Let me first join others in
thanking Mr. Schwarz-Schilling, the High
Representative for his comprehensive report on the
issue. The report (8/2007/253, annex) provides us with
a snapshot of the current conditions, providing
valuable information about the situation on the ground.
We would also like to welcome and thank the
Chairman of the Council of Bosnia and Herzegovina
for his statement.

The decision of the European Union on 11
December 2006 to downsize the European Union
military operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina during
2007 was a significant political event. It meant that the
general security condition was improving and that
domestic law enforcement agencies had become
capable of coping with the challenges ahead of them. It
meant that the fruit of years of investment and training
of domestic law enforcement agencies could now be
reaped. This would not only increase the sense of
national ownership but also show the general public
that its own agencies are leading the efforts. We
therefore congratulate the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina on making such progress. We also
commend the European Union for providing assistance.

Furthermore, we acknowledge that the Balkan
region has had a bitter experience with nationalistic
sentiments. The world is filled with tragic stories
arising from unfettered nationalistic sentiments.
Europe has had a share of this story. We thus
understand why the report is cautious on this subject,
in View of the fact that these nationalistic sentiments
are capable of hindering progress in the region.

It is our view, however, that these nationalistic
feelings can also be a source of strength for a country
and can be used to unite it and move it forward.
Nationalistic sentiments can represent a greater feeling
of ownership, which is critically needed for the current
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We believe that
the Government needs to funnel these abundant
sentiments to reenergize the society, which would help
the peace and reconciliation efforts.

Inflammatory rhetoric during political campaigns
reflects the ebb and flow of political events.
Nonetheless, we call on all sides to exercise restraint
and to put the interests of their societies above all other
considerations.

We also note with concern the slow return of
refugees and internally displaced persons (IDPs). We
believe that any inducement to encourage returnees
should not be focused solely on the provision of the
basic necessities of modern life, important as they are.
There also needs to be a higher level of trust among the
returnees and the local population. This also has to be
nurtured carefully. The returnees need to be convinced
that they will be able to interact and live peacefully
with the others. It must be recognized that the longer it
takes for them to return, the less incentive there is for
them to do so.

While there have been some accomplishments in
various sectors, challenges remain to be addressed,
including how the national authorities can be assisted
further in effectively carrying out reforms in the
constitutional and police areas.

With reference to broad constitutional reform, my
delegation deems it necessary that reforms be
undertaken in a careful manner and in line with the
Peace Agreement. Constitutional reform should serve
the interests of all sides to achieve stability, peace and
a just society. There are various constitutional reform
processes and models throughout the world from which
it can benefit. However, efforts to impose one
particular experience of constitutional reform on
Bosnia and Hezergovina would not serve its interests.
The most important thing is for the reform exercise to
reflect the wishes of the country's people and embody
local norms, values and wisdom.
Finally, since this will be the last report presented
by High Representative Schwarz-Schilling, we join
others in thanking him and in expressing our
appreciation to him for his hard work and dedication to
meeting the objectives set by the Council.

