Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this debate. In my
country's View, better peacebuilding goes to the heart
of the Security Council's work. Peacebuilding is about
entrenching peace in countries that have been affected
by conflict and about building successful countries. It
is about stopping wars from breaking out again.
Peacebuilding is the best expression of the
interrelationship between security, development, good
governance and human rights, which are at the heart of
the purposes of the United Nations.

That is why the Peacebuilding Commission was
such an important achievement at the 2005 World
Summit and why so many hopes are focused on its
success. After one year of its substantive work, this is a
good moment to reflect on how far we have come and
how we can build to meet the challenges we face.

I would first commend the work of our Angolan
colleague in his chairmanship of the Peacebuilding
Commission in its first year and the contribution made
by the Vice-Chairs. I very warmly welcome our
Japanese colleague as the new Chairman of the
Commission. A great deal of time and effort has been
put into establishing the Commission and into its initial
work on Burundi and Sierra Leone. We are grateful to
Norway and the Netherlands for the excellent
leadership that they have played on country-specific
work.

I would like to echo others in emphasizing that
the true value of the Peacebuilding Commission will be
where it can add value to the work of the other
institutions of the United Nations. We believe that the
Peacebuilding Commission can provide a forum where
the international community can help countries address
the barriers to peacebuilding and help bring coherence
and harmonization to the international community's
efforts in the country in question.

We need to continue to develop closer and more
focused interaction between the Security Council and
the Peacebuilding Commission. The Commission's
work should not be dominated by process. It must be
alive to the challenges faced and provide advice to the
Security Council and to other partners on the critical
issues that need to be addressed.

I have two modest, practical suggestions for
developing those links.

First, we think that there should be regular
interaction between the Security Council presidency
and the Peacebuilding Commission Chair. That could
include discussion of how best to align the work
programmes of the two bodies and of how the
Commission's capacity for new work - and the
formulation of its advice to the Security Council on
specific country issues - can best be channelled to the
Council.
Secondly, I believe that there is a role for the
Security Council itself in requesting advice from the
Peacebuilding Commission on specific issues regarding
countries that are on both the Council's agenda and the
Commission's agenda - for example, in response to
events on the ground. It should be a two-way
relationship with a clear division of labour, with the
Peacebuilding Commission carrying out its detailed
work on peacebuilding issues and providing advice,
and with the Security Council taking that advice into
account in its work.

An essential part of the Peacebuilding
Commission's wider relations involves all the relevant
organs of the United Nations: the Security Council, the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council, all of which are important. Ambassador
Takasu has acknowledged that, and I welcome the
emphasis that he has placed on enhancing the relations
between the Peacebuilding Commission and the
international financial institutions. That too will be
key.

Clearly, the Peacebuilding Commission should
not remain static; its agenda should evolve. In looking
at new countries for the Commission to include on its
agenda, it will be important to consider the capacity
implications for the Commission and for the
Peacebuilding Support Office. In parallel, we would
like the Peacebuilding Commission to assess very soon
where it believes it can best add value and what
experience and resources are required from
Commission members and elsewhere.

We also look to the Peacebuilding Support Office
to play a more proactive role. For example, it can assist
United Nations country teams with peacebuilding
analysis or by providing best practices, and it can help
to shape the Peacebuilding Commission's activities. In
essence, the Peacebuilding Support Office should
become the hub for United Nations activities on
peacebuilding issues.

During the Peacebuilding Commission's second
year, we look forward to the Commission's building on
the substantial achievements of its first 12 months,
with the support of the Council and in support of the
Council, and to its being able to demonstrate real
added value to the other institutions of the United
Nations.
