Mr. Ben Mustapha (Tunisia) (spoke in French):
The delegation of Tunisia would first of all like to
express to you, Mr. President, its appreciation, for all the
efforts you have made throughout the consideration of the
draft resolution now before us.

I also must express my delegation's appreciation to
the delegation of the United States for the valuable
contribution it made, along with all the other members of
the Council, in the drafting of a text that has our support
and in favour of which my delegation will vote.

The draft resolution to be adopted by the Security
Council is the result of several weeks of consultations
involving the members of the Council, the parties to the
Lusaka Agreement, the United Nations Secretariat and
other concerned parties. Through this draft resolution, the
Security Council authorizes the long-awaited deployment
of phase II of the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and
defines its mandate. The Council thereby expresses its
commitment to the implementation of the Lusaka
Agreement, which the parties themselves reaffirmed at the
highest level during the meeting of the Security Council
on the subject of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and, more recently, at the summit held in Lusaka.

This draft resolution in effect responds to the
expectations of the Congolese people and, by extension,
to the expectations of all the countries of the region and
of the African continent, whose only aspirations are
peace, security and stability so that they can tackle the

 

task of development. The success of the operation clearly
depends on the following elements.

The first element is the clarity of MONUC's mandate.
The Security Council and the Secretariat have attached the
greatest importance to this matter in defining the tasks and
objective considerations for the deployment of an expanded
Mission.

Secondly, aside from the political support it needs, the
success of the operation is also a matter of finding the
human, material and financial resources the Mission will
require. This support and those resources are important and
call for goodwill on the part of everyone. Commitments
have been made by numerous parties, and we hope those
commitments will be fulfilled. My country has already
indicated its readiness to contribute.

The third element has to do with the cooperation of all
parties. We attach paramount importance to this factor, and
we consider that the extent of cooperation afforded by the
parties to MON UC will be a test of their genuine
commitment to respecting the Lusaka Agreement.

The adoption of this draft resolution coincides with
yesterday's meeting of the heads of State signatories to the
Lusaka Agreement, who on that occasion reaffirmed their
resolute commitment to the Agreement and reiterated their
determination to forge ahead in the implementation of its
various provisions. In this connection, there is reason to
reaffirm that the success of the implementation of the
Ceasefire Agreement depends first and foremost on the
genuine willingness of the parties themselves.

Although it is not perfect, this draft resolution
encompasses a host of important areas covered by the
Lusaka Agreement as well as practical measures for
implementation under reasonable conditions, due account
having been taken as to how delicate the situation on the
ground is.

We hope that this second phase of MONUC's
deployment will take place under positive conditions,
although we are aware that the bet has not yet been won
and that additional and sustained efforts will continue to be
necessary in order to allow the launching of phase III on a
solid foundation.

In this context, the convening in due course of an
international conference on the Great Lakes region, under
the auspices of the United Nations and the Organization of
African Unity, is of great importance. Only then can we
entertain any real hope of seeing the entire subregion
enjoy the dividends of peace, security and stability - the
corollaries of development.

