Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
appreciate the convening of this meeting and thank
Special Representative Hennis-Plasschaert for her
insightful briefing.

We begin by highlighting the progress towards the
full establishment of the federal Government in Iraq,
with the recent appointment of the Ministers of Justice,
the Interior and Defence. That demonstrates that it is
possible to find political points of convergence, which
is the responsibility of all parties, as mentioned by the
Special Representative.

However, we are concerned that the appointment
for the Ministry of Education is still pending. It
is desirable that the post be taken up by a woman,
which, we believe would positively contribute to the
consolidation of democracy in Iraqi. We recall that this
aspiration was voiced by the mission that visited Iraq at
the end of June, during which the Council reaffirmed
its full commitment to the country's reconciliation and
stabilization process and that of the region as a whole.

We welcome the fact that the political process is also
accompanied by efforts aimed at Iraq's reconstruction,
particularly with regard to promoting investment in
basic infrastructure and reviving the economy. We
therefore welcome the signing of a memorandum of
understanding between the Government of Iraq and the
United Nations to establish the Iraq Reconstruction and
Recovery Trust Fund, which will help best channel the
funds pledged by the international community at the
Kuwait International Conference for the Reconstruction
of Iraq and attract new investments. That must go hand
in hand with the Government's firm commitment to
combating corruption.

We also believe that the support of the international
community is crucial to combating the terrorist activities
ofthe remaining members ofDa'esh, including ensuring
accountability for the atrocity crimes committed. We
therefore join others in our support for the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant, whose work will not only bolster
the fight against impunity but also contribute to the
reconciliation of the country.

We also welcome the issuing of Executive Order
237, concerning the popular mobilization forces, so that
the fight against the Da'esh remnants can be carried out
jointly, with a centralized framework and officers fully
committed to the vision of the State.

We also commend the readiness of the Iraqi
Government to contribute to regional stabilization
efforts and to the establishment of a conflict-free space
by fostering friendly relations and overcoming tensions
through dialogue with neighbouring States. In that
connection, we welcome the progress made with regard
to the property, national archives and Kuwaiti missing
persons, on the basis ofjoint cooperation between the
two countries.

We conclude by highlighting the role of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq in all these
processes, especially its initiatives to involve Iraqi
youth in efforts to promote peace and development, and
in its contribution to the necessary humanitarian work
in the country.

