Mr. Baali (Algeria) (interpretation fromArabic): First
of all, Sir, I should like to convey to you my most sincere
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. Iam firmly convinced that
your well-known wisdom and experience and your
knowledge of world affairs will ensure the successful
completion of the Council's work.

I also take pleasure in extending my thanks and paying
tribute to my dear brother, the Permanent Representative of
Kenya to the United Nations, for his competence in leading
this body during a period when its activity was on the
increase.

At a time when hopes were being raised that the peace
process was once again slowly moving in the right
direction ~-~ in spite of all the obstacles created by the
Israeli authorities, which had almost brought the process to
a standstill -- these authorities decided to build a major
settlement within East Jerusalem. It appears as if the goal
of this serious step is to undermine the peace process as a
whole and to provoke the international community, and in
particular the Council, which has repeatedly condemned the
settlements policy.

Indeed, this policy cannot be taken in isolation. It is
part of the considered, calculated plan followed by the
Israeli authorities since the occupation of Jerusalem and the
other Arab territories -- a plan designed to continue the

settlement policy, whatever the cost, whatever the
international reaction and whatever the grave dangers
involved for peace.

Everyone -- including the Israeli authorities -
knows that the settlements policy flagrantly contravenes
the basic tenets of the peace process. This policy is
contrary to the spirit and the letter of the Israeli~
Palestinian peace accords and the American guarantees
submitted to the Arab parties at the Madrid Peace
Conference. This policy is also quite clearly a violation of
the relevant United Nations resolutions, including Security
Council resolutions, which have consistently Stated that
the measures and steps taken by the Israeli authorities,
including the expropriation of land and property, are null
and void.

In this connection, we should like to refer to an
important resolution adopted by the Council. Resolution
476 (1980) forbids any alteration of the geographic or
demographic nature of the city of Jerusalem.
Consequently, this latest Israeli measure is null and void
and can receive no international recognition.

Apart from the fact that this decision by Israel
represents a flagrant violation of international law and of
the Fourth Geneva Convention, we are even more
concerned at the fact that the proposed Israeli settlement
is intended to house 35,000 Jews from all different areas.
It is part of a broader project that began in 1967, under
which more than 39,000 housing units have been built in
East Jerusalem. This project would open up Jerusalem to
tens of thousands of Jewish settlers. It is designed
radically to change the demographic nature of the Holy
City, thereby serving the purposes of the Israeli
authorities: to use this new status as a means for
manoeuvres and pressure during the upcoming
negotiations on the future of the city.

Algeria reaffirms its dedication to a just and
comprehensive peace as a strategic choice of the Arab
nation -- a peace based on internationally binding
resolutions and on the principle of land for peace. Algeria
therefore vigorously condemns this latest Israeli measure
and demands that it be rescinded.

The Israeli authorities have been pursuing a policy
of provocation and of fail accompli vis-a-vis the
international community and internationally binding
resolutions, including Security Council resolution 1073
(1996), which has not yet been implemented. In the face
of the grave risks and dangers that the latest Israeli
security Lolll'lClI swam meeting \KCSumleOn A)
Fifty-second year 6 March 1997

 

measures pose for the peace process and for security and
stability in the region as a whole, our Council must today
fully discharge its responsibilities and react immediately
and in a practical manner to bring pressure to bear on the
Israeli authorities so that they rescind their decision. This
would reaffirm the credibility of the Council in the area of
the maintenance of international peace and security and in
restoring justice and the rule of law.

