Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I would like to
welcome the presence of the Foreign Minister of Serbia
and Montenegro, Mr. Vuk Draskovic, at this meeting of
the Security Council. My delegation would also like to
express appreciation to Special Representative Holkeri
for introducing the report of the Secretary-General and
for the work he has been carrying out as head of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK).

In spite of what this Organization has been doing
to protect the population and help the cause of a stable
Kosovo, the situation in the province has deteriorated.
The ideal of a multi-ethnic, tolerant and democratic
society is once again threatened. The international
community, including Brazil, has already voiced its
vehement condemnation of the episodes of ethnic
violence witnessed in Kosovo in March. All those
responsible must be brought to justice, with the full
cooperation of the Provisional Institutions. Effective
public security measures, such as the apprehension of
illegal weapons, must also be taken.

Intents to force a premature solution to the status
question through violence and intimidation must be
promptly thwarted. Brazil continues to lend its full
support to the process of peace and reconciliation, as
foreseen by resolution 1244 (1999) and the standards
before status policy for Kosovo.

Last month, we welcomed the launching of the
Standards Implementation Plan and its set of guidelines
and goals in the effort to bring peace and stability.
Immediate and steady progress is needed to speed up a
long-term political solution that will reflect the needs
of all populations of the province. We concur with the
Secretary-General in that

"the implementation plan will need to be
recalibrated and prioritized by giving additional
emphasis to security and matters relating to the
rule of law, minority rights and protection, return,
and the devolution of functions from the central
level to local bodies, as well as economic
development". (5/2004/348, para. 60)

There is no doubt that episodes of ethnic violence
should also raise an alarm for the international
community. While our attention is devoted to new
conflicts, some of the old ones have recurred. We
wonder how such an "organized, widespread, and
targeted campaign", whereby

"properties were demolished, public facilities
such as schools and health clinics were destroyed,
communities were surrounded and threatened and
residents were forced to leave their homes",
(ibid., para. 2)

- a campaign in which 730 houses and 36 religious
sites were damaged or destroyed - could have
escalated to such proportions.

The report before the Council mentions the
number of injured officers of UNMIK, the Kosovo
Police Service and the Kosovo Force and the number
of arrests undertaken in connection with the violence.
This morning, Special Representative Holkeri
elaborated on the response of UNMIK and local police
forces to all those criminal events. My delegation
welcomes the establishment of a crisis management
review body by Special Representative Holkeri to
assess the Mission's response to the crisis and would
like to suggest that their conclusions be brought to the
attention of the Council at an appropriate time.

Reconciliation became more elusive after March,
but we believe that an unwavering commitment by all
parties is the key to advancing the process of standards

and to moving on to the next steps of the peace
process. This commitment is particularly important on
the part of the Provisional Institutions and the political
leaders in Kosovo, but is also needed from
Governments in the region. We congratulate the new
Government of Serbia and Montenegro and hope that it
will engage in a fruitful dialogue with the leadership in
Kosovo and with UNMIK. We expect the coming
months to bring the intensification of the talks between
Pristina and Belgrade.

