Mr. Judeh (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my gratitude to the
Secretary of State of the United States, whose country
is presiding over the Council this month, for convening
this important ministerial meeting to follow up on
the constructive international work that has been
accomplished with the aim of bringing an end to the
crisis in Syria and the suffering of the Syrian people.

Today's meeting is another milestone in the
international response to the situation in Syria. Over
the past few months, the parties concerned, both
internationally and regionally, have intensified their
diplomatic efforts to reach a common understanding
on how to achieve a political settlement of the tragic,
five-year-long Syrian crisis, whose repercussions pose
such a threat to the region and to the international
community, particularly through the humanitarian
issues resulting from the millions of Syrians who are
now internally displaced or seeking asylum, and on
the security front, owing to the expansion of the Daesh
terrorist group, the Al-Nusra Front and other terrorist
individuals and entities.

Those commendable international efforts led to the
establishment of the International Syria Support Group,
and in that regard I would like to thank Secretary Kerry
and Mr. Sergey Lavrov, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Russian Federation, for their efforts in helping
to realize this achievement, which, God willing, may
eventually lead to the political solution for Syria that
we all desire. I am also grateful to the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for
his work so far and his efforts in the future. We stress
how important it is that the Group continue to work on
ensuring the establishment of a political process for
Syria based on the Geneva communique of 30 June 2012
(S/2012/522, annex) and the declarations issued by the
Support Group in the three meetings held in Vienna and
today in New York, and to implement the provisions of
resolution 2254 (2015), adopted by the Council today, a
historic document that paves the way for implementing
a political solution that we hope can end the crisis that
Syria and its people have endured.

In that regard, I would also like to express our
appreciation to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, which
hosted a conference of the Syrian opposition in Riyadh
with the aim of launching the political negotiations that
we hope will lead to a settlement, and to all the other
countries that have worked tirelessly to achieve this. I
would also like to mention that Jordan has played the
part that it was asked to take on in launching the process
of coordinating the members of the International Syria
Support Group with the aim of reaching a common
understanding on the groups and individuals who may
be considered to be terrorists. We presented the results
of our work to the Support Group and have outlined the
consensus reached by some countries on some terrorist
groups; there were other groups about which members
could not agree, which means that negotiations on
the future designation of those groups may have to
continue.

In the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, since the
beginning of the crisis in Syria, we have said that
the only solution to the crisis is a comprehensive
political solution. Our position under the leadership
of His Majesty King Abdullah II ibn Al Hussein, son
of King Al Hussein, has been to emphasize that a
comprehensive political solution must be realized. That
remains our position and our conviction. We see no way
to restore normalcy in Syria, to mend the social fabric
and to safeguard its territorial integrity and political
independence except through a political solution. We
do not see any other way of confronting and defeating
terrorism, extremism and Daesh groups or of uprooting
them from Syria and other places.

That objective cannot be realized except through
a comprehensive political solution that all Syrians can
agree on. We will support and help them to realize
it, so as to save Syria and restore international and
regional peace and security. The Council's adoption
of resolution 2254 (2015) today will give them the
necessary momentum to realize a political solution,
based on the concepts in the Geneva communique,
within a comprehensive political context and in line
with the statements of the International Syria Support
Group. It should enable them to begin and sustain a path
towards the realization of a political solution through
the process outlined in resolution 2254 (2015) and to
determine the time frames required and mechanisms
necessary for its implementation and the fulfilment of
all obligations, as well as to lay the groundwork for a
comprehensive ceasefire, which would, however, not
apply to the terrorists groups Daesh, the Al-Nusra Front
and others, but which will lead to defeating them.

With regard to terrorism and extremism, Jordan
leads the international efforts to defeat the terrorism
and extremism in our region. It is a terrorism that
destroys the image of our great religion, Islam, and its
message of tolerance and its moderate cause. All those
who try to commit crimes in the name of our religion
are not part of the religion at all. All Syrian parties
must rise to the level of making a sacrifice for, and
thereby realize the religious aspirations of, the Syrian
people to achieve a comprehensive political solution,
one that could restore security, stability and harmony
to Syria and lead to the uprooting of terrorism. It could
have implications worldwide and provide the basis for
the reconstruction of Syria so that it can live in peace
with itself, a Syria of plurality, and allow the refugees
to return to their homeland.

The international community in general, and the
Council in particular, must not allow any obstacles to
impede a comprehensive political solution or lead to its
failure, and they must take effective measures capable
of defeating any attempt to delay that realization.
Failure would have grave consequences for everyone.
We have all seen conclusive evidence of the dangers
resulting from the absence of a political vision and a
political solution.

Today's momentum should spur the international
community to intensify its efforts to face the crisis of
the Syrian refugees, one ofthe most difficult and painful
humanitarian crises, especially for neighbouring States
hosting refugees, and notably my country, Jordan. The
number of Syrians in the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
alone is estimated at 1.4 million, and they are spread
across all regions ofthe Kingdom. Approximately 9 per
cent of them live in camps. Jordan, with its limited
resources, has become the second-largest host for
refugees in the world and is the country that hosts the
second-largest number of Syrian refugees, with all the
attendant consequences and pressures on major sectors
like health, education, security, the labour market and
the infrastructure, which are costing the Jordanian
treasury a lot of expenses beyond the reach and the
ability of the Kingdom to manage.

Jordan and its kind people, including our Syrian
brothers already in the country, have opened their
houses to the refugees from Syria. We have shared with
them our limited resources. On behalf of all humankind,
we have carried out our obligation in hosting them and
providing them with all that we can. We are proud of our
ability to host them. Our hosting is in consonance with
the principles of the Hashemite leadership. However,
the world must share the burden with us, because we
are performing that humanitarian duty on behalf of
all humankind. We ask for help to shoulder the burden
and to work with us in accordance with the response
plan drawn by the Government of Jordan to alleviate
the suffering of those who are living in the camps or
being hosted by our citizens. We look forward to the
London Conference to be held early next year, and
we call on the international community to participate
in the Conference so as to achieve the necessary and
desired results.

Today, we are facing a real chance, one that must
not be missed, to take confident steps towards the
realization of a political solution that will satisfy all
Syrians and restore stability and security to Syria.
We should help the Syrian people to realize their
ambitions to move into a new reality, a reality that they
themselves will define, one that will maintain the unity
and territorial integrity of their country and enable
us to defeat terrorism, working in coordination and
partnership with them. Today, from the Chamber, I call
on all Syrians and the entire international community
to avail ourselves of this opportunity before it is too
late.

My statement today could be the last during
Jordan's tenure as a member of the Security Council,
as our non-permanent membership will end in a few
days. Allow me to avail myself of this opportunity to
express to the whole membership of the Council our
deep thanks and gratitude for the cooperation we have
received during our two-year tenure in the Council,
which began in January 2014. I also wish to express
our deep thanks and gratitude to the Member States for
the confidence given to Jordan, under the leadership
of His Majesty King Abdullah II ibn Al Hussein, by
electing our country as a non-permanent member of the
Council.

Jordan believes in the Charter of the United
Nations and is committed to its purposes and
principles. We are all proud of the quality achievements
that the Organization has realized and the initiatives
undertaken in all sectors, notably in the youth sector. I
wish to refer to the various initiatives in regard to Syria,
the humanitarian situation in Syria, the Palestinian
question and other important issues on which we
worked with other Council members to achieve positive
results and solutions during our membership. Any
achievements realized in this important body have
all been accomplished through cooperation with the
membership in the maintenance of international peace
and security.

