The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Van
Bohemen for his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism.

(Spoke in English)
On behalf of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), I wish to give a brief overview of the
developments in the work of the Committee and its
Executive Directorate (CTED). The Committee, with
the support of CTED and as mandated by paragraph 24
ofresolution 2178 (2014), has undertaken a wide range of
actions to address the threat of foreign terrorist fighters
and is currently developing new tools to facilitate its
dialogue with Member States on their implementation
of resolution 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005), as well as its
analysis of measures taken pursuant to resolution 2178
(2014).

The Committee has devoted much of its efforts
over recent months to identifying principal gaps
and good practices in stemming the flow of foreign
terrorist fighters and to building on the analysis
produced, including the three reports issued by the
Security Council on the threat posed by foreign
terrorist fighters and ways in which Member States can
strengthen countermeasures.

The third report (S/2015/975), published
on 29 December 2015, provided comprehensive
recommendations for all States in regions affected by
the threat, as well as global thematic recommendations
covering the criminalization requirements of resolution
2178 (2014), the prosecution of foreign terrorist
fighters, border control and law enforcement measures
to prevent inter-State travel, countering incitement and
violent extremism, preventing financing of foreign
terrorist fighters, international cooperation, and human
rights and the rule of law.

The Committee also continued to enhance
its cooperation with international and regional
organizations and relevant United Nations bodies and
partners. The Council published, on 23 December 2015,
the conclusions of the Committee's special meeting
(S/2015/939, annex I) with Member States and relevant
international and regional organizations on stemming
the flow of foreign terrorist fighters, held in Madrid
on 27 and 28 July 2015, and the guiding principles on
foreign terrorist fighters (S/2015/939, annex II), adopted
following the meeting, as well as the declaration of
the meeting of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs and
of Interior, held on the occasion of the special meeting
(S/2015/939, annex III).

The guiding principles were identified by the
participants in the special meeting and build upon
existing good practices identified by international
and regional organizations and forums. Intended
to assist Member States in their efforts to stem the
flow of foreign terrorist fighters, they focus on the
detection of, intervention against and prevention of
the incitement, recruitment and facilitation of foreign
terrorist fighters; preventing their travel; and the
criminalization, prosecution - including prosecution
strategies for returnees - international cooperation,
and the rehabilitation and reintegration of returnees.

As the Council will recall, in January 2016, in
my capacity as Chair of the Committee, I submitted
to the Council the global surveys of Member States'
implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005). The surveys rely on data compiled on the basis
of information and updates provided by Member States
to the Committee; reports on country visits - the
Executive Directorate has visited more than 90 States
on behalf of the Committee; regional workshops; and
information provided by international, regional and
subregional organizations and partners. Both surveys
take stock of the progress achieved and remaining
challenges in implementing the measures under
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005), which are
also relevant to stemming the flow of foreign terrorist
fighters, pursuant to resolution 2178 (2014). I would also
note that the Committee, with the support of CTED,
has been actively addressing the use of information and
communications technology for terrorist purposes.

Last December, the Committee held a special
meeting on this growing and significant threat,
attended by Member States, international and regional
organizations, private sector leaders, and representatives
of civil society. The participants considered ways to
develop a multi-stakeholder approach to this challenge,
including with respect to the evolution of the threat,
the need to strengthen public/private cooperation, self-
regulation by the private sector, and online counter-
messaging. The Committee, with the support of CTED,
intends to hold another special meeting on this topic,
at which it will take stock of progress made since the
December meeting, including partnerships established
with key stakeholders from the private sector.

As Council members are aware, I recently chaired
a joint open briefing, together with my colleague from
New Zealand, focusing on new and emerging terrorist-
financing trends. We were joined by the President of
the Financial Action Task Force and by representatives
from the private sector. As members are also aware,
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and
its affiliates pose significant new challenges to the
international community, owing in large part to their
exploitation of the natural and economic resources of
territories under their control, bank robbery, extortion
and the looting of antiquities. The counter-strategy
of the international community focuses in part on
disrupting financial flows to and from ISIL-controlled
areas and ensuring the protection of the international
financial system. However, that presents significant
challenges for many Member States.

In order to disrupt terrorist networks, we must
target their income and their ability to provide
resources to sleeper cells. By cutting off the flow of
funds to such groups we can significantly undermine
their capacity to recruit for, incite, plan and carry out
attacks. Countering the financing of terrorism must
therefore form an integral part of national and regional
counter-terrorism strategies.

Terrorist groups continue to identify innovative
funding methods, and the international community,
especially those Member States directly affected,
must be equipped with the tools required to mount
an effective response. In that regard, the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) - jointly with the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh)
and Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities - will convene a three-day
joint CTC/1267 Committee special meeting on terrorist
financing in December, with the participation of the
Financial Action Task Force.

At our recent joint open briefing, it became clear

that enhanced cooperation within and between public
sector agencies, both domestically and internationally,
was critical to identifying foreign terrorist fighters
and preventing their travel. Participants discussed the
possibility that Member States' financial intelligence
units be given access to personal information such as
social security and tax records, subject to domestic
data and privacy laws, and proposed that they share
information more effectively, both among themselves
and with other relevant agencies. They also noted the need
for deeper public-private partnerships in identifying
financing networks of foreign terrorist fighters, as well
as the need to establish financial profiles and patterns
to support the work ofinvestigators.

The Committee continues to adopt a risk-based
approach, where appropriate, aimed at facilitating
capacity-building tailored to each State's perception
of its own needs. The huge diversity of States in
terms of their size and population; the nature of the
various threats posed by foreign terrorist fighters to
particular States; as well as States' relative capacities
and vulnerabilities to address terrorist threats, makes
a one-size-fits-all approach impractical. States should
therefore develop responses to the threat of terrorism
based on their respective national security concerns,
rather than on a fixed template that might have little
relevance to their situation.

The Committee has also consistently recalled the
position of the Council that all measures taken by
Member States to combat terrorism must comply with
all their obligations under international law and that
States should adopt such measures in accordance with
international law, in particular international human
rights law, refugee law and humanitarian law.

The Committee recognizes that its effectiveness
rests notjust on what is done but when it is done. To that
end, it has been implementing measures to act more
rapidly in its dialogue with Member States, and thus to
improve its responsiveness to their needs based upon
the principle of national ownership, without sacrificing
the quality of that dialogue or the opportunity for States
to carefully consider their responses to the Committee's
outreach efforts. One example in that regard is
the Committee's request that the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate (CTED) present its findings
immediately upon its return from follow-up visits. This
year CTED also reported to the Committee on recent
visits to Ghana, Kenya, Sri Lanka, Kyrgyzstan and Iraq.
Moreover, the Committee arranged an informal meeting
with representatives of Iraq, the donor community
and technical assistance providers and implementing
agencies to discuss collective efforts in assisting Iraq
in its counter-terrorism capacity-building. That marks
a significant improvement on previous practice, and the
Committee looks forward to strengthening its dialogue
with each of those Member States.

The Committee has adopted its 2016 work
programme, which covers all the required objectives
and related activities. The Committee will continue
to take the necessary measures to ensure a practical,
responsive and dynamic approach to its dialogue with
all Member States.

(spoke in Arabic)

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi.

