Mr. Diarra: On behalf of the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission, His Excellency Mr. Jean
Ping, I thank you, Mr. President, for the invitation to
brief the Council on the situation in Somalia and, in
particular, to contribute to the debate on a
comprehensive strategy for the realization of peace and
security in Somalia. I also want to offer Mr. Jean
Ping's regrets and apologies for his inability to
personally join in today's debate. Chairperson Ping
asked me to convey to you, Mr. President, his best
wishes for success during your presidency of the
Council.

Allow me to begin by reiterating the appreciation
of the African Union to the President of the Council,
the Secretary-General and all States members of the
Security Council for the interest and commitment to
addressing the situation in Somalia. The number and
frequency of debates held on Somalia is a clear
testament to that. Another eloquent testimony is the
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union in the area of peace and security, and in
addressing the situation in Somalia in particular. That
partnership is yielding positive and tangible results. We
appreciate and value the partnership.

11-2583]
Despite the Council's support and some positive
results, the situation in Somalia remains challenging. I
will begin with the political situation. With the current
transitional arrangement coming to an end on
20 August and key transitional tasks, such as the
adoption of a draft constitution, still outstanding, the
political situation in Somalia is at a critical juncture.

In order to address the need for a post-transitional
arrangement, the Assembly of the African Union, at its
sixteenth ordinary session, endorsed the decision taken
by the Assembly of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) at its extraordinary session on
Somalia to extend the term of the Transitional Federal
Parliament so as to allow for the remaining political
dispensation to be handled by the people of Somalia. In
line with that decision, on 3 February the Parliament
passed a resolution extending its term for a further
three years.

Together with IGAD and the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS), we are
channelling all efforts to implement the decision of the
African Union Summit, in particular through, first, the
conduct of elections for the Speaker of Parliament and
the President; secondly, parliamentary reforms to
enhance the legitimacy and inclusiveness of the
Transitional Federal Parliament; and, thirdly, the
establishment of a new political dispensation. Together
with IGAD and UNPOS, we remain engaged in
accompanying the process of adopting a new
constitution for Somalia within the shortest possible
time.

On the military front, over the past couple of
weeks, Transitional Federal Government (TFG) forces,
supported by troops of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) - which now has a strength of
well over 8,000 soldiers - have changed the picture
on the ground in Mogadishu. The TFG forces,
supported by AMISOM. troops, have taken control of
key positions in north-west Mogadishu, including the
former Ministry of Defence building, which had served
as the main logistical and operational base of
Al-Shabaab. Those gains are the latest in a series of
steady advances our forces have been making since the
summer of last year.

I would like once again to express our
condolences to the families of our brave soldiers who
have paid the ultimate price during those recent
operations and, in the same breath, reiterate our
appreciation to the Governments of Burundi and
Uganda for their commitment and increased
deployment of troops to Somalia under AMISOM.

Following those gains, I am pleased to inform the
Security Council that the TFG now effectively controls
about 60 per cent of Mogadishu. The Government now
fully controls seven districts of Mogadishu.
Importantly, about 80 per cent of the city's population
of roughly 2 million lives in the areas that have come
under the control of the TFG and its Somali forces.

The humanitarian situation remains dire. It has
been further exacerbated by the famine occasioned by
the drought. Also, Al-Shabaab continues to act in
flagrant violation of all norms of all civilized societies.
They are not only targeting the TFG and AMISOM
with mortars, improvised explosive devices and suicide
attacks, but are also using innocent civilians as human
shields, in horrific violation of humanitarian law. They
are hampering the flow of humanitarian aid to the
needy population and are perpetuating a siege on the
population, which is now hostage to their ideology.

In spite of the gains we have recorded in Somalia,
I must emphasize that the armed opposition group,
Al-Shabaab, is still fighting to remove the TFG and
AMISOM. from Somalia so that it can continue to rain
terror on the Somali people and even far beyond, as it
did last year in Kampala, Uganda. The situation in
Somalia poses a clear threat to international peace and
security. A robust response from the international
community is therefore needed.

Allow me at this juncture, therefore, to express
some thoughts for the Council's consideration as it
discusses a comprehensive strategy for peace and
security in Somalia. These recommendations are based
on the African Union's strategy, which encompasses
political and security pillars.

The political pillar of the African Union strategy
hinges on the need to support the Transitional Federal
Institutions (TFIs). At this juncture in the transition,
the African Union believes that the TFIs require the
continued support of AMISOM. That will assist them
in their efforts to meet the aspirations of the population
and will also facilitate the end of the current
transitional arrangements and allow for a new
dispensation come August.

The security pillar of the African Union strategy
is a means of achieving the political goal that I have
8

just outlined. It includes provisions for the
enhancement of AMISOM. troop levels and the revised
concept of operations that informed the decision of the
African Union Peace and Security Council at the end
of its meeting on 15 October 2010. It requires the
deployment of 20,000 troops across Somalia and
12,000 troops in Mogadishu in particular.

This is to enable the African Union to achieve
three broad political and military objectives. The first
objective is to improve the security environment in and
around Mogadishu. The second is to create an
environment conducive to increased political
engagement between the TFG and Somali groups
outside the peace process, including the armed
opposition groups and regional and local
administrations across the country, and to finalize the
new constitution. The third is to create an environment
conducive to the delivery of humanitarian assistance
and public services to the needy population in
Mogadishu.

The political and security objectives that I have
mentioned are achievable with the support of the
international community and, in particular, through the
Council's continued support to AMISOM. We certainly
welcome the support of the Council, as detailed in its
resolution 1964 (2010) of 22 December 2010. However,
the African Union urgently requires the support of the
Council in more ways. In specific reference to a
comprehensive approach, the African Union would like
to reiterate the requests made to the Council by the
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union Commission, Ambassador Lamamra, in
December last year.

First, the African Union requests the Council to
continue to support Somalia's Transitional Federal
Institutions and its security forces, including through
the provision of specialist training and equipment and
initiatives to meet welfare needs.

Secondly, it requests the Council to enhance the
support package for AMISOM, funded through United
Nations-assessed contributions, on the basis of the
newly authorized strength, and arranging for
reimbursements for contingent-owned equipment,
including minor and major equipment, and the payment
of troop allowances at United Nations rates so as to
ensure adequate, predictable and sustainable support to
the Mission.
11-25831
Thirdly, the African Union asks that the Council
authorize the naval operations off the coast of Somalia
to provide more direct and tangible support to
AMISOM. That support could take the form of
maritime deterrence and air surveillance operations to
prevent the entry of foreign elements into Somalia and
of flights and shipments delivering weapons and
ammunition to armed groups inside the country that are
carrying out attacks on the TFG, AMISOM. and the
Somali population.

Fourthly, the Council is requested to ensure the
effective implementation of sanctions against all those
impeding the peace and reconciliation process in
Somalia, in particular through financial, material and
logistical support to groups waging attacks on the TFG,
the Somali people and AMISOM.

Fifthly, the African Union asks the Council to
approach the issue of piracy off the coast of Somalia in
a holistic manner, with the View to effectively
addressing its underlying causes and other equally
serious threats affecting the livelihood and well-being
of the Somali people, in particular illegal fishing and
the dumping of toxic substances and waste off the
coast of Somalia.

Finally, the African Union requests the Council to
enhance humanitarian aid assistance to Somalia and
particularly to alleviate the current suffering of the
population due to famine.

Allow me to conclude by reiterating on behalf of
the African Union our appreciation to the Security
Council for its untiring, resilient and courageous
efforts in resolving the situation in Somalia. The
African Union recognizes and appreciates fully the
support of the international community to Somalia. We
are now only a few months away from the end of the
transition. During the coming months, more support is
required. What we do and when and how we do it in
addressing the situation in Somalia will be critical.

