Mr. Valdes (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like first of all to thank Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
and High Commissioner Sergio Vieira de Mello for
their detailed briefings on the human rights situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

My delegation wishes first of all to express its
concern at the human rights situation in that country, in
particular at the atrocious violations of human rights
committed in January in the region of Ituri, where
grave crimes were perpetrated against the civilian
population, including summary executions, mass rape,
mutilation, even acts of cannibalism. My country is
awaiting with interest the publication of the report of
the group of experts that the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) has sent to the eastern part of the
country to corroborate these serious reports of massive
violations of human rights.

It is extremely grave to see that at the beginning
of this century we can witness such examples of
inhumanity and cruelty. We forcefully condemn the
systematic violations of human rights committed by the
Mouvement de liberation du Congo and the
Rassemblement congolais pour la democratie in the
region mentioned.

Of equal concern to my delegation is the
confirmation in the report of the Secretary-General of
the participation of children in armed conflict and of
the continued use and recruitment of children by the
different factions in the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We want to take this
opportunity to thank MONUC for its devoted work,
especially the work of the unit for the protection of
children, in the investigation and condemnation of
violations of their human rights.

We wish fully to support all the conclusions put
forward by Mr. Vieira de Mello. It seems to us that it is
the obligation of the Council to support the idea of an
international commission to investigate allegations of
human rights violations by all the parties. We also
think it is vital to implement the provision of the
Pretoria Agreement for a national observatory for
human rights and a commission of truth and
reconciliation that would make it possible to hear the
victims.

We agree that the most effective way of
confronting a situation such as the one described is to
strengthen the institutions, to give greater legitimacy to
the Government authorities, to detain and condemn
those who are guilty of violations of human rights and,
as the High Commissioner says, to increase
international control over the human rights situation
within the country.

The High Commissioner can rest assured of the
constant support of the Chilean delegation in the
continuation of his important work to protect human
rights in that country.

