Mrs. Kazragiene (Lithuania): I wish to
congratulate Guatemala on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council this month, and to commend you,
Mr. President, for convening this critical debate.
Lithuania aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union.

Peace and justice, as linked in the Rome Statute,
need to be regarded as mutually reinforcing imperatives.
That link, however, is often tested by practical and
moral dilemmas. Being a State party to the Rome Statue
and the Agreement on the Privileges and Immunities
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), Lithuania
strongly supports the ICC in its struggle as an important
arbiter of international justice. Its existence reflects
our common determination to end impunity and to
uphold accountability for the most serious international
crimes. It also bolsters international humanitarian law
and human rights law by playing an important part
in their interpretation and enforcement. It could and
should be an effective tool of preventive diplomacy that
the Security Council may refer to it in carrying out its
mandate.

The complementary nature of the ICC reminds us
that the best investment in the long run is the building
of national capacities to investigate and prosecute
international crimes.

The Security Council has its own unique role in the
system of international justice, derived from both the
Rome Statute and the Charter of the United Nations.
When it considers that there is a threat to peace and
security, the Security Council may refer a situation to
the ICC, thus extending the reach of its jurisdiction to
States that are not parties to the Rome Statute.

The powers vested in the Security Council present
both an opportunity and a great responsibility. If
exercised improperly, they could undermine the
credibility not only of the ICC and the whole system
of international justice, but primarily the Security
Council itself. We believe that the Security Council
would benefit from consistent and coherent practices
that meet the expectations of certainty, predictability
and impartiality in its response to alleged international
crimes.

The Security Council has thus far referred two
situations to the ICC. Many strongly believe that the
Security Council should also refer other ongoing
situations. Developing a coherent approach to referrals
would facilitate the process of determining when a
referral should be made. Lithuania believes that once
a referral has been made, the Security Council should
exercise responsibility for making that referral effective.
This relates in particular to adequate arrangements for
financing. The Security Council might also consider
extending an obligation of cooperation to all Member
States, and providing specific steps that concerned
States should take.

The ICC relies primarily on the assistance from
concerned States and requires international support
when domestic support is insufficient or lacking.
The Security Council should extend a greater degree
of cooperation with the ICC also through diplomatic
and political support, the coordination of its sanctions
regime and the strengthening of peacekeeping
mandates.

The ICC and the Security Council in their
interaction have gained a great deal of experience. One
example of a common area of concern with potential
for further cooperation and action is resolution 1325
(2000) and subsequent resolutions on women, peace
and security. A more formal framework for interaction,
regular exchanges of views or open briefings between
the two bodies may constitute a welcome and useful
practice.

This year marks a milestone for the International
Criminal Court. It has delivered its first verdict. With
greater support by all, the ICC will make a difference
in our quest for sustainable peace.

