Mr. Dacie (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; English text provided by the delegation): At the outset, let me
welcome the new members of the Security Council and
wish them success in their work.

It is a source of great honour and satisfaction for
me to be given yet another opportunity to address a
meeting of the Security Council dedicated to the work
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK), a rare opportunity indeed to
consider, in this forum, the way to go to overcome the
problems in Kosovo and Metohija.

Let me express, once again, my gratitude for the
contribution made by the United Nations for almost
15 years now to the solution of outstanding issues.
During that time, a significant contribution has
undoubtedly been made by these quarterly meetings
convened under resolution 1244 (1999), the only valid
legal framework of the international presence in Kosovo
and Metohija.

At the next Security Council meeting, we shall
mark the first anniversary ofthe signing ofthe Brussels
Agreement of Principles Governing the Normalization
of Relations, reached between Belgrade and Pristina
in April 2013. In order to achieve ever-better results in
the implementation of the Brussels Agreement in the
period to come and to be able to look back at the results
in that period with satisfaction, we must establish much
clearer rules and build much greater confidence.

We appreciate very much the constructive
approach taken by the United Nations and its Special
Representative Mr. Farid Zarif, as well as by the
organizations working under the United Nations
umbrella, including the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX). They have created
conditions for all sides to work together on improving
the living conditions of all people in Kosovo and
Metohija, irrespective of their ethnic affiliation. I
believe that the Council will agree that disagreements
with regard to the question of the status of Kosovo and
Metohija must not impede our efforts to act jointly to
bring about solutions to practical questions that were
pushed onto the backburner by Pristina for many years.

Thanks to the unstinting efforts of all actors in the
negotiations, major breakthroughs have been made,
which are noted in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/20l4/68). Let me take this opportunity once again
to thank Baroness Ashton for her patient and wise
mediation, on behalf of the European Union, of the
negotiations between Belgrade and Pristina.

The patience and wisdom that helped us overcome
the decades-long vacuum are of key importance for the
process of the normalization of relations, which is a
precondition for the normalization of life in Kosovo and
Metohija. Should our patience and wisdom now wear
thin, not only would we not progress towards results,
but we would squander peoples' trust and have to wait
a long time for another opportunity to rehabilitate the
idea of cohabitation.

I call on the members ofthe Security Council tojoin
efforts to create additional conditions on the ground for
the consistent implementation of the agreements we
have reached so far, for I deeply believe that this is
the only way to establish mutual trust in Kosovo and
Metohija. Short of such trust, we may not, I am afraid,
have sound foundations for any future agreements.

I am sure that, in solidifying the foundations, the
European Union will continue to lend us a helping
hand, primarily during the upcoming negotiations in
Brussels, as well as within the negotiations on European
integration that we have begun. On 21 January, the
Republic of Serbia officially started the process of
accession to the Union, of which we are very proud,
since we consider the decision of the European Union
to open the negotiations as recognition of the efforts
that we have invested in modernizing the country. We
consider that the beginning of the accession process
is also a great impetus to further work to improve the
living conditions of the Serbian people in Kosovo, on
the renewed conviction that our constructive approach
to the promotion of European values in Serbian society
will be properly appreciated. The fact that the accession
negotiations began on 21 January and that the screening
on chapter 35 of the conditions for membership was
held is telling evidence that the Republic of Serbia had
fulfilled its obligations under the Brussels Agreement
in time and approached the dialogue in a constructive
spirit.

In addition to the need to implement all basic
human rights provisions, including amending the
legal framework with respect to religious freedoms,
the Kosovo 2013 Progress Report of the European
Commission points also to the need for addressing other
very important problems confronting Serbs and other
non-Albanians in Kosovo and Metohija. The report
calls for the improved implementation of the existing
legal framework and for the enforcement of decisions to
remedy human rights infringements. It also highlights
the need for simplifying and streamlining the complex
and overlapping institutional set-up for reporting on
those rights, as well as for their promotion, at both
central and local levels. It points to the continued
attacks on religious heritage sites, in particular the
widespread desecration of Serbian Orthodox churches
and cemeteries, and the need for improving the
mechanisms for reporting and following up on such
activities.

The report also points to the weak implementation
of anti-discrimination policies and goes on to say that
many unresolved property compensation claims are
still before the courts and that inter-ethnic disputes are
unduly prolonged. The so-called Kosovo authorities,
it is also said in the report, need to do more to reach
out to displaced persons regarding the expropriation
of their real estate. The sustainability of the returns
and reintegration processes continues to be further
restrained by ongoing incidents affecting returnees,
their property and religious and cultural heritage sites,
as well as by limited access to property and public
services, blocked or delayed property restitution and a
lack of economic opportunities.

We have called upon Serbs to participate in the local
elections in Kosovo. In order to encourage them to also
participate in the forthcoming parliamentary elections
in Kosovo and Metohija as a desirable step - which
is, I believe, in our common interests - we must
focus on eliminating the shortcomings that marred the
recent local elections. The report fails to address any
of the numerous obstacles that Serbs encountered in
that processes and that prevented many of them from
participating in the elections and exercising freely their
civil rights.

We shall continue to insist on the implementation
of the agreements reached in Brussels in both letter
and spirit, which was not the case at the local elections.
Notwithstanding the agreements, the election materials
were only partially status-neutral; mail registration of
internally displaced persons (IDPs) began after almost
a two-month delay and lasted only five days; despite
the agreement that Serbian documents were also valid,
verification of the inclusion of a person in voters'
lists with Kosovo's Central Election Commission was
possible only on the basis of the Kosovo personal
number; and the possibility of e-mail registration was
unavailable to that category of voters.

Let me point out that the IDP identity card was
considered as proof of displacement and identity at
elections so far, while at the local elections in Kosovo
and Metohija the IDP identity card or the certificate
issued by the Refugee and Migrations Commissariat of
the Republic of Serbia were being considered only as
proof of identity. Considering that there is no other way
to prove internal displacement, the Central Election
Commission refused to recognize in this way the IDP
registration carried out and verified by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
and the voters' list established by the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe.

The situation regarding voters' lists is very
complex and it is imperative that they be updated in
time for the next elections. The IDPs who were not
entered into the voters' list of the Central Election
Commission of Kosovo are many even though they
fulfilled all conditions. It so happens that even the
election candidates had no right to vote, although
the Commission itself confirmed the validity of their
candidatures - a practice that is unprecedented in the
world.

I considered it necessary to highlight the problems
that Serbs encountered in pre-election and election
processes lest an impression be created that, except in
northern Kosovo and Metohija, things run smoothly
everywhere else. There is a need to remedy those
shortcomings before the next elections. We must not
disregard the fact that, as stated in the report of the
Secretary-General, there were incidents at polling
stations in the north that did not occur in the second
round due to the intervention of political leaders and,
let me add, proper organization of the elections by
the authorities. I regret that those obviously effective
measures were not taken before the first round of
elections.

The recent assassination of Dimitrije Janic'ijevie,
a mayoral candidate in northern Kosovska Mitrovica,
helped create an atmosphere of fear and insecurity,
which will surely dent the prospects of Serbs'
participation in elections. We are witness to exactly what
I have persistently warned about in this Chamber - a
failure to punish perpetrators of crimes against Serbs
is instrumental to creating a climate amenable to
the perpetration of new crimes, which must not go
unpunished and whose perpetrators we expect to see
brought to justice soon.

Nor has stability been helped by the arrest of
Oliver Ivanovie, another mayoral candidate in northern
Kosovska Mitrovica and one of the most prominent
Serbian politicians in Kosovo and Metohija. That
is indicative of another problem we have warned
about for years and which we expect to be resolved.
While secret indictments may not exist in Kosovo and
Metohija, witnesses who must testify 15 years after
crimes were allegedly committed do. Ivanovic', who
is being detained in a prison in Pristina, was arrested
specifically on the basis of such testimony. In addition,
the appellate court failed to provide an explanation as
to why the legal deadline to act upon his arrest appeal
was allowed to lapse.

The Republic of Serbia most vigorously protests
the arrest of Oliver Ivanovie and requests the Security
Council to seek his release from detention and an
explanation as to why he was arrested just prior to the
holding of the mayoral elections in northern Kosovska
Mitrovica, of which he is one of the candidates.
Such unwarranted actions may threaten the already
fragile peace and stability in Kosovo and Metohija.
The Government of the Republic of Serbia has given
guarantees that Oliver Ivanovie, Dragoljub Delibasie,
Laza Lazie and Zarko Veselinovie, who are being
detained in Kosovo and Metohija, will be available to
EULEX during the court proceedings in their entirety.

Elections in northern Mitrovica will be held and
its mayor elected. Steps will be taken thereafter to
establish the community of Serbian municipalities, the
statute of which is currently being drafted. However,
we must mention the failure of Pristina to prepare
a legal framework for the effective exercise of the
competencies of the future community pursuant to
the Brussels Agreement and its lack of political
will to implement that part of the Agreement. It is
necessary to achieve fundamental agreement on the
long-term representation of the Serbian community in
Pristina's central institutions, with a clear picture of its
participation in Government agencies, and to regulate,
inter alia, financing methods, communication with
Pristina and modalities for holding central Government
elections.

Even if it is accurate for the reporting period, the
Secretary-General's assessment that the number of
inter-ethnic incidents has decreased does not exonerate
the perpetrators of the more than 7,000 physical attacks
that have been carried out since 1999. Regrettably,
despite our numerous protestations, no records on
ethnically motivated crimes have yet been compiled, and
the competent agencies of the Provisional Institutions
of Self-Government in Kosovo and Metohija continue
to fall short in trying those crimes.

Although the number of attacks is smaller compared
to previous reporting periods, the fact remains that the
attacks have never come to an end, just as it is a fact that
Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija are becoming increasingly
scarce. Therefore, the number of attacks must never be
reduced to a statistic that could be misleading; what is
clear, however, is the message transmitted by attacks
on members of a community. An ethnic crime of low
intensity may suffice to cause serious limitations to the
freedom of movement of Serbs and other non-Albanians
who find their lives compromised by a complex range
of minor limitations, such as a reluctance to travel alone
or by night, restriction of choices of place and time for
small purchases of everyday necessities, limited use
of the Serbian language in public places, the safety
of trips to school, and so on. Public condemnation of
ethnically motivated incidents would go a long way
towards improving inter-ethnic dialogue and tolerance
and help create the awareness that the future lies in

multi-ethnicity and the acceptance of returnees from
other ethnic groups.

The current discriminatory treatment of minority
communities makes it impossible for their members
to lead normal lives, especially with respect to
the enjoyment of all rights legally provided for
in instruments in force in Kosovo and Metohija.
The law on discrimination promulgated by the
Special Representative himself provides special
protection to minority communities, bans all forms
of discrimination and protects the individual not only
against discriminatory acts of public agencies, but
also against the discriminatory behaviour of legal and
natural persons. Regrettably, UNMIK and the Pristina
institutions have not followed up on the high quality of
that legal text with concrete and relevant measures to
implement it, leaving a huge discrepancy and outright
contrast between them and everyday instances of direct
discrimination.

The question of the restitution of property to
members of non-Albanian communities in Kosovo
and Metohija, among which Serbs are the majority, is
surely embedded in the question of minority rights. In
addition, there is the open question of the property of
the State of Serbia and the Serbian Orthodox Church.
The legal mechanisms initiated by UNMIK and EULEX
to address property issues, assist courts to reduce the
number of unresolved claims and provide protection to
individuals in cases of human rights violations have,
regrettably, yielded less than adequate results. That
type oflitigation accounts for 40 per cent of the overall
number ofunresolved cases before the courts ofKosovo
and Metohija. Furthermore, the large number of forged
ownership documents creates another impediment
to upholding of property rights. About 40,000 land
restitution claims have been filed at the Kosovo Property
Agency, while, according to unofficial data, almost
700,000 parcels have been usurped. Another problem
affecting property restitution is the lack of appropriate
protection against repeated unlawful repossession after
eviction. Moreover, Serbian property in Kosovo and
Metohija has been expropriated following the decision
of the so-called Kosovo authorities for the purposes of
highway construction. In the Gracanica municipality,
for example, about 170 out of 213 expropriated
properties belong to Serbs.

We were recently advised that the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government intended to alter the
legal status of the Trepca combine, the majority owner
of which is the Republic of Serbia. The combine employs
a large number of members of the Serbian community
in Kosovo and Metohija. The adoption of a new law
designed to amend the ownership structure and the
legal status of the combine would undoubtedly be yet
another unilateral act that could result in altering the
rights and the status of Trepca employees and members
of the Serbian and other non-Albanian communities
in Kosovo and Metohija. That would be tantamount to
confiscating the property of the Republic of Serbia and
a violation of the basic principles of property rights.

The alteration of the legal regulation would result
in the rescission of creditors' rights. It is far from
clear today how the question of their claims would
be resolved, considering that only creditors who had
registered claims against the Trepca combine through
the management team for the establishment of the
community of Serbian municipalities could request
payment of more than €268 million.

In that context, laws are being changed in the
areas that will remain matters of debate. By so
acting, Pristina has shown itself to be inconsistent
and unwilling to honour agreements. Furthermore,
laws are being changed in other areas as well, before
being negotiated in Brussels. Moreover, in areas where
agreement has already been reached, Pristina has failed
to show the political will needed to start the political
process that, as the first step in the implementation
of the Agreement, would change the legal framework
to allow the formation of the community of Serbian
municipalities, in accordance with its commitments.

The Serbs and members of other minority
communities in Kosovo and Metohija continue to
encounter problems. Their freedom of movement is
still limited or blocked. Their security and free use of
language, access to institutions, exercise of the right
to participate in elections and vote are threatened.
No mechanisms exist either to provide for restitution
of usurped property or to protect property from
repossession after eviction. Entry into possession is
being prevented, and there is no free choice of the place
of return and no conditions for the sustainable survival
of returnees. Even if returnees decide to return, local
communities do their utmost to make them feel neither
accepted nor acceptable. In the municipality of Klina,
two returnee houses have already been set on fire in the
past 10 days. Last but not least, attempts are continually
being made to rename or to stamp out Serbian cultural
and religious heritage and to confiscate property
belonging to the Republic of Serbia.

As pointed out by the Secretary-General in his
report, one ofthe priorities ofthe United Nations Mission
is to ensure respect for human rights. We believe that
all international missions must respect such a priority,
irrespective of which right is involved. They should be
even more mindful with regard to the human rights and
fundamental freedoms of the minority communities
in Kosovo and Metohija. We see UNMIK as the main
guarantor, all the more so as the EU Mission will be
reconfigured during the year.

I would like to point out in particular that any
discussion of a possible change of the scope and
mandate of EULEX must not take place outside the
Security Council, bearing in mind that the United
Nations is the coordinating organization of the
international presence in Kosovo and Metohija. I
believe that today's meeting is the right opportunity to
initiate a discussion on the reconfiguration of EULEX,
as the Security Council is the only appropriate forum
to agree on changes in Kosovo and Metohija that
would lead to lasting and stable progress in the field.
Given that it was necessary for the Security Council
to adopt a presidential statement (S/PRST/2008/44) on
the so-called six-point plan of Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, that is, to deploy EULEX under the UNMIK
umbrella, is not the approval of that body also needed
for a substantial change in the mandate and scope of the
EU Mission? The point of departure for determining
the measures to be taken to improve the contribution of
the European Union to Kosovo and Metohija should be
a report of the Secretary-General on the progress that
EULEX has achieved to date. The Republic of Serbia
expects a discussion on that topic to be started and will
participate constructively in it.

In brief, owing to the lack of mutual trust, I believe
that, in order for all agreements to be implemented,
an international presence in Kosovo and Metohija is
necessary. That is equally true for UNMIK, the Kosovo
Force, EULEX and the missions of other international
organizations. Each and every proposal for the
termination of those missions, the reduction of their
scope and a change in their mandate must be the subject
matter of a serious discussion and agreement, lest it
affect the peace and stability in Kosovo and Metohija
and, by extension, in the entire region.

Serbian officials continue meticulously to follow
the investigation launched by the EULEX Special
Investigative Task Force into the allegations made
in the December 2010 report of Swiss senator Dick
Marty, which was almost unanimously adopted by the
Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe.
According to the report, entitled "Inhuman treatment
of people and illicit trafficking in human organs in
Kosovo", hundreds of Serbs were abducted in Kosovo
before, during and immediately after the 1999 conflict
and sent to secret detention camps in the Republic of
Albania. Many of them were subsequently selected for
forced surgery before being murdered. Their internal
body organs were extracted and sold on the international
black market.

Just as Serbia has done everything to uncover
and prosecute all those who committed atrocities
against the Albanian population in Kosovo, it expects
the whole truth on the war crimes committed against
Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija to be established and all
those responsible for such crimes to be punished. The
families of the Serbian victims must not be seen as less
deserving of justice than the victims of the other war
crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia during the
1990s.

Participating in the Security Council meeting on
21 August 2012 (see S/PV.6822) for the first time in my
capacity as Prime Minister of the Republic of Serbia,
1 said that the solution of the problems in Kosovo
and Metohija would be one of the most important
priorities of the new Government and that we were
ready to achieve, through negotiations and dialogue, a
peaceful and sustainable solution that fully respected
the legitimate interests of both Albanians and Serbs, as
well as all other peoples living in Kosovo and Metohija.

We want lasting peace. In order for peace to last,
it must be just. I say that as someone born in Prizren,
Kosovo and Metohija, the town that was the capital
of Serbia in the Middle Ages. Only 20-odd Serbs live
there today. As a consequence of the five-century-
long occupation by the Ottoman Empire and the
ethnic cleansing of Serbs by Albanians in the past
two centuries, Albanians are the majority population
of Kosovo and Metohija today. That fact does not give
the right to the Albanians to take unilateral decisions
of independence without the agreement of the country
from which they secede.

Let me be quite clear: Serbia is ready for
normalization and reconciliation in the region, primarily
in the interests of ordinary people. Serbia is also ready
for dialogue aimed at finding a comprehensive solution,

but it is not prepared to accept, and never will be, the
unilateral declaration of independence of Kosovo and
Metohija. We warn Pristina not to misinterpret the
readiness of Serbia for dialogue and compromise as
Serbia's weakness and not to use such readiness for the
affirmation of its self-declared independence.

In order to bring about a historical reconciliation
of the two peoples and a comprehensive solution to
the problem of Kosovo and Metohija, it is necessary
that the two sides take difficult and courageous
decisions. We played our part and shall continue the
dialogue with undiminished intensity and maximum
constructiveness. Pristina, however, must be aware
that there is no lasting comprehensive solution without
Serbia's agreement and the decision of this body that I
am addressing, the Security Council. Fifteen years have
elapsed since the end of the armed conflict in Kosovo
and Metohija. Instead of continuing to live in the past
and condemning each other, it is time that we found a
sustainable solution for the future.
I call on all States members of the Security Council
to use the momentum reached in the solution of the
problems in Kosovo and Metohija, which, I am sure,
none of them expected when I spoke of it here 18
months ago, as an opportunity to build lasting stability
and long-lasting peace in Kosovo and Metohija and the
entire region.

I thank the Council for its attention and
understanding of the challenges facing us.

