The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.

I will now make a statement in my capacity as
President of the United States of America.

In the nearly 70 years of the United Nations, this is
only the sixth time that the Security Council has met at
a level like this. We convene such sessions to address
the most urgent threats to peace and security. I called
this meeting because we must come together as nations
and an international community to confront the real
and growing threat of foreign terrorist fighters.

As I said earlier today, the tactic of terrorism is not
new. So many nations represented here today, including
my own, have seen our citizens killed by terrorists who
target innocents. Today, the people of the world have
been horrified by another brutal murder - of Herve
Gourdel - by terrorists in Algeria. We stand with
President Hollande and the French people, not only as
they grieve that terrible loss but as they show resolve
against terror and in defence of liberty.

What brings us together today - what is new - is
the unprecedented flow of fighters in recent years to
and from conflict zones, including Afghanistan and
the Horn of Africa, Yemen, Libya and, most recently,
Syria and Iraq. Our intelligence agencies estimate
that more than 15,000 foreign fighters from more than
80 nations have travelled to Syria in recent years. Many
have joined terrorist organizations such as Al-Qaida's
affiliate, the Nusra Front, and the Islamic State of Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL), which now threatens people
across Syria and Iraq. I want to acknowledge and thank
Prime Minister Al-Abadi of Iraq for being here today.

In the Middle East and elsewhere, those terrorists
exacerbate conflicts. They pose an immediate threat
to people in those regions. As we have already seen
in several cases, they may try to return to their home
countries to carry out deadly attacks. In the face of
that threat, many of our nations, working together
and through the United Nations, have increased our
cooperation. Around the world, foreign terrorist
fighters have been arrested, plots have been disrupted
and lives have been saved. Earlier this year, at West
Point, I called for a new partnership to help nations build
their capacity to meet the evolving threat of terrorism,
including foreign terrorist fighters. Preventing those
individuals from reaching Syria and then slipping back
across our borders is a critical element of our strategy
to degrade and ultimately destroy ISIL.

The historic resolution 2178 (2014) that we have
just adopted enshrines our commitment to meeting
this challenge. It is legally binding. It establishes
new obligations that nations must meet. Specifically,
nations are required to prevent and suppress the
recruiting, organizing, transporting or equipping
of foreign terrorist fighters as well as the financing
of their travel or activities. Nations must prevent the
movement of terrorists or terrorist groups through their
territory and ensure that their domestic laws allow for
the prosecution of those who attempt to do so.

The resolution we have adopted today calls on
nations to help build the capacity of States on the front
lines of this fight, including with the best practices
many of our nations approved yesterday, which the
United States will work to advance through our
counter-terrorism partnerships fund. The resolution
will strengthen cooperation between nations, including
sharing more information about the travel and activities
of foreign terrorist fighters, and it makes clear that
respecting human rights, fundamental freedoms and
the rule of law is not optional - it is an essential part
of successful counter-terrorism efforts. Indeed, history
teaches us that the failure to uphold those rights and
freedoms can actual fuel violent extremism.

Finally, the resolution recognizes that there is
no military solution to the problem of misguided
individuals seeking to join terrorist organizations. It
therefore calls on nations to work together to counter
the violent extremism that can radicalize, recruit and
mobilize individuals to engage in terrorism. Potential
recruits must hear the words of former terrorist
fighters who have seen the truth - that groups like
ISIL betray Islam by killing innocent men, women and
children, the majority of whom are Muslim. Often it
is local communities - families, friends, neighbours
and faith leaders - that are best able to identify and
help disillusioned individuals before they succumb to
extremist ideologies and engage in violence. That is
why the Government of the United States is committed
to working with communities in America and around
the world to build partnerships of trust, respect and
cooperation.

Likewise, even as we are unrelenting against
terrorists who threaten our people, we must redouble
our work to address the conditions - the repression, the
lack of opportunity, too often the hopelessness - that
can make some individuals more susceptible than
others to appeals to extremism and violence. This
includes continuing to pursue a political solution in
Syria that allows all Syrians to live in security, dignity
and peace. This is the work that we must do together as
nations. These are the partnerships that we must forge
as an international community. These are the standards
that we now must meet.

Yet even as we are guided by the commitments that
we make here today, let me close by stating the obvious.
Resolutions alone will not be enough. Promises on paper
cannot keep us safe. Lofty rhetoric and good intentions
will not stop a single terrorist attack. The words spoken
here today must be matched and translated into action,
into deeds. There must be concrete action within
nations and between them, not just in the days ahead
but for years to come. For if there was ever a challenge
in our interconnected world that cannot be met by one
nation alone, it is this one - terrorists crossing borders
and threatening to unleash unspeakable violence.

These terrorists believe our countries will be unable
to stop them. The safety of our citizens demands that we
do. I am here today to say that all who are committed to
this urgent work will find a strong and steady partner
in the United States of America.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council. I begin by giving the floor to His
Excellency, Mr. Goodluck Ebele Jonathan, President of
the Federal Republic of Nigeria.

