Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the Australian presidency for having convened
today's informative briefing and for the concept note
(S/2014/788, annex), which allows us to address the
role of policing in peacekeeping and post-conflict
peacebuilding. We also appreciate the briefings from
the Police Commissioners of the Missions in Liberia,
South Sudan and the Central African Republic.

Chile understands the concept of peacekeeping
operations in the broadest sense, considering it to
include peacekeeping and peacebuilding tasks with
military, police and civilian components working in
a comprehensive framework. Today's meeting allows
us to assess one of those components - the police
component - and to discuss ways to help States reach
agreement and overcome conflicts.
The increase in the number of police personnel
deployed and the changing nature of their functions
reflect ever-more complex realities and an understanding
of the fundamental role of their work. As we know, its
functions today include, inter alia, provisional police
efforts that support processes of reform, restructuring
and reorganization of national police and other entities
that are charged with maintaining a robust rule of law.
Whatever their functions are, they should be guided by
respect for human rights and the protection of civilians,
including, of course, the concept of national ownership.

The police function comes with a daily interaction
with the civilian population, hence the importance of
the police component having the training and equipment
needed to enforce the rule of law, respect for human
rights and the protection of civilians, in particular
women and children, in the face of gender-based and
sexual crimes. It is important for each State to protect
its civilian population, but if that does not happen,
the principle of the responsibility to protect brings
us necessarily before the need to act. Further, this
contact with the civilian population allows in practical
terms the police component to act as an early-warning
mechanism. consistent with the Secretary-General's
Human Rights First initiative.

We must increase the presence and leadership
profile of women in the police components, which is
directly linked to the effectiveness of their function. We
call upon the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
to incorporate in its reports recommendations in step
with resolutions 1325 (2000) and 2122 (2013). We also
encourage police-contributing countries to give their
police sufficient training so as to close the competency

gaps.

Police components contribute to the laying of
the groundwork for a robust rule of law in which
reconciliation and the promotion of development
through economic growth and the eradication of
poverty and social development are key elements when
it comes to overcoming conflicts and building peace.
In that context, I should like to mention that since 1996
my country has undertaken assistance programmes
with the Haitian National Police, through which nearly
60 officers are trained each year in the Chilean police
curriculum.

A trained and duly equipped United Nations police
has the ability to facilitate reconciliation processes
and confidence-building among civilian populations,
armed groups and Governments, while favouring
peacebuilding, the rule of law and the overcoming of
crises through inclusive development. We urge that
this forum for exchange be maintained, as it allows
for more informed decision-making based on first-
hand knowledge about the challenges, perspectives and
concerns of the police forces working on the ground.

We would also like to underscore and appreciate
the efforts made by countries providing police forces
in the different peacekeeping operations, in particular
those countries for which this contribution, unlike other
contributions, also means additional effort because
they are providing less support for their own domestic
public security.

Lastly, I should like to say that we would have liked
for the resolution adopted this morning (resolution 2185 (2014)) to have directly recognized the role of the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations in the
terms set forth in the 2006 resolution adopted by the
General Assembly (resolution 61/291).

