Mr. Negroponte (United States of America): On
22 May, this body joined together to help the Iraqi
people recover from decades of repression, wilful
neglect and isolation. We adopted a framework to
enable the Coalition Provisional Authority, the United
Nations Member States and others in the international
community to contribute to Iraq's reconstruction.

At that time, my Government and the United
Kingdom committed to informing the Council on a
quarterly basis of progress in implementing resolution
1483 (2003). We had looked forward to this
opportunity to inform the Council in detail about
coalition activities and efforts to illustrate our
commitment to fostering the conditions in which the
Iraqi people could chart their own future and to seek
the Council's continued support for this unprecedented
undertaking.

But, like everyone gathered here, as well as
friends and colleagues in countries all over the world,
our step is a little slower today, our smiles a bit forced,
as we begin to come to grips with the truly inestimable
loss of Sergio Vieira de Mello and other United
Nations officials and Iraqi staff members who perished
on Tuesday.

It has been only three short months since
resolution 1483 (2003) was adopted and, in that brief
period, Sergio and his devoted staff energetically
seized the mandate awarded by the Council and forged
a path for United Nations contributions to Iraq's
reconstruction. For nearly 60 years, the United Nations
has been a partner and friend to people in need all over
the world. United Nations employees who freely
choose to help in Iraq are unarmed civilian
professionals who have devoted their talents and
energies to public service. These good people are men
and women from every background who lend a hand
when we call. They are no man's enemy.

On behalf of the United States and the American
people, I extend our deepest sympathies to the victims
and their families. I also want to assure the Council
that coalition forces are working closely with United
Nations officials to ensure that the injured receive
appropriate medical care. We greatly appreciate the
many offers of assistance from other nations with the
difficult - indeed, heartwrenching - work at the site
of the attack.

While we do not yet know the identities of those
who perpetrated this hateful attack, we can surmise
their motives: to restore the brutal reign of terror of the
Saddam regime and the Baath party; to terrify those
who wish to work with the international community to
build a free and democratic Iraq; to create a new
battleground in the global war between terrorists and
civilized nations; to prevent the emergence of a new
Iraq whose people live at peace among themselves and
with their neighbours; and to threaten the foundation
carefully laid since Iraq's liberation.

The Iraqi people, the coalition, the United
Nations and others in the international community have
laboured mightily over the past few months to build a
new Iraq. With concrete support from the international
community, the Iraqi people will realize the potential
of their great nation. However, as Tuesday's attack
painfully illustrates, we should be under no illusions
about the enormity of the task.

Thirty years of unbridled tyranny have scarred
and stunted the Iraqi body politic. The sustained lack of
investment in human and material infrastructure has
left Iraq ill equipped to meet the needs and challenges
of the twenty-first century. Iraq must transform its
failed statist economy into a functioning market-based
system. Basic services must be fully restored, improved
and expanded. The voice of the Iraqi people must be
reclaimed from enforced silence and speak freely in a
civil society through responsible media and through
local and national elections. The rule of law, enshrined
in a new constitution and grounded in respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms, must supplant
rule by terror. The police and army must be
transformed from instruments of oppression and
brutality into professional institutions capable of
ensuring order and security.

Resolution 1483 (2003) provided the framework
for Iraq's regeneration. Since its adoption, one of the
most significant accomplishments was the formation on
13 July of the 25-member Governing Council. It is now
up to the Governing Council to guide the country
through the sequence of events, naming ministers for
an interim Government, drafting a constitution and
holding elections that will lead to an internationally
recognized representative Government.

For the first time in decades, Iraqi resources -
including oil revenues, assets of the former regime and
donor funds - are being spent for the benefit of the
Iraqi people. The coalition, in coordination with the
Governing Council, developed a budget for the
remainder of 2003 of $6.1 billion. The Governing
Council has now taken the lead in developing a budget
for the year 2004.

Allow me to highlight other important markers of
progress. In all of these areas, the coalition has worked
side by side with United Nations specialized agencies
and, in many cases, the resulting achievements would
not have been possible without their assistance and
expertise.

We are working to improve economic conditions.
Salaries, pensions and emergency payments inject $20
million per month into the Iraqi economy. The coalition
is buying wheat and barley crops from Iraqi farmers.
Efforts are under way to establish an Iraqi trade bank
and to put the banking system on line. Currency
unification is set for the month of October.

In the field of security, we have initiated
programmes to enable Iraqis to develop a capacity to
foil the saboteurs who target their electrical
infrastructure, oil industry and other sectors critical to
Iraq's renewal. For example, we are in the process of
organizing an Iraqi civil defence corps to work with
coalition forces on security tasks, and we have also
hired several thousand Iraqis into the Facilities
Protection Service to provide security for critical
infrastructure, Government facilities and cultural and
educational assets.

We have taken major strides towards promoting a
secure environment with an effective and professional
police force. Tens of thousands of Iraqi police
answered the call to return to work for the betterment
of their country, and recruitment and training is under
way to put thousands more on the streets. There are
currently nearly 38,000 police officers patrolling
throughout the country, some 6,000 of whom are in
Baghdad. Our ultimate goal is to have approximately
65,000 police countrywide. We have also worked hard
with the Iraqis to refurbish and reopen police stations,
courts and prisons around the country. Some countries
have already contributed expertise, trainers or
equipment to support police programmes in Iraq, most
notably Canada, Denmark, Singapore and South Korea.
We will need the help of other countries to build an
effective and durable Iraqi police force.

It is a basic task of security sector reform in Iraq
to make permanent the demilitarization of the internal
security structures of the Saddam regime. However, as
it resumes full control of its affairs, Iraq will need a
military for self-defence. Accordingly, we have started
training the new Iraqi army. We are supporting
Governing Council efforts to develop the institutional
and legal framework necessary to ensure that the new
Iraq's national security policy and national security
institutions are under democratic, civilian control and
can maintain Iraq's security in a secure region.

Just as with our civilian police and other security
reform initiatives, the Iraqi people and the coalition
welcome and need the participation of the international
community in these efforts to help bring security and
stability to Iraq. Many countries have already rallied to
this effort. More than 30 nations have sent or
committed forces to promote stability in Iraq, and we
are continuing our efforts to secure contributions from
others.

The timing of Tuesday's attack was no accident.
It occurred at a critical juncture, when the impact of
initial plans and efforts has begun to take positive
effect. A secure, democratic and stable Iraq is a threat
and a target for those who would turn the clock back to
the days of tyranny. In the face of this attempt to
sabotage the future of Iraq, there is only one response
available to us if we are to live up to the principles of
our Charter. The members of this body must
unreservedly stand together. We must invigorate our
struggle against terrorism and aggressively implement
measures to prevent and suppress acts of terrorism and
we must solidify and enhance our support for security
and stability in Iraq in order to foster an environment
in which the people of Iraq freely determine their own
future.

Members of this body can best honour the legacy
of those who died on Tuesday with a sustained and
unwavering commitment to build a better Iraq.

