Mr. Oquist Kelley (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish):
Nicaragua is participating in today's Security Council
meeting to reaffirm its commitment to peace and
reiterate its solidarity with the Government and the
people of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and its
legitimately elected president, our brother, Mr. Nicolas
Maduro Moros. The Government and the people of
Nicaragua believe that Venezuela in no way represents
a threat to international peace and security, and we
therefore demand and urge that the sovereign decisions
of the Venezuelan people be respected.

The Venezuelan people have already exercised
their sovereign right by electing our brother Nicolas
Maduro as their legitimate constitutional president, and
notjust for one, but for two consecutive terms. We must
recall and share with the international community that
the former President of the United States, Mr. Jimmy
Carter, described Venezuela's electoral system as the
best in the world. We recall this in case anyone has
doubts about the accuracy and transparency of the
results of all the elections held in Venezuela in the past
20 years. By the way, it is important to point out that no
people in our Americas have exercised their sovereign
right to choose their leaders as many times as the people
of Venezuela have in these past two decades, which
serves as an important lesson for all peoples - a lesson
of sovereignty, socialjustice and democracy, conceived
by the Venezuelan people.

The request for convening today's meeting is
a clear interference in the internal affairs of States
and a violation of the principles and purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations and of international law.
The interest in and insistence on including the issue
of Venezuela on the Council's agenda by the United
States is another form of interfering and intervening
in Venezuela's internal affairs, the clear objective of
which is to impose a change of Government and to
replace the Constitutional Government of President
Nicolas Maduro through a coup d'etat. These actions
do not contribute to a political and peaceful solution
that specifically fits the Venezuelan people, who are
the ones who should exercise their rights to sovereignty
and self-determination within the framework of their
domestic jurisdiction.
It is essential and urgent that the will of the people
be respected, that policies that violate international law
definitively cease, and that hostile actions, including
all unilateral coercive economic measures that threaten
economic development and hinder the achievement
of the Sustainable Development Goals and the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, thereby violating
the human rights of the entire Venezuelan people, are
stopped. What characterizes the situation in Venezuela
are the shameless concrete attempts to destroy the
social gains in health, education, housing, reduction
of poverty and hunger achieved with great effort by
the Bolivarian revolution launched by the timeless
Commander Hugo Chavez Frias.

Nothing should derail the zone of peace in Latin
America and the Caribbean proclaimed by the Heads
of States and Governments of the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States in 2014. Accordingly,
any threat or act of military aggression is unacceptable
and reprehensible. Our Commander President Daniel
Ortega Saavedra has effectively summed up what is
happening in this sister nation as follows:

"Andinthesedays,whenitinitiateshostilities against
peoples and nations like Venezuela, it is launching
an openly interventionist policy of interference.
What we are seeing is an action and an attitude of
arrogance and disrespect for international law by
a Power that, as history has shown, cannot coexist
with or abide by international law. Whenever it
wants to, it disregards international law, including
United Nations Security Council resolutions, and
takes unilateral actions, because it decides to do so,
based on the power it has."

Venezuela is all ofLatin America and the Caribbean;
Venezuela is the whole world, because, in Venezuela,
the principles of non-interventionism and a multilateral
order based on the independence, sovereignty and
equality of States are being defended.

