Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to convey Ambassador Adom's
apologies to you, Sir, and the other members of the
Council that he could not participate in this important

meeting on the return of the Council mission to
the Sahel.

I thank you for giving me the opportunity to present,
on behalf of the Permanent Representative of Cote
d'Ivoire, His Excellency Mr. Leon Adorn, a summary
of the discussions on the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel) during the Security Council's visit to the
Sahel from 22 to 24 March.

The Security Council delegation held a working
breakfast on 23 March, from 8 am. to 9.30 a.m., with
the security forces mentioned in resolution 2423 (2018),
namely, the Malian armed forces, the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), Operation
Barkhane, the European Union Training Mission
in Mali and the European Union capacity-building
mission in the Sahel. These discussions focused on
cooperation among those different forces, including
efforts to coordinate the fight against armed terrorist
groups in the Sahel. They highlighted the importance
of coordination and information exchange among those
forces, as well as their complementarity, despite the
fact that they operate under different mandates and
with persistent challenges.

The Security Council delegation also held a
working session with representatives of the Joint
Force on the security aspects of the activities of the
G-5 Sahel, in which Brigadier General Hanena Ould
Sidi, Force Commander of the Joint Force; Mr. Maman
Sidikou, the Permanent Secretary of the G-5 Sahel;
as well as the Foreign Ministers of Burkina Faso and
Mali took part. They informed the members of the
Council of the efforts made to operationalize the Joint
Force and ensure compliance with the human rights
compliance framework. Brigadier General Hanena
Ould Sidi pointed out that the Joint Force had been able
to conduct three operations since the beginning of 2019,
despite delays due to the terrorist attack on G-5 Sahel
headquarters in Sevare in June 2018.

While the exchanges highlighted the progress
made over the past six months in the operationalization
of the Joint Force, they also underlined the difficulties
associated with the provisions of the technical
agreement. These include, for example, the territorial
constraints on the support that MINUSMA can provide
to the Joint Force, pursuant to resolution 2391 (2017).
As a result, only two of the seven battalions of the Joint
Force operating on Malian territory can benefit from
that support. The difficulties encountered therefore
require a revision of the technical agreement in order to
better adapt it to the realities on the ground and enhance
the effectiveness of the Joint Force.

Responding to the concerns expressed by several
members of the Council, the Commander of the
Joint Force reassured them of the efforts made to
implement the human rights compliance framework
in the conduct of operations, with the assistance of
international partners. He acknowledged that respect
for the framework and the conduct of civil-military
activities were essential to winning hearts and gaining
the cooperation of the people in the affected areas.

The various audiences given to the Council
members by Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar Keita, Malian Head
of State, Prime Minister Soumeylou Boubeye Maiga
and, subsequently, by civil society and members of the
political opposition allowed the Council members to
understand the problems facing the people of Mali in
terms oftheir political, social and security expectations.

During the Ouagadougou stage, the Council held
a working session with members of the Government of
Burkina Faso, who outlined Burkina Faso's priorities as
part of the activities intended to promote economic and
social development in the geographical area of the G-5
Sahel. Mr. Maman Sidikou, Brigadier General Hanena
Ould Sidi, the Head of the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel, the European Union
representative and the United Nations Development
Programme Resident Coordinator in Burkina Faso also
took part in this meeting.

Pointing out that Burkina Faso spends 22 per cent of
its budget on national defence and security, Government
members shared their plans for the economic and
social development of the country's vulnerable areas
and highlighted actions to reopen schools. They also
expressed their readiness to ensure respect for human
rights and conduct investigations into alleged human
rights violations committed by the defence and security
forces. The members of the Government of Burkina
Faso informed the members of the Council of their
strengthened cooperation with countries on the coast of
West Africa - Cote d'Ivoire, Ghana, Togo, Benin - on
security issues, given the risk of an increase in the
number of terrorist attacks throughout the subregion.

With regard to Burkina Faso's priorities, Council
members noted ongoing efforts to operationalize
the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel, including its police
component, the implementation of the Priority
Investment Programme, capacity-building of the
permanent secretariat of the G-5 Sahel and the
empowerment of women. The Council delegation
was also informed of the limitations to the optimal
performance of the Joint Force, owing in particular to
inadequate support arrangements, equipment shortages,
limited basic infrastructure and insufficient training.

At the end of their stay, the members of the Security
Council delegation were received by the President, His
Excellency Mr. Roch Marc Christian Kabore, who
reiterated his country's priorities at the helm of the G-5
Sahel by endorsing all of the information previously
conveyed by the members of his Government. President
Kabore' committed to stepping up efforts in support
of economic and social development, in particular in
affected areas. He also stressed the need to review
the technical agreement so as to ensure adequate
MINUSMA support to the G-5 Sahel with a view to
improving efficiency. That is my summary of Security
Council meetings that were held on G-5 Sahel issues.

In conclusion, on behalf of Ambassador Adom,
I too would like to thank the Secretariat team for its
valuable assistance, which contributed to the success of
the Security Council mission.

