I would like to thank all briefers for their overviews. Almost two years ago, in May 2018, the Council adopted resolution 2417 (2018), recognizing the link between armed conflict, violence, conflict-induced food insecurity and the threat of famine. It also strongly condemned the use of the starvation of civilians as a method of warfare. We know that the need for humanitarian aid is rising. Today, the relevance of conflict-induced hunger has not decreased; on the contrary, especially now, due to the outbreak of the pandemic, it is even more relevant. The pandemic has already had a massive impact in every possible way on our everyday lives. The impact has been felt more profoundly, especially by the most vulnerable, in conflict situations, where resources have always been scarce. According to the latest analysis by the World Food Programme (WFP), due to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) an additional 130 million people could be pushed to the brink of starvation by the end of 2020. Most of the food-insecure people in the world live in countries affected by armed conflicts, which have devastating humanitarian consequences, hindering an effective humanitarian response. Sometimes humanitarian aid is all that people have. One can only think what might happen to these people when we are not able to carry out an effective humanitarian response. We again fully support the Secretary- General's call for a global ceasefire. As the conflicts are put to a halt, there is a higher chance for the civilians to avoid food shortages. We cannot ignore the impact of climate change, which plays a major role here. Climate change has reduced livelihood options in many countries and caused migration. It has also left significant parts of the population in a vulnerable condition. Climate-related security risks contribute to grievances and increase inequality and fragility, which in turn pose challenges to the implementation of United Nations missions everywhere. Conflict-driven food crises can be aggravated in countries where severe extreme weather phenomena are becoming more frequent. We cannot turn away from the impact of climate on food security; on the contrary, urgent action is needed to protect the most vulnerable communities. We also underline that women are key actors contributing to food security during conflict. Women are often hardest hit and have fewer alternative livelihoods than men when crops are lost. Ensuring women's equal rights, including to household resources and land, as well as their participation in decision-making, strengthens communities' ability to manage the challenges related to food insecurity. The importance of safe and unimpeded access of humanitarian personnel to civilians in armed conflicts can never be underlined enough. We call on all parties to armed conflict to comply with international humanitarian law and international human rights law.
