Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I wish
to thank you, Mr. President, and the other members of
the Security Council for rapidly responding to the
request of the Group of Arab States that this emergency
meeting be convened. We are grateful to the Secretary-
General for attending this emergency meeting, which is
being held to consider the recent and ongoing Israeli
military actions against the Palestinian population in
the Gaza Strip. To date, this aggression has killed more
than 400 Palestinians and wounded thousands of
others, including many women and children, and the
horrifying carnage continues. The impact has been
made still more tragic by the crippling blockade
imposed by Israel, in flagrant violation of its
responsibilities under international law and
international humanitarian law, including its specific
obligations, as the occupying Power, under the Fourth
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War.

The events in Gaza, including Israel's
premeditated and barbaric aggression and killing of
civilians and its disproportionate and arbitrary use of
force, threaten peace and security not only in the
Middle East region, but throughout the world. That
requires the Security Council to step up its efforts and
take immediate action, in accordance with its Charter
mandate, to ensure a comprehensive and binding
ceasefire that will be respected.
Such action by the Council would implement its
unanimous will, as expressed in the press statement of
28 December 2008, which called for an immediate end
to all military action and violence and for efforts to

address the humanitarian situation and the urgent
humanitarian needs in the Gaza Strip through the
permanent reopening of the crossings, in order to bring
about improved political, economic and humanitarian
conditions.

Such conditions are necessary if there is to be an
end to violence and counter-violence and true calm
between the parties, so that international efforts can be
stepped up to bring about the desired settlement and to
establish an independent Palestinian State, with
Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, as quickly as possible.

There can be no doubt that Israel is not heeding
the appeals by the Security Council to address the
explosive situation in Gaza. Israel continues its
military aggression, flagrantly flouting the will of the
international community despite the Council's repeated
calls to both parties, the calls by Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon and contacts with the concerned parties.
Israel's actions have exacerbated tensions in the
occupied Palestinian territories and, indeed, in all Arab
countries. This will compromise the prospects for
peace in the Middle East.

The Security Council, which, through its
successive resolutions and decisions, has recently
stated its intent to bring about peace, needs to impose
its collective will under international law and
international humanitarian law by adopting a decisive
resolution that would include the elements already set
out in the press statement, along with other elements.
Specifically, it should highlight the need to ensure the
international protection necessary for the Palestinian
people in order to restore the prestige and credibility of
the Security Council by addressing this aggression,
avoiding double standards, politicization and
selectivity.

The Israeli aggression, which has been
denounced by all international and regional parties,
requires that the Security Council adopt a firm decision
and take all measures necessary to end Israeli
aggression against the Gaza Strip and to prevent a land
attack from taking place. Contrary to Israeli assertions,
these attacks are not carried out in self-defence. The
attacks are taking place in the context of a lack of any
real political will to put an end to the occupation and to
enable the Palestinian people to restore their lost rights,
specifically their inalienable right to self-determination
and to the creation of their own independent State.

Notwithstanding all the efforts undertaken by the
forces of peace in the region, including Egypt, to
maintain the lull, this lull is not an end in itself, but a
way to ensure an environment conducive to true peace
instead of the suspended peace process, in which the
Palestinian people and all Arab peoples have lost their
faith. To truly guarantee that the situation will not be
replicated, there must be an end to the occupation of
the Palestinian, Syrian and Lebanese territories, a
return to the borders of 4 June 1967, a settlement of the
refugee question and the establishment of an
independent, viable Palestinian State - which are all
elements of the Arab Peace Initiative. That Initiative
continues to be the only basis for bringing about a
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East.

As a result, the Council of the Arab League,
which met at the foreign minister level today,
31 December 2008, decided to instruct the Arab Group
in New York to call for an emergency meeting of the
Security Council and to call for a binding resolution to
compel Israel to immediately end its aggression, lift
the blockade, open the crossings, put an end to its
collective punishment policy, ensure international
protection for the Palestinian people and calm the
situation.

I endorse the statement made by the Permanent
Representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya as the
sole member of the Arab Group represented in the
Security Council and welcome his introduction of the
draft resolution. We reiterate the fact that the draft
resolution submitted to the Security Council represents
an integrated, complete basis for addressing these
issues in order to bring about an end to military
confrontation and to promote peace efforts. The Arab
Group hopes that all Council members will support the
draft resolution and that it will be adopted as soon as
possible.

