Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank the Special
Envoy and his team. What they do remains absolutely
vital, however hard pounding it is on the ground.

I will start, ifI may, with Idlib, where the Special
Envoy started. We had a big debate about this earlier
in the week (see S/PV.8561), so I will not rehearse all
those points. But I think the fact that the indiscriminate
use of force continues ought to worry everybody on the
Security Council.

There are violations of the Geneva Conventions
and international humanitarian law going on. I asked
a number of questions. Those questions remain
unanswered. I looked at the Russian general's statement.
The questions are still unanswered, so I will return to
them at the next humanitarian briefing.

However, at this particular moment, I want echo
what the Special Envoy said in his appeal for all parties
to stabilize the situation and implement resolution 2254
(2015), including the nationwide ceasefire. We need
to keep that goal right at the forefront of our minds.
I also take this opportunity to echo the United States
representative with regard to what we heard from the
Syrian representative in the meeting on Idlib (see S/PV.8553). We have discussed the length of statements
and the working methods here in the Council. This is
therefore not the time to rehearse that. I think, however,
that it does mean that we need another discussion
about it.

I want to pick up on the point about attacking
humanitarian workers. Their jobs are dangerous
enough, and they do those jobs because recognized
institutional services or a country's own services are
unable or unwilling to help. Therefore, as I said in the
previous meeting, they deserve our protection, as well
as our thanks.

Turning to the political process, I hope that the
Special Envoy knows that he has the United Kingdom's
full support. We are very interested in the contact group
being able to meet. I think that it is a necessary first step
towards trying to make faster progress on resolution
2254 (2015). I therefore hope that all the people whom
the Special Envoy is trying to bring together would
approach that in the spirit of constructiveness and good
faith. We support his efforts in the United Nations-led
Geneva process. It is the only the legitimate forum. We
welcome the holding of the meeting in Geneva. It is
necessary but not sufficient. As he said, we also need
progress on the ground. I hope that the Group of 20 will
be able to discuss it and find a way forward.

None of that is to detract from the fact that we
support the political process being Syrian-owned
and Syrian-led, with United Nations facilitation. The
Special Envoy is absolutely right to say that progress
cannot be made without that sort of facilitation. I believe
that there is still is a very big question about the Syrian
Government's commitment to the political process,
as, month after month, we see the prevarications with
regard to the constitutional committee continue. If
progress cannot be made, then I really do agree with
the United States representative and would encourage
the Special Envoy - who alluded to this himself - to
try other routes leading towards achieving the political
solution set out in resolution 2254 (2015). For good
reason, we have all become very focused on the
constitutional committee, but the bigger prize is
resolution 2254 (2015), which includes preparing for
nationwide elections observed by the United Nations,
securing the release of detainees and establishing the
nationwide ceasefire.

I note that, unless there is progress on the ground
that is meaningful to ordinary citizens, a political
process will not prosper. That means the Syrian
Government stopping the repression throughout the
country - in former opposition areas that it now
controls. It means stopping arbitrary detention,
conscription and discrimination.

We understand that, only last week, the Syrian
authorities issued death certificates for more than 700
Syrians who died in detention in Hamah, and, according
to reports from Syrians for Truth and Justice, families
have not received the bodies of their loved ones, nor
have they received information about the circumstances
of their deaths or the location of their burials. That is
therefore a serious hindrance for the people of Syria to
being able to have confidence in their own future.

In addition, there is a real sense that the Syrian
authorities are holding their own people to ransom. It
also affects and impacts on conditions for the return of
refugees and fails to create the conditions required for
a stable economy so that Syria eventually can become
a normal country once again. It fails to give people
the chance to engage in the decisions that govern their
lives, and it fails to give them the right to live those
lives free of violence and fear.

Once again, let me conclude by appealing to the
Syrian authorities to come to the table and engage more
speedily and positively with the Special Envoy.

