Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): Please allow me at the outset, Sir, to congratulate
you on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for this month. I am convinced that, with your outstanding
abilities and wealth of diplomatic experience, you will
guide the Council's work to success during the final month
of 1995. I wish also to take this opportunity to thank your
predecessor, His Excellency Ambassador Salim Bin

 

Mohammed Al-Khussaiby, for his contribution to the
complete success of the Council's work last month.

The dawn of peace and stability has finally come to
Rwanda after repeated setbacks. We are pleased to note
that the improvement of the security situation in Rwanda
has brought about a further improvement in the
humanitarian situation and has enabled Rwanda to embark
gradually on the road of rehabilitation, reconstruction and
development. The Government and the people of Rwanda
have made tremendous efforts to this end, with gratifying
successes.

Today the core of the question of Rwanda is national
reconciliation, the most important element of which is the
voluntary repatriation of the 1.6 million refugees. The
protracted presence of large numbers of refugees has
brought huge pressure and difficulties not only to Rwanda
but also to the region as a whole. Therefore, the
international community has the responsibility to assist
Rwanda and other countries in the region in the return of
Rwandese refugees to their homeland to live a stable life.

In the light of the favourable changes in Rwanda,
and with the consent of the Rwandese Government, the
Council has decided to extend the mandate of UNAMIR
and to adjust its size and mandate, under which it will
mainly play a mediating role, assist the voluntary return
of Rwandese refugees and help Rwanda achieve national
reconciliation within the framework of the Arusha peace
agreement. This conforms to the interests of the
Rwandese people. Therefore, the Chinese delegation,
based on its consistent support for the peace process in
Rwanda, will vote in favour of the draft resolution before
us.

We hope that the adoption of the draft resolution
will further promote peace and stability in Rwanda and
contribute to national reconciliation and a peaceful and
stable life for the Rwandese people at an early date.

