Ms. Shalev (Israel): Allow me to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month and to thank you for convening
this important debate.

Today, as we discuss the scourge of terrorism, the
world continues to see terrorism raise its ugly head
around the globe. These terrorists turn civilians into
targets, shields and weapons. There is no way to justify
the unjustifiable: the killing of the innocent. There
must be unanimous and unequivocal condemnation of
terrorism, irrespective of the motivation, by the world
community.

With that in mind, my delegation welcomes the
work of the three subsidiary bodies of the Security
Council, the able stewardship of their Chairpersons and
the informative briefings delivered earlier. Israel has
strengthened and will continue to strengthen its
capacity to work and cooperate with international
bodies to enhance collective efforts with respect to
counter-terrorism.

In the debate earlier today, some delegations
sought to explain terrorism. Let me stress that
terrorism is terrorism is terrorism and that we cannot
and should not try to justify it. That principle has been
reaffirmed in the General Assembly's Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, in numerous Security Council
resolutions and by the Secretary-General himself.
Nothing justifies the horrible phenomenon of terrorism,
which is the global plague of our time.

Let me also say that nothing can be more
appalling than to hear the justification of terrorism, and
nothing can be more ironic than to be lectured on
"commitments" to combat terrorism and on "measures"
to prevent terrorism, as we have just heard from the
Syrian representative. Let me remind the Council that
Syria supports, harbours, finances and trains terrorists
in our region.

As for the work of the three Committees, I wish
to comment on certain specific aspects that merit our
attention. Regarding the Counter-Terrorism Committee
and the work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED), I would like to thank
Mr. Smith for his able leadership. We are appreciative
of his ongoing dialogue with Member States, and the
regular updates on current affairs, to enable us to best
respond to and support his work.

The implementation of numerous reforms, as
articulated in resolution 1805 (2008) and in Mr.
Smith's organizational plan (see S/2008/80), led to
effective methods of work and sustained achievements
by the CTED. Israel looks forward to the interim
review report that will highlight ongoing plans,
successes and challenges during the remaining period
of its mandate.

We would also like to touch upon the policy
adopted in resolution 1805 (2008) relating to country
visits. That revised policy, which permits more tailored
visits to States and donors alongside traditional visits,
has proved to be an effective and valuable tool. This
policy has also contributed considerably to enhancing
technical assistance, and it enables the CTED to better
engage with donor and recipient countries. It is our
understanding that many requests for assistance were
successfully responded to and resulted in tangible
support.

With the successful enhancement of technical
assistance, Israel would welcome similar emphasis on
the implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and
1624 (2005), as outlined in those resolutions, as well as
subsequent resolutions, including resolution 1805
(2008). In that regard, Israel is encouraged by the
dialogue between Member States and the CTED with
regard to the Preliminary Implementation Assessments,
and we look forward to the finalization of the technical
guide that will serve as a road map for the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).
The Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee remains an
important part of our efforts to isolate terrorists and
their means to inflict harm. Regarding the work of that
Committee, Israel welcomes the progress towards
promoting clear and fair procedures concerning the
inclusion of individuals on the consolidated list. My
delegation realizes that the ongoing review of
individuals and entities placed on the consolidated list,
with the aim of ensuring clear and fair procedures, is a
dynamic process that allows for further improvement.

In that regard, resolution 1822 (2008) was a
major step forward, and the next renewal of the
mandate of the 1267 sanctions Committee in December
should consider further improvements. We believe, in
particular, that the publication of the statement of case
will further enhance the ability of Member States to
implement sanctions against the said individuals and
entities.

In relation to the work of the 1540 Committee,
Israel firmly supports resolution 1540 (2004), the work
of the Committee and the subsequent renewal of its
mandate. Israel remains committed to the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and calls on
other Member States to ensure their compliance with
the resolution in order to redouble our collective efforts
on this critical issue.

Israel continues to believe that the convergence of
terrorism and weapons of mass destruction - chemical,
biological, nuclear and radiological weapons -
represents a grave global threat. We must continue to
seek and implement measures that keep the world's
most dangerous weapons out of the hands of the
world's most dangerous individuals. Israel fully
supports the renewal of the mandate of the 1540
Committee and believes that it is critical to continue to
develop international standards against the use and
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

In order to increase the dialogue among Member
States and the 1540 Committee, my delegation believes
that receiving periodic briefings by the expert
coordinator would enhance Member States'
understanding of the work of the Committee.

On a broad level, my delegation believes that we
must actively and robustly support the work of the
counter-terrorism committees of the United Nations, as
well as the work of Member States in this regard. Close
cooperation and coordination among all three
subsidiary bodies and the Counter-Terrorism

Implementation Task Force (CTITF) is also of the
utmost importance. With the relocation of the CTITF to
the Department of Political Affairs, we hope that such
integration will further augment and enhance
cooperation.

Furthermore, the international community must
address in a proactive and operative manner the threat
posed by the transfer of weapons and capabilities by
some Member States to terrorist organizations in our
region. The danger emanating from the continuous
smuggling of arms is evident in our region, where
ongoing efforts by Iran and Syria provide terrorist
organizations - in particular, Hamas in Gaza and
Hizbollah in Lebanon - with sophisticated and deadly
weapons.

This support - which constitutes a violation of
numerous Security Council resolutions - not only
threatens Israel, but also undermines the stability of
our entire region. This phenomenon and its
consequences are recognized by many Governments in
our region, and they must be confronted by the
international community in the strongest possible
terms.

We in Israel are all too familiar with the
horrifying toll that terrorism exacts, and so I wish to
thank you once again, Mr. President, for convening
today's important meeting. However, while our
condemnation of terrorism today is important, it is not
an end in itself. Our words here will not protect
innocent men, women and children from the evils of
terrorism. Only our collective action will.

We appreciate this opportunity for dialogue and
an exchange of ideas, and we are prepared to continue
to do our part. Nothing justifies terrorism, and we must
do all that we can to eradicate this threat. The world
expects nothing less, and humanity deserves so much
more.

