Mr. Serrano (European Union): Let me begin by
thanking you, Sir, for inviting the European Union to
this important debate. Many thanks also to Under-
Secretary-General Pascoe for his report.

I wish to join others, at the outset, in conveying
the condolences and sympathy of the European Union
to the people and Government of China for the victims
and losses suffered in today's earthquake.

The candidate countries, Turkey, Croatia and the
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the countries
of the Stabilization and Association Process and
potential candidates Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro, Serbia and the European Free Trade
Association country Iceland, member of the European
Economic Area, as well as Ukraine, align themselves
with this statement.

Negotiations between Palestinians and Israelis
were last held in December 2008. The absence of
negotiations and the ensuing vacuum has been a source
of great concern to the European Union and the
international community. The resumption of
negotiations remains an absolute necessity, now more
urgent than ever. The European Union calls on both
Israelis and Palestinians to resume meaningful
negotiations on all final status issues without further
delay. A failure to do so will have negative
consequences and obstruct efforts to bring peace and
stability to the Middle East.

The European Union has strongly supported
international efforts led by the United States and aimed
at resuming negotiations. A firm, ambitious and
sustained effort from the United States remains
indispensable. The European Union will continue to
work closely with the United States and support its
efforts. At the same time, the European Union, together
with its Quartet and Arab League partners, will
continue actively to look for ways to ensure a peace
deal, which should be finalized within the 24-month
period mentioned in the Quartet statement agreed in
Moscow on 19 March 2010. The European Union
continues to support reinvigorated Quartet engagement.

The creation of the State of Palestine and the
realization of the two-State solution remain a core
European interest. The European Union is also ready to
step up its efforts by facilitating and sustaining peace
agreements. The European Union will continue to work
on contributions in the areas of State-building, regional
issues, refugees, security and Jerusalem, and will
continue to assist Palestinian state-building in
preparation for Palestinian statehood. It is ready to
extend full diplomatic, political and economic support
to the Palestinian Authority's Government Plan
"Palestine, Ending the Occupation, Establishing the
State".

In order to restore credibility to the peace process
the parties should implement their respective agreed
obligations under the first phase of the Road Map. This
should take place in parallel with a resumption of
negotiations on all final status issues. Israel must end
all settlement activities in East Jerusalem and the rest
of the West Bank, including natural growth. It should
dismantle all outposts erected since March 2001.
Palestinian institutions in Jerusalem should be allowed
to reopen. The Palestinian side must continue to
implement its obligations to end Violence.

The European Union is deeply concerned about
the situation in East Jerusalem and calls on all parties
to refrain from further provocative actions. The
European Union has never recognized the annexation
of East Jerusalem. If there is to be a genuine peace, a
way must be found through negotiations to resolve the
status of Jerusalem as the future capital of two States.
All discriminatory treatment of Palestinians in East
Jerusalem must stop.

The humanitarian situation in Gaza continues to
be a source of deep concern. The physical and political
divisions between Gaza and the West Bank undermine
the efforts of the international community to resume a
meaningful peace process. Gaza must be an integral
part of the future State of Palestine. The continued
policy of closure is both counterproductive and
unacceptable. The European Union reiterates its call
for the urgent and full implementation of Security
Council resolution 1860 (2009) and for the immediate,
sustained and unconditional opening of crossings for
the flow of humanitarian aid, commercial goods and
persons. The European Union calls on those holding
the abducted Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit to release him
without delay. The European Union further emphasizes
the importance of appropriate and credible
investigations, in accordance with international
standards, into possible violations of international
human rights law and international humanitarian law
by the parties to the conflict.

European Union assistance aimed at supporting
the peace process stands at more than €1 billion per
year. The European Union will continue to provide this
support. The European Union also calls on all regional
actors to undertake confidence-building measures in
order to stimulate mutual trust, and encourages Arab
countries to be forthcoming, both politically and
financially, in assisting the Palestinian Authority and
Palestinian refugees through the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East. The European Union hopes and expects that all
parties to the conflict will shoulder their
responsibilities and move towards lasting peace.

