The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Somalia, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Omaar
(Somalia) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: On behalf of the Council, I
extend a warm welcome to His Excellency
Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi Omaar, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Somalia.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Lamamra to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and head of the United
Nations Political Office for Somalia.

It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Ould Abdallah to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/373, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia.

At this meeting, the Council will hear a briefing
by Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, to whom I now give
the floor.


