I would like to congratulate Indonesia on assuming the presidency of the Council for the month of August. We are also grateful to the briefers for their insightful contributions. At a time when the world's attention has been overwhelmingly focused on dealing with the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and its significant disruptions to society, we are also grateful to Indonesia for keeping the Council's attention on the threat of international terrorism and the linkages with organized crime, which has affected many parts of the world, including some regions on the African continent. The Secretary-General's report on the actions taken by Member States and the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact entities to address the issue of the potential linkages between terrorism and organized crime (S/2020/754) provides us with a useful and comprehensive analysis of the areas where these dual threats to international peace and security may converge. The report makes clear that while the nature of the threat posed by these issues varies considerably throughout the world, there has nevertheless been significant progress in strengthening and harmonizing legislation and strategies to address these challenges. The steady development of a body of international law, with the support of specialized agencies of the United Nations, including the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism and partner organizations such as INTERPOL, has contributed significantly to shoring up our global response to these tandem threats. South Africa's commitment to fighting terrorism and organized crime, whether transnational or national, remains unwavering. South Africa has integrated the provisions of the various international instruments on terrorism and organized crime into its national legislation, supported by national strategies and mechanisms that attempt to address the myriad sub-elements that comprise these illicit webs. South Africa's robust national counter-terrorism strategy, aligned with the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, provides for the implementation of the relevant conventions and Security Council counter-terrorism resolutions. Our national strategy is supported by national counter-terrorism legislation, the Protection of Constitutional Democracy against Terrorist and Related Activities Act, as well as a number of other statutes criminalizing activities related to terrorism and organized crime, including terror-financing activities and support for terrorist organizations and individual terrorists. South Africa is also an active member of the Financial Action Task Force, as well as the Eastern and Southern Africa Anti- Money-Laundering Group, and complies with all review processes in an ongoing effort to improve our domestic systems. We understand that these challenges are by their very nature adaptive and continually evolving and that they require that we be similarly adaptive and evolve to address new manifestations and trends. We wish to emphasize the importance of international cooperation and coordination as well as the sharing of information, best practices and technology on these issues. The transnational nature of these often multi-layered threats can effectively be countered only by equally robust international countermeasures allowing real-time information sharing and cooperation. In further developing these systems, we must remain cognizant of the fact that they can only ever be as strong as their weakest point, which means that it is vital that we continue to support those Member States with capacity constraints and unique challenges such as large, porous borders. It is also critical that we work to address the root causes and drivers of both terrorism and organized crime. The best investment that we can make in addressing these issues is to prevent our citizens from ever considering these terrible paths as viable options by providing them with the opportunities to flourish in positive ways that benefit society. In conclusion, South Africa will continue to support the evolving global response to these threats. We believe that the United Nations should continue to lead in that regard, given the evident need for a multilateral and multidimensional approach to these international challenges. As always, we encourage the further development and enhancement of regional strategic partnerships between the United Nations and regional organizations on these issues, including with the African Union. We also wish to propose that consideration be given to establishing and/ or strengthening regional fusion centres to enhance cooperation with regional organizations to prevent and counter terrorists from benefiting from organized crime. Finally, it is also paramount that our efforts across the board be conducted in accordance with international human rights law and international humanitarian law and in close partnership with one another, international and regional organizations, as well as civil society and the private sector.
