Allow me to first thank the Permanent Mission of Russia for hosting today's open debate. I also want to thank Secretary-General, Antonio Guterres; the Director of UN-Women, Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka; the Goodwill Ambassador of UN-Women, Danai Gurira; the Sexual and Gender-Based Violence Adviser to the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei, Nataliia Emelianova; and the Head of the Women and Children Legal Research Foundation, Zarqa Yaftali, for their valuable inputs on the imperative of continuing to take tangible actions towards the inclusion of women in all aspects of peace and security, including in the armed forces, humanitarian responses, peace processes, conflict prevention and resolution, and peacebuilding. Twenty years ago, the Security Council acknowledged that women and girls experience conflict differently than men and the important role of women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts and peacebuilding. Resolution 1325 (2000) challenged Member States to move beyond rhetoric into action. Since its adoption by the Security Council in 2000, women in Afghanistan have made significant progress across a range of indicators. Resolution 1325 (2000), adopted around the same time as the fall of the Taliban, was, and continues to be, particularly relevant to the Afghan people. When the post-Taliban Government of Afghanistan assumed power, global rankings indicated that Afghan women faced one of the most difficult situations in the world in regard to their civil liberties, protection against violence, access to health care and education, and public participation. As such, the full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) has been a key priority of the Government of Afghanistan during the past two decades of reconstruction. To ensure the full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and in line with the goals of the resolution, our Government launched its Resolution 1325 (2000) National Action Plan in 2015. Afghanistan was among the first countries in Asia to adopt a national action plan. The plan has sought to increase the role of women in the peace process and acknowledge the impact that armed conflict has on women in order to provide appropriate relief and recovery efforts. The second phase of the Resolution 1325 (2000) National Action Plan began in August of 2019 and reaffirms our Government's efforts to preserve the rights of women and their role throughout the peace process. Our Government has worked to make significant progress on the inclusion of women at all levels of our institutions, leveraging the legal framework of article 22 of the Constitution, which emphasizes the "equal rights and duties before the law" of all citizens of Afghanistan. We have implemented a gender-sensitive security sector reform and worked to remove barriers to entry for women in the security service, including negative biases and traditions. Today, over 3,000 women serve as police officers and 2,000 serve in the Afghan National Army. For the first time in our history, there are female deputy ministers in the Ministries of Defence and Interior, and based on a presidential order signed in July of this year, all 34 provinces have appointed women as deputy governors. Women also play a much more significant role in the judiciary, and every province has a woman heading the Office on the Prevention of Violence against Women. Despite the progress, today, many of these hard-fought gains are threatened, and there are formidable challenges to be addressed. Women and children, especially girls, are victims of terrorist attacks and constitute one-third of civilian casualties. Continued efforts to safeguard and promote our achievements will be crucial in the light of new vulnerabilities resulting from the coronavirus disease and the outcome of the ongoing peace negotiations with the Taliban. Particularly with regard to the ongoing peace talks, the Government has been diligent in its commitment to an inclusive peace process that incorporates women at the very centre of negotiations and ensures that any outcome result fully respects, builds upon and consolidates the achievements of the past two decades, particularly the constitutional rights of women, girls and minorities. A National Women's Consensus for Peace conference was held in February 2019 and a Consultative Loya Jirga for Peace was held in April of the same year. In the latter, women made up to 30 per cent of the 3,000 participants and headed various commissions. Both of these meetings called for the participation of women in the negotiation team. Their request has been answered by the Government and the current negotiating team includes four women. The full, equal and meaningful participation of women at all levels of the peace process will continue to be a priority for the Government. In this connection, we thank the international community for its unwavering support to Afghan women and its contribution to the Afghan Government. In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Afghanistan's firm commitment to promoting and protecting the rights of women and girls, including the Resolution 1325 (2000) National Action Plan, as well as continuing its efforts to uphold women's rights and their social, economic and political inclusion in efforts to achieve peace, stability and prosperity in Afghanistan.
