Mr. Du Xiacong (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks the High Representative, Mr. Inzko, for
his briefing and appreciates his efforts to promote the
political process in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I would
also like to welcome His Excellency Mr. Nikola Spirie,
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, to today's meeting and to thank him for
his statement.

In the past year Bosnia and Herzegovina has
continued to take positive steps in the field of
constitutional reform, the entrenchment of the rule of
law and ethnic harmony. The political process in the
country has continued to move ahead.

However, there are still destabilizing factors in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The situation remains fragile
and sensitive. We express our concern in this regard.
China respects the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We sincerely hope that all
parties will commit themselves to long-term peace and
stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the entire
Balkan region and cooperate in good faith in
accordance with the Dayton Peace Agreement to
advance the political process by making further
progress in the fields of government- and institution-
building, the reform of public administration,
constitutional reform and the entrenchment of the rule
of law, with a view to securing lasting peace, stability
and prosperity in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

China is pleased to see the prospects for the
gradual integration of Bosnia and Herzegovina into the
European Union. We believe the High Representative
should continue his in-depth consultation with all
parties, as mandated by the Dayton Peace Agreement,
and prompt the political entities within Bosnia and
Herzegovina to take constructive measures and act in
unity in the process of joining the European Union so
as to make significant headway.

Meanwhile, we also welcome the important role
that the European Union continues to play in the
maintenance of security and stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and in the advancement of economic and
social development in that country.

China will continue to support the High
Representative in his efforts to carry out his mandate
and is ready to join the rest of the international
community in providing the necessary assistance to
Bosnia and Herzegovina in order to achieve lasting
peace, stability and development in that country.

