Mr. Acharya (Nepal): My delegation greatly
appreciates the French initiative to hold discussions in
the Security Council with all the relevant stakeholders
on transition and exit strategies and for the succinct
concept paper on this important issue (S/2010/67). I
feel that a debate like this at the Security Council level
with troop- and police-contributing countries would
also help to add substantive value to our efforts to
make United Nations peacekeeping operations more
effective and efficient, thereby helping us ensure an
orderly transition and exit.

I thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Mr. Alain
Le Roy, Ms. Susana Malcorra, the two Under-Secretaries-
General and the Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General for their morning presentations. Before
I begin, I associate myself with the statement made by
the representative of Morocco on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

As a country participating consistently over the
past five decades in peacekeeping operations, we have
seen great transformations in such operations in that
time. Today, they are more diverse, more proliferate
and more challenging. But we also see that there are
also opportunities to contribute to peace and security
through successful peacekeeping and peacebuilding
operations.

Devising transition and exit strategies should be
an integral part of any peacekeeping mission. It should
be planned at the earliest phase of the mission, while
keeping in view the end objective, provisions of the
comprehensive peace agreement signed by the parties
to the conflict, and the nature and complexity of the
problem in a realistic manner. We need to have firm
and clear discussions with the parties on the ground
about transition and exit around the time of the
comprehensive peace agreement itself, and clear
political and security objectives should be formulated
with benchmarks for each phase of the mission's life so
as to streamline the transition process. As exit strategy
is largely influenced by the political and security
10-23924

situation in the host country, a balance should be
maintained between an untimely exit and the
possibility of relapse into violence.

Besides the ground reality, how the mandate is
drafted, what it includes, what and how much resources
are allocated, and whether or not necessary political
support is consistently rendered at the critical moment
have a great bearing on the evolution of United Nations
peacekeeping missions. In this context, the close
coordination and consistent involvement of the troop-
contributing countries would also strengthen the
effective operation of peacekeeping operations as well
as their successful completion. This was also clearly
put forth in the Brahimi report (see S/2000/809), the
New Horizon paper and the report of Security Council
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations led by
Japan. After all, the way the peacekeepers respond to
the various evolving situations on the ground should
lead towards the successive progress of the situation,
which in turn depends very much on how we drafted
our mandate in the beginning. The specific and
synchronized integration of peacebuilding elements
into peacekeeping operations has immensely
contributed to ensure a smoother transition and exit.

We should effectively start the integrated concept
of peacekeeping and peacebuilding as a seamless
evolution in some of the situations. As we have seen
around the world, the coordinated delivery by the
United Nations system under one umbrella with one
integrated framework, national ownership, the building
of national institutions, matching resources as per the
mandate, and strong and consistent political support,
together with cooperative regional support, would
ensure a smooth transition from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding and eventually towards the normal
developmental activities of the United Nations.

I would like to stress that in order to make
peacekeeping operations an effective stage towards the
peacebuilding phase, the formulation of the concept of
operations and strategic guidance should focus on the
implementation of mandates and identified key tasks.
Based on the reports from the field, the Security
Council, in consultations with the troop-contributing
countries, should then review the mandates and
resources with a view to examining whether they are
matched with each other and whether there is a need
for an added impetus to the mission's effectiveness,
leading towards the desired progress.
11
Similarly, the Security Council should ensure the
timely availability of allocated resources, especially air
assets and enabler components, for the effective
implementation of peacekeeping mandates within the
stipulated time. More often, we do not see an equal
level of commitment to providing support, especially
lifting capacity, when the area of coverage is large and
extensive and the situation precarious. Their timely
availability helps make peacekeeping operations
immediately operational and more effective, which will
lead towards early transition to the next phase.

In considering the transition issue, security, peace
and development have to be considered as an
integrated whole. Security is paramount to peace and
development, but they have to be promoted
simultaneously in order to make peace sustainable and
to ensure the peace dividend so that it reinforces strong
national ownership of the process. National leadership
is critical to long-term peace, development and
progress. The conceptual framework on capacity-
building, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, and security sector reform should be
agreed upon at the outset with the parties concerned in
the conflict to ensure its smooth implementation,
which also ensures effective exit later.

We believe that the coordination of international
efforts is a must to establish an effective framework for
the protection of civilians in the mission area. This is
an overarching factor in the implementation of Security
Council mandates. But it should also be pointed out
that United Nations peacekeeping operations cannot
have an unlimited area of responsibilities without a
proportionate level of deployment and resources.
Otherwise, we would create a level of expectation that
cannot be fulfilled and which in the long run would
undermine the credibility of United Nations efforts
themselves.

