Mr. Al-Khussaiby (Oman): On behalf of my
delegation, allow me to convey to you, Sir, and to your
friendly country, Honduras, our congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of July. I should also like to reassure you of my
delegation's full support and cooperation in trying to
facilitate your work in a manner that will further the noble
causes for which this Organization was established.

At the same time, allow me to take this opportunity to
extend our gratitude to the former Ambassador of Germany
and to the members of his delegation for the skilful manner
in which they steered the work of the Security Council
during his presidency last month.

Nearly a year ago, the Security Council adopted
resolution 943 (1994) regarding sanctions relief for the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro).
Oman, which was among those that supported those
measures and voted in favour of the resolution, continues
to support the further extension of sanctions relief. The
main reason for our decision relates to the assurances and
indications given to us and to the international community
at large that such a suspension would contribute positively
to isolating the Bosnian Serbs, who still reject the
territorial peace plan of the Contact Group, and would
help create a positive political environment among all
States in the region based on respect for sovereignty,
territorial integrity, international borders and mutual
recognition.

The relevant reports submitted to the Council note
with satisfaction that cooperation between the Mission of
the International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia
(ICFY) and the authorities of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia continues to be good and satisfactory. On the
other hand, we would reaffirm the importance of further
efforts on the part of the authorities of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia to enhance the effectiveness of
the closure of the international border between that
country and the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina with
respect to all goods except foodstuffs, medical supplies
and clothing for essential humanitarian needs.

We hope that the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
(Serbia and Montenegro) will exert its pressure on the
Bosnian Serb party in a manner that will convince them
to accept the peace plan. We further believe that one way
of doing this is through effective border closure to
prevent any military shipment from reaching that party.

With regard to the question of mutual recognition,
my delegation is of the view that such a step will enhance
the confidence-building measures between the countries
of the Balkans. We also renew our call on Belgrade to
expedite its recognition of the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the Republic of Croatia, the Republic of
Slovenia and the Former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, as referred to in paragraph 3 of the draft
resolution before us. We are of the view that this
important step will strengthen the ongoing peace efforts
and contribute positively to the consideration of additional
sanctions relief by the Security Council in the future.

In support of the efforts of the international
community, particularly those of the Contact Group,
towards reaching a peaceful settlement of the conflict in
Bosnia and Herzegovina - based, as a starting point, on
the acceptance of the peace plan, which still awaits the

 

acceptance of the Bosnian Serbs, and based on our
conviction that such sanctions relief, whenever it is
associated with some concrete steps and commitments on
the part of the authorities of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) will surely enhance
the prospects for peace, my delegation will vote in favour
of the draft resolution.

