Mr. Skinner-Klee Arenales (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): Guatemala thanks your delegation,
Mr. President, for convening this debate and for
preparing the concept note (S/2018/1004, annex). We
also thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and
Mr. Sma'il Chergui, African Union Commissioner for
Peace and Security, for their briefings.

Before beginning, allow me to first strongly
condemn the attack on the bases of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We extend our heartfelt
condolences to the Governments and the peoples of
Malawi and Tanzania for the hapless murder of their
Blue Helmets. I recall that in 2006, Guatemala also
suffered the irreparable loss of soldiers who were
fulfilling their mandate in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. The sacrifice of our troops is a sign of the
great value of protecting the most vulnerable civilian
populations who are at the greatest risk. Those who
fall while on peace missions are heroes for the entire
international community.

One of the most noble tasks of the Organization
is peacekeeping, in which my country is honoured
to participate. The positive strategic partnership for
peace among Member States, which, despite great
asymmetries, share a common objective, demonstrates
the irreplaceable value of multilateralism, concerning
which a debate was just held on 9 November (see S/PV.8395). For more than two decades, Guatemala has
actively participated in peacekeeping, and even made
the ultimate sacrifice in an ambush by elements of the
so-called Lord's Resistance Army, as we mentioned.

As stated in the concept note, peacekeeping is
stronger when there is a greater sense of ownership
and joint cooperation. That is precisely what we have
noted in recent years regarding the participation of
the African Union as an essential partner in efforts to
protect civilian and vulnerable populations in conflict
situations. Through the African Union's peace support
operations, the ability ofthe UnitedNations, in particular
the Security Council, to maintain international peace
and security is also strengthened, which highlights the
importance for both organizations of working more
closely in the field ofpeace and security, includingjoint
cooperation, operational evaluation and joint reporting,
when appropriate.

From our perspective, the active and strong
relationship between the African Union and the United
Nations reaffirms regional and national leadership in
peacebuilding, which means that the responsibility for
the stabilization of a society is not the task of only the
international community, but also the host country and
subregion concerned, even if deployment is temporary.

Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
indicates that cooperation among regional organizations
and the United Nations to address peace and security
issues is a task that should be fulfilled. For that reason,
we believe it is important that, at the next session of the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, to be
held in February 2019, the General Assembly be able to
strengthen African peacekeeping capabilities.

For that reason, the strategic partnership is key
to the ongoing task of peacekeeping. In real terms,
our contributions to the Organization of personnel
who are deployed in such operations are symbolic in
comparison to the resources that are invested in war
or punitive operations. History itself is testament to
that. Stabilization can come from a peacekeeping
operation, but it should be harnessed, taking into
account the priorities of the country where it is located
and highlighting the fact that they are not permanent
missions, while of course trying to address the
root causes of the conflict in subsequent efforts to
build peace.

My country reaffirms its commitment to
continuing to participate in peace missions in Africa,
since our vocation is peaceful and our history reminds
us of the priceless value of the absence of conflict and,
consequently, of building peace.

