Mr. Al-Sallal (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate you, Mr. President,
and your delegation on your successful conduct of
the work of the Security Council this month. I also
thank and congratulate Ambassador Susan Rice of the
United States of America for her successful presidency
last month. We would further like to express our
appreciation for the continued and tangible efforts and
good offices of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
his Special Adviser, Mr. Jamal Benomar, and his team
aimed at leading the political process in my country to a
successful outcome.

Yemen has witnessed several positive developments
since the signing of the Gulf Cooperation Council
initiative and its implementation mechanism by partners
in the political process. In this, the efforts ofthe President
of my country, Mr. Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour,
and the national unity Government must be noted.

I also draw the Council's attention to several
measures taken by my country with a view to leading the
transition in my country to a successful outcome. First,
measures have been taken to establish the environment
necessary to begin the national dialogue between the
various partners in the political process in Yemen. The
President of the Republic issued Decision 13 on 6 May
2012 establishing a contact committee to expedite the
establishment of the preparatory committee for the
national dialogue conference by 30 June 2012, and has
established seven working groups to continue outreach
activities with the parties.

The Government is considering a law on transitional
justice and national reconciliation with a view to
reaffirming the political transition in Yemen on the
basis of forgiveness, tolerance, the rights ofthe victims,
individual, collective and national reconciliation, and
the renunciation of all forms of violence and retaliation.
It would also seek to prevent the recurrence of human
rights violations in the future and establish a modern,
civil State based on democracy, the rule of law and
human rights. The Government will submit this project,
when its consideration is completed, to Parliament
with a View to its adoption in the form of a presidential
decision.

The Government has also established a ministerial
committee to prepare a draft law for the establishment
of an independent human rights agency. In the wake
of the national dialogue conference, a constitutional
committee will be established to draft a new constitution
that will determine the political shape and system of the
country, to be put to a referendum by the end of the
transitional period and the conduct of parliamentary and
presidential elections.

The military commission has continued to discharge
its duties in the maintenance of peace and security
in Yemen, to remove all military roadblocks, and to
restructure the armed forces and the security forces. The
President of the Republic has issued many important
decisions effecting transfers and changes in the security
and military leadership.

However, and as mentioned by Mr. Benomar, Yemen
still faces many difficult challenges. Al-Qaida in the
Arabian Peninsula has taken advantage of the unstable
political situation in the country over the past year and
has extended its control to parts of the country, attacked
and plundered many Government agencies, and killed
numerous innocent people. Following the presidential
elections and the establishment of the national unity
Government, the security and armed forces focused
their military operations against the Al-Qaida terrorist
organization, which threatens Yemen and its stability
and has also pledged several times to extend its
operations to the sea, threatening international peace and
security. Government forces have tightened the noose
on Al-Qaida in the Abyan governorate, eliminated many
terrorists, and also carried out numerous pre-emptive
strikes against the leaders who have taken refuge in the
mountains.

Recently, Al-Qaida committed a horrible act of
terrorism, killing 100 people and injuring over 300 of
our best youth in the national security forces as they
trained for the celebration of Yemeni unification. I take
this opportunity to extend our sincere condolences to the
families of the martyrs and wish a speedy recovery to
the injured. I would like to thank all the Heads of State,
the Secretary-General, and the President and members
of the Security Council for their condemnation of that
wanton act.

I reiterate that the threat of terrorism and bias in
Yemen cannot addressed solely by military efforts.
These efforts must extend to the intellectual, cultural,
development and rehabilitation activities to be
conducted by the Government, with the necessary
international support at the bilateral and multilateral
levels, and further assistance in the implementation
of the recommendations of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate.

There are now 500,000 internally displaced persons
in my country. While some $477 million have been
pledged, only $63 million have been received, whereas
meeting the needs of so many displaced is no easy task.
Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
Catherine Bragg, who visited Yemen recently, has stated
that the deteriorating humanitarian situation in Yemen
is not only a result of the conflicts within and outside
the country, but is foremost a humanitarian problem that
requires urgent attention. The World Food Programme
has conducted a survey in Yemen and has warned that
levels of malnutrition have reached alarming levels.
Three million people are suffering extreme malnutrition;
5 million - 22 per cent ofthe entire population - suffer
from one form of malnutrition or another; and half the
population of the country has experienced extreme
hunger.

According to statistics provided by the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA),
44.5 per cent of the population - that is, 10 million
people - suffers from food insecurity in general,
and 22 per cent - 5 million citizens - suffers from
acute malnutrition. There are 465,000 displaced
people, 169,855 refugees, 140,000 returnees, 116,830
war-affected people and 12,000 forcibly displaced
people, in addition to the almost 3 million people who
lack potable water and proper sanitation. We appeal to
all Member States to provide Yemen with the support
necessary for it to be able to meet the needs of all of the

displaced people and refugees.

In spite of all our internal problems, we have
hosted more than 1 million refugees from neighbouring
countries. We had attached great hopes to the most
recent appeal by OCHA; however, it has not generated
the reaction that we had hoped for. Alarms have been
sounded before the Council with regard to the myriad
problems resulting from such a high number of refugees,
including from drug and weapons smugglers as well as
terrorists coming from the Horn of Africa and other

neighbouring and European countries.

Since the winds of change blew through Yemen
last year, many people have lost their jobs and many
companies have had to close their doors. That has
led to an alarming increase in the unemployment and
poverty rates, and many heads of household are unable
to provide for their families. The general economic
deterioration poses a tremendous obstacle to the Yemeni
Government, particularly given the decrease in the gross
domestic product growth rate and the state of paralysis
of various economic activities as a result of the political
and security situation in the country, which is reflected

in every aspect of life in Yemen.

In conclusion, at the meeting of the Friends of
Yemen held on 23 May, His Royal Highness Prince
Saud Al-Faisal, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, stated that Yemen is an
ancient civilization with a long history and that it is not
a source of discouragement or disappointment. Yemenis
are capable and responsible enough to support the
efforts necessary to ensure peace, security and stability
in the country. Here I would stress the different projects,
programmes and development plans aimed at providing

support to the Yemeni people.

We would like to thank our brothers in Saudi Arabia,
in particular His Majesty the Custodian of the Two
Holy Mosques, King Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud,
for their support and their hospitality. We would also
like to thank the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland for all its support and for hosting the The President: I now invite Council members to
donors' conference next June. informal consultations to continue our discussion on the

subject.

The meeting rose at 3.35 pm.
