I too thank our briefers - Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) Deborah Lyons: Executive Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime Ghada Fathi Waly; and Chairperson of the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission Shaharzad Akbar - for their passionate, comprehensive and insightful presentations. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines remains firmly committed to supporting Afghanistan on the path to stability and peace. We welcome the efforts of President Ghani and Mr. Abdullah, which culminated in the signing of a power- sharing agreement on 17 May, aimed at ending the months-long political impasse in Afghanistan. This agreement helps to deepen the public support for the future intra-Afghan negotiations and broaden the understanding and support of the outcome. In our view, unity and cooperation through inclusive national dialogue and leadership are necessary to address the needs and challenges faced by the country. We also believe that intra-Afghan talks should include women and young people, who are essential to an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process and fundamental to an inclusive negotiated political settlement. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines remains deeply concerned by the humanitarian situation in Afghanistan. According to the report (S/2020/549), the spread of the coronavirus disease has had serious implications for the humanitarian situation in view of continued conflict-related displacement, population returns, poverty and food insecurity. My delegation calls on the international humanitarian community and national partners to renew their commitment to the humanitarian needs of people in Afghanistan. Additionally, the armed conflict remains the deadliest for children. There have been reports of sexual violence against children and incidents of attacks against schools and protected personnel. We agree wholeheartedly with Special Representative of the Secretary-General Lyons that if ever there was a prayer for peace, it would most certainly echo the voices of these children. In that connection, we reiterate our call for the greater protection of civilians, particularly women, children and displaced persons, and for respect for international human rights law. Turning to the 2020 pledging conference on Afghanistan scheduled for later this year, we encourage the international community and the Afghan Government to renew their commitments to the mutual objectives to coordinate development cooperation in Afghanistan. We urge greater support for the Afghanistan National Peace and Development Framework to promote inclusivity, resilience and sustainability in accordance with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. I feel compelled to highlight a significant fact that is not mentioned in the report of the Secretary General. The situation in Afghanistan, which has been affected by years of war, is further compounded by the fact that this is one of the most climate-vulnerable countries in the world and the environmental impacts of war and the resultant damage to critical infrastructure have made it one of the least equipped to handle these challenges. The consequences of flooding, drought and lack of irrigation for crops contribute to continued instability in Afghanistan. We call on major emitters and all Member States to significantly reduce their emissions in line with the goals of the Paris Agreement. We further call on Member States to fulfil their responsibilities regarding climate finance for adaptation and loss and damage caused by climate change. We can only call on Afghans to address what is within their power and control. The impact of human-induced climate change on this country is palpable and caused by external forces far beyond its borders. Climate change is one in a deadly mix of factors at play, but it is too often overlooked. This truth, as inconvenient as it may be, must be acknowledged so that we may comprehensively address the climate-induced security risks that undermine stability in Afghanistan. Without action on this front, lasting peace may remain elusive. In conclusion, we reiterate our support for UNAMA and our commitment to a successful and sustainable Afghan peace process.
