Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): First of all, let me join
others in thanking the President of the Court, the
Prosecutor of the Court and the Deputy Secretary-
General for their briefings.

Indonesia welcomes the Special Court's steady
progress towards the fulfilment of its mandate and the
implementation of its completion strategy.

Indonesia consistently condemns gross violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law.
The perpetrators of war crimes and crimes against
humanity, as well as other serious crimes, must be
brought to justice.

In this regard, we welcome the start of the trials
of individuals, including the trial of Charles Taylor by
the Special Court for Sierra Leone in The Hague. This
trial could greatly contribute to the strengthening of the
rule of law and also create confidence in the people of
West Africa and beyond that there is no impunity for
crime, no matter how powerful the perpetrators may
be. We hope that the trial will be conducted fairly in
accordance with international standards and with
respect to the presumption of innocence unless proven
otherwise.

Despite the current efforts by the Government of
Sierra Leone, there is much more to be done in healing
the wounds of the people and in consolidating peace. It
is hard to console the people of Sierra Leone who were
battered by the actions of Charles Taylor for six
horrendous years. We expect and are hopeful,
therefore, that his trial will contribute to advancing
national reconciliation and to furthering the sense of
accountability among the public.

At the same time, we believe that it is important
for the Security Council to focus on the big picture of
the country. While we fully support the Special Court
for Sierra Leone, my delegation considers it to be one
of the several critical means to achieve a sustainable
peace in Sierra Leone, which will reduce the chances
of relapsing into conflict.

With most institutions ravaged by the 10-year
civil war, it is understandable that the Government is
still facing difficulties with its present scarce resources
and inadequate infrastructure. The international
community therefore needs to step up its support to the
Government of Sierra Leone not only in assisting it in
the conduct of upcoming elections, but in helping it to
expand its capacities across the various sectors for the
long-term recovery.
To conclude, Indonesia is hopeful that the process
of the Special Court for Sierra Leone will run smoothly
within the time frame of the mandate, leading to the
strengthening of peace and harmony in Sierra Leone.

