Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to welcome President Mbeki and to
express my deep appreciation for his wise efforts. I
also welcome Mr. Menkerios, Mr. Bassole and
Mr. Gambari and congratulate them on their efforts on
behalf of the Sudan. I thank them for their valuable
briefings.

The idea of this unusual meeting emerged during
Security Council consultations on 11 February, when
members expressed their wish to hold a in-depth
discussion of the situation in the Sudan with the two
mediators, President Mbeki and Mr. Bassole, and the
two Special Representatives, Mr. Gambari and
Mr. Menkerios, in order to consider what can be done
to help that large country address its challenges and
overcome its crises and to reflect on what the United
Nations can do in that regard.

We express our deep appreciation for the
convening of today's meeting and for the goodwill that
we perceive in support for the Sudan in meeting the
historic challenges that it faces today. We hope that our
efforts will be successful so as to benefit that country,
and consequently the entire region and the African
continent.

When we look at a number of issues before us -
such as the monitoring of the implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement, the referendum in
the South and its aftermath, the demarcation of the
Abyei borders, the question of the wealth-sharing, the
situation in Darfur, the humanitarian situation and the
displaced population - we see that the only option is
to support the path towards peace based on political
dialogue as the best way to settle the conflict in the
Sudan, to establish peace and stability and to address
all problems.

Five years after its signing, the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement has proved both its effectiveness and
the need for a thorough follow-up on the
implementation of all its provisions. It would have
been impossible to achieve any of these steps without
the political will and determination of the Sudanese
Government of National Unity and all other concerned
parties.

As Council Members know, this meeting is being
held only a few months before the scheduled
referendum on the fate of the South, and thus at a very
important stage in the history of the Sudan. In this
context, Lebanon would like to emphasize the
importance of the following points.

First, the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
independence of the Sudan must be respected.

Second, the success of the multi-level electoral
process, which took place between 11 and 15 April,
should be commended, despite its shortcomings, and
considered an important step in guaranteeing the
stability and sustainability of the implementation of all
the provisions of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement.

Third, we call for continued efforts to guarantee
the successful implementation of the referendum on the
fate of the South, and we emphasize the importance of
making unity an attractive option, in accordance with
the provisions of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement.

Fourth, we support the negotiations for the post-
referendum stage, regardless of the outcome of the
referendum.

Fifth, we welcome the improved relations
between the Sudan and Chad and the establishment of
joint forces to monitor their common borders.
Sixth, we support efforts to achieve a
comprehensive, final and peaceful solution in Darfur,
and we commend the State of Qatar and its Emir
Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa Al-Thani for hosting the
peace negotiations in Doha. We call upon all factions
to return to the negotiating table and to resolve all
disputed matters through dialogue. We call upon those
States with influence to exert pressure on the
remaining parties to join the negotiations.

Seventh, we caution against the danger of
politicization and double standards in the work of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), and we recall the
substance of the resolutions of the League of Arab
States rejecting the ICC decisions against President
Omer Hassan Al-Bashir.

It goes without saying that political efforts should
be accompanied by a social and economic plan to
contribute to addressing the root causes of the crisis
and the reconstruction of the Sudan.

In conclusion, we emphasize the importance of
the ongoing cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union, and call on the Organization of
the Islamic Conference, the Arab League, the African
Union and the Non-Aligned Movement to continue
their essential coordination role in order to achieve
peace and stability in the Sudan.

