Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I congratulate
you, Madam President, on the initiative taken by your
country to hold this debate on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict, an issue of concern to the United
Nations, in particular the Security Council. Serious
violations against civilians in armed conflict persists,
and hence the interest in this morning's debate, which
is being held on World Humanitarian Day. I thank
the Secretary-General, the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the Director for
International Law and Cooperation of the International
Committee of the Red Cross for their statements.

Despite the Council's efforts to strengthen the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, we find that
the cumbersome bureaucracy, restrictions, segregation
and discrimination imposed by the parties to conflict
continue to prevent humanitarian agencies from
providing assistance to many civilian populations in
need. The Syrian conflict, like many others in Africa
and elsewhere, including the situation in Jonglei state
in South Sudan and the conflict between the Buddhist
and Muslim communities in the states of Rakin and
Kachin in Myanmar, are indicative of that state of
affairs. Similarly, the denial of humanitarian access
to civilian populations in need is a serious violation
of the human rights and human dignity of the victims,
in particular women and children. The perpetrators of
such behaviour should be prosecuted.

That is why my country welcomes the recent
initiatives taken by the Security Council to enhance the
protection of civilians in conflict zones. An example of
such efforts is the adoption of resolution 2112 (2013),
which allowed the establishment, within the framework
of the United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire, of a
comprehensive strategy to protect civilians. In addition,
the African Union Commission, in close collaboration
with the African Union Mission in Somalia, has
adopted an approach to the protection of civilians that
should, in our opinion, allow both the Commission and
the Council to provide visible protection that is based
on the realities on the ground.

The effective protection of civilians in armed
conflict requires that the capacity of peacekeeping
operations be strengthened. The introduction of
robust mandates to protect civilians is a decisive
step in a strategy to protect civilians, provided that
peacekeeping missions are provided with adequate
resources to implement those mandates. That is why it
is important that Council members agree on the use of
new technologies, such as drones, in the protection of
civilians.

Moreover, since the circulation of small arms and
light weapons is a threat to the protection of civilians,
we must work towards accession by all States to the
Arms Trade Treaty, which was adopted in April.

Effectively protecting civilians in armed conflict
requires Vigorous efforts to combat impunity for
perpetrators of violations against civilians, in
accordance with international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. The transfer of Bosco
Ntaganda to the International Criminal Court and
the arrest warrants issued for Joseph Kony and his
lieutenants from the Lord's Resistance Army show the
determination of the international community and the
Security Council to put an end to serious violations of
human rights in armed conflict. We must pursue our
efforts to achieve the goal of putting an end to impunity.

Finally, Togo shares the view that the five core
challenges to ensuring more effective protection of
civilians, identified in the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2012/376), have not lost any oftheir relevance
and should therefore be reflected in the report that
the Secretary-General will submit in November. My
delegation also hopes that the Views expressed during
today's debate will bring added value to that report.
