Mr. Petersen (Denmark): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Nordic countries: Finland, Iceland,
Norway, Sweden, and my own country, Denmark.

The Nordic countries stand firmly behind the
United Nations fight against terrorism. We welcome
today's discussion and the Security Council's focus on
countering violent extremism and terrorism through
resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014).

International terrorism, such as that practised by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and Al-Qaida
and their affiliates, is a serious threat to international
peace and security. The horrendous crimes committed
by those groups continue to cause immense human
suffering in Syria and Iraq. As underlined by many
previous speakers, other terrorist groups are causing
similar suffering in other countries and regions.

We need a broad approach in order to defeat ISIL and
other terrorist groups. We need to support an inclusive
political process in Iraq, and we need a strong political
engagement to solve the conflict in Syria. We must also
continue to contribute extensively with humanitarian
assistance to the millions in desperate need of food,
shelter and medical care. The Nordic countries fully
support the crucial work being carried out by United
Nations entities on the ground, not least by the United
Nations Special Representative, Staffan de Mistura.
Our common fight against terrorism must always
comply with international law, including human rights
law and, as applicable, humanitarian law. Terrorists'
use of social media as a means of communication is of
great concern and must be countered without infringing
on freedom of expression. Censorship is not a solution.

Young people from many different countries,
including the Nordic countries - some of them only
teenagers - are being attracted by ISIL's effective
propaganda. The Nordic countries therefore strongly
supportenhancedinternationalcooperationtostrengthen
existing border controls and information-sharing aimed
at stopping the recruitment and flow of foreign terrorist
fighters, as well as terrorist financing, into Syria and
Iraq. Relevant legislation needs to be adopted and fully
applied. Information must be shared effectively.

Likewise, we must address the issue of foreign
terrorist fighters returning to their country of origin or
traveling to other areas of conflict. We are convinced
that terrorism and the problem of foreign terrorist
fighters can be defeated only through deradicalization
efforts - that is, by addressing the complex and diverse
motivations for radicalization and violent extremism.

Preventing the spread of terrorism requires local
efforts on a global scale. The role ofwomen as agents for
conflict prevention needs to be fully acknowledged and
further explored. Early preventive efforts are essential
to understand the the motivations for radicalization
and recruitment to terrorist organizations. Civil
society organizations, religious leaders, social workers
and teachers are examples of those who can make a
difference on the ground.

The narrative of terrorism is that of hate and
intolerance. Countering that narrative and creating
resilience is essential. The Nordic countries believe
that our strongest counter-narrative is a firm
commitment to democracy, human rights and equality.
We consider those values end goals in themselves, as
well as key drivers of economic development. They
are the cornerstones of inclusive societies in which no
one should feel marginalized or be attracted to violent
extremism.

The Nordic countries place great value on United
Nations efforts to facilitate information-sharing and
the exchange of best practices. We strongly support
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
and other efforts to enhance the capacity of States to
counter terrorism within the rule of law. We support
United Nations efforts to explore additional ways to
counter violent extremism and terrorism.

Finally, on behalf of the Nordic countries, I wish
to express our appreciation to Australia for taking the
initiative to arrange this timely debate.

