Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): Thank you, Mr.
President. I thank Assistant Secretary-General Mr.
Hedi Annabi for his thorough and objective
presentation of the Secretary-General's report on
UNMISET. My delegation welcomes the report and
shares the Secretary-General's assessments regarding
progress made in Timor-Leste towards self-sufficiency,
as well as his remarks about major challenges still to
be overcome by the Timorese Government itself and by
the international community and the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET) in
fulfilling their roles and living up to expectations.

This is a mid-term report, and my delegation
understands that we have good reason to believe that
the completion of UNMISET's mandate in Timor-Leste
will proceed as smoothly as possible. We are pleased to
acknowledge that there has been an overall
improvement in stability and in the security situation in
the country, although smuggling, illegal trading and
border-crossing continue to be causes of concern.

We welcome the significant steps being taken for
the country's first elections since independence. Relevant
progress has also been achieved in the areas of public
administration and law enforcement. We believe that,
with appropriate support from UNMISET -
particularly from its civilian component - it should be
possible to reach more positive results by May 2005.

Nonetheless, and in line with the Secretary-
General's opinion, there is a series of pending issues
that need to be addressed. The country will continue to
be dependent on international assistance in order to
reach its development goals. Thus, bilateral and
multilateral support, in particular from international
financial organizations, will be crucial for the future of
Timor-Leste. We hope that such support will continue
and that it will be properly managed in full cooperation
between Timorese authorities and institutions on the
one hand and their international partners on the other.

I am also pleased to acknowledge the Secretary-
General's reference to the relationship between Timor-
Leste's own capacity to generate sufficient national
income and the development of sustainable national
institutions, which will lead to stability and improved
socio-economic conditions. In that regard, Brazil hopes
that bilateral negotiations between Australia and
Timor-Leste on the maritime boundaries, as well as
negotiations with Indonesia regarding land boundaries,
can soon be finalized in order to help the Timor-Leste
Government, in the most effective way, to sustain
stability and foster development.

As far as the fight against impunity is concerned,
we encourage the international community to continue
to provide support - particularly diplomatic and
financial support - to the improvement of the judicial
system in Timor-Leste, as well as to the work of the
Commission on Reception, Truth and Reconciliation.
We consider this to be an essential part of any process
of democratic consolidation. The need to redress all
cases of impunity and violations of human rights should
not be limited to efforts, however praiseworthy, to act
against those who committed the most serious crimes in
1999.

All perpetrators of crimes and violations of
human rights, be they serious or minor, need to be
punished in a new State such as Timor-Leste. My
delegation takes this opportunity to call on all parties
concerned - inside and outside Timor-Leste - the
donor community and human rights organizations, as
well as the Dili and Jakarta Governments, to make all
possible efforts to build a culture of respect for human
rights in this new nation, which will provide a solid
basis for a democratic State and will accelerate its
development process.

