Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me, at the outset to welcome
Mr. Kim Sung-hwan, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Korea, and to thank him for presiding
over this important meeting. I also welcome you, Sir,
my colleague Ambassador Kim Sook, in presiding over
the work of the Security Council this month. I further
welcome the participation of the Foreign Ministers of
Rwanda, Azerbaijan and Brazil at this important debate.

I have listened carefully to the statements made by
delegations in this debate on the important topic of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. I am compelled
to underline the following fundamental points.

First, I wish to thank all those of goodwill who have
referred to the crisis in my country, Syria, and offered
constructive points of view on how to protect Syrian
civilians from the consequences of the crisis shaking
the country. As for other colleagues who see the crisis
in my country through the prism of mere criticism and
superficial humane theorizing and reckless accusations,
I should like to stress that their Governments are an
integral part of the creation, escalation and expansion
of the crisis in my country, be it through coercive,
unilateral sanctions imposed on the Syrian people or
by allowing their own fundamentalist and terrorist
Takfiri citizens to come to my country through open
borders under the noses of every intelligence agency
in the world. They have also allowed those terrorists
to cross Syria's borders with neighbouring countries or
armed, funded, abetted and advocated on their behalf
in the media.

The ideal way to protect civilians in armed conflict
and to spare them the scourge ofwar lies fundamentally
in preventing armed conflicts and adopting peaceful
means to settle existing ones. Those Governments
that have initiated and continue to initiate and incite
such conflicts must be held accountable. Moreover,
the civilians in armed conflict will never be protected
without strict respect for the principles of international
law and the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations, in particular the principles of respect for the
sovereignty of States, sovereign equality among States,
and non-interference in the internal affairs of States.

It is utterly unacceptable for such an important issue
to be addressed in a discretionary or, indeed, selective
manner, or in a way that voids it of its meaning and
content and makes it nebulous enough to accommodate
numerous forms of abuse and misapplication. The
experience of protecting civilians in Libya is still fresh
in our minds.

One of the most important principles of sovereignty
is that the State has the exclusive and primary
responsibility to protect its own citizens. That is a
fundamental rule of international law that was agreed
upon by the founding fathers of the Organization.
Practical experience has proved that the issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict or unrest has
been used as a pretext to serve intrusive and suspect
agendas and the interests of certain States that seek
to aggravate and manipulate tensions. Indeed, the
practices adopted by the Governments of some of
those countries have drifted from some of the most
fundamental principles of international law, human
rights and international humanitarian law.

We have begun to see fevered attempts to market
political propositions that do not enjoy international
consensus, such as the so-called responsibility to
protect and humanitarian intervention, which are now
being touted to shape public opinion that will pave the
way for NATO military intervention in the domestic
affairs of developing countries and to overthrow ruling
national Governments.

The issue of protecting civilians in armed conflict
must be addressed in a holistic manner that encourages
the peaceful settlement of conflicts and condemns
and holds accountable the Governments of States that
support armed violence and terrorism and use the media
to incite sectarian provocation. It also means putting
an end to actions by countries that infringe upon the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of other States,
as well as military interventions or invasions that kill
hundreds of thousands of people and displace millions
of others, under the pretext of protecting them.

The protection of civilians also requires not
subjecting them to suffering a slow death by depriving
them of the necessities of daily life, including
food, medicine and fuel, among others, through the
imposition of unfair unilateral coercive measures by
some countries that have been confirmed as illegitimate
by the United Nations.

On this occasion, my delegation would like to see
renewed emphasis on the need to provide protection for
civilians languishing under Israeli occupation in the
occupied Arab territories, including the occupied Syrian
Golan, as well as on putting an end to the aggressive
practices of the occupying authorities against those
civilians.

Despite our opposition to the exploitation by
some delegations of the subject of our discussion
today, and comparing that to the regrettable events
currently being witnessed in Syria, let me point out
that caring for Syrian civilians, if it is serious, cannot
be compared to the policies being pursued by well-
known Arab, regional and Western countries that boast
publicly about providing arms, funding, training and
safe havens to armed terrorist groups that are crossing
borders in order to target all aspects and sectors of the
Syrian State, utilizing civilian populated areas as bases
for terrorist operations and using civilians as human
shields.

We believe that concern for Syrian civilians cannot
be expressed by sponsoring terrorism or extremism
or by derailing settlement efforts or through exerting
pressure in order to undermine any possibility for an
inclusive national dialogue that alone would be able to
restore security and stability in Syria and allow Syrians
to determine their own future through a Syrian-led
political process among Syrians, as backed up by
resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012) and the Geneva
communique (S/2012/523, annex).

There is a difference between the protection
of innocent civilians - a noble task and duty of all
Member States - and the protection of insurgents,
terrorists and fundamentalists who recruit children,
attack civilian aircraft and diplomatic missions and
primarily target the very safety of civilians and
destroy the State infrastructure that has been built to
fundamentally serve them.

The Syrian Government continues to carry out its
constitutional duties in protecting its own citizens from
acts of terrorism and sabotage. The Government is
working to restore security and stability. It is doing its
best despite unilateral, unjust measures and enormous
pressure to meet the needs of its citizens, to provide
shelter for those forced by the distressing events and
terrorist actions to leave their homes and to facilitate
their voluntary return.

The Syrian Government has also provided
all the necessary facilities for the relevant United
Nations specialized agencies, including the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
International Committee of the Red Cross, in order to
help in that regard. Furthermore, the national committee
that is investigating the current events is continuing its
task to ensure that those proven to be involved in acts of
violence are prosecuted and held accountable, without
exception.

Finally, the unethical political trading in the
situation of Syrian refugees and the organizing of
media press conferences only to announce pledges that
in most cases go unfulfilled are inconsistent with the
effort to protect civilians. The fact is that many of the
countries that have announced pledges of donations are
themselves the basic reason for the displacement and
suffering of the refugees.

In conclusion, let me say that the arrogance of
the Israeli representative has made him fall victim
to the illusion that he is Salah Al-Din, Hammurabi
or Nebuchadnezzar, or indeed Abraham Lincoln,
Gandhi or Simon Bolivar; and that his country's acts
of aggression and occupation and its repression of the
Palestinian people are examples to be followed by all
Member States. He misses the fact that the resources
spent by the Organization to discuss the very means
of ending Israeli occupation and aggression have taken
from the Organization and the Security Council millions
of work hours and produced hundreds of resolutions.

However, the Israeli representative, with his
ignorance and his arrogance, now believes that his
country's policies are above the Charter of the United
Nations and above the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. He also believes that the so-called international
community must thank Israel for its occupation and
aggression and that it must lionize Israeli State terrorism
against Arabs in the occupied territories.

Israel provides aid, arms and sponsors Takfiri
extremist fundamentalist groups that work
fundamentally from the separation line in the Golan.
Israel is an integral part of those acting to use and
abuse the crisis in Syria to perpetuate the occupation
of Palestinian land and to prevent forever the creation
of a Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as its capital.

