Mr.Saikal (Afghanistan): I would like to begin by
congratulating the Russian Federation on its presidency
of the Security Council for the month of June and for
organizing today's debate. I would like to express our
appreciation for the delegation's flexibility in adjusting
the date of the debate at our request. Also, we wish the
Russian Federation all the best for the World Cup.

I welcome the presence of my good friends, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Tadamichi
Yamamoto, Under-Secretary-General Vladimir
Voronkov and Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, Yury Fedotov. We thank
them for their briefings.

Since the last meeting ofthe Council on Afghanistan
(S/PV.8199), we experienced a mix of apprehension and
hope. The Taliban's so-called spring offensive caused
still more deaths and injuries throughout the country,
but their attacks faced prompt and at times pre-emptive
action from our national security forces and hence
were futile in achieving their objectives. In contrast,
we reiterated our commitment to peace and to ending
violence, offering the Taliban a historic chance to prove
their willingness to choose a path away from conflict
and destruction, with a key role being played by our
Islamic clerics, peace marchers and international
partners. We also witnessed notable developments
in the regional context, particularly with respect to
Afghanistan-Pakistan cooperation.

Further, international support for securing and
safeguarding our country against violent attacks
remains high. We completed the fourth-year review of
our national security strategy at the NATO Ministerial
Visit, where the security situation in Afghanistan and
our reform measures were discussed. As a key outcome
of the gathering, NATO partners renewed commitments
to helping fund our security forces for the coming years
with annual financial support. In this regard, we look
forward to new pledges of support at the July NATO
summit in Brussels and the potential contribution of
other international partners.

In line with our unremitting commitment to the
security of Afghanistan and the wider region, we have
moved to double the size of our commando forces and
strengthen our air force, which will enhance the overall
capability of our national defence and security forces.
Reforming our Defence and Interior Ministries also
remains a priority; measures are already under way to
bring a new generation of highly educated and capable
officer corps in our defence and security institutions to
leadership positions.

The Security Council is well aware of our firm
desire for an end to the senseless violence that has
been taking scores of innocent lives each and every
day in our country. Earlier this month, the leadership
of the National Unity Government took another
bold and historic step to achieve lasting peace by
announcing a unilateral ceasefire with the Taliban for
the end of Ramadan and the Eid al-Fitr holiday. Our
announcement responded to a call by a grand gathering
of around 2,500 Islamic clerics from 34 provinces who
met in Kabul and condemned acts of terror and violent
extremism as contrary to Islamic tenets and principles.
These developments complement our revitalized peace
strategy, which was unveiled at the second Kabul
Process Conference and reaffirmed in Tashkent later on.

The initiative once again demonstrated our
willingness to make a difficult and selfless decision
in favour of peace for our people. The ceasefire was
mutually observed during the three days of Eid. At
the expiration of this period, we extended it for an
additional 10 days. Regrettably, the Taliban failed
to reciprocate, and carried out terrorist attacks on a
number of occasions. We thank the Council and all its
members forjoining our call to the Taliban to re-engage
in the ceasefire and take part in peace talks without
preconditions. We appreciate efforts from within our
region and beyond in helping to create an environment
conducive to a ceasefire during the religious holiday.

During the ceasefire, our security forces acted to
defend our territorial integrity and continued operations
against elements of foreign terrorist groups, including
Da'esh and Al-Qaida, inter alia. They played a major
role in the elimination of Mullah Fazlullah, head of the
Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan terrorist group, which was
an important development that reaffirmed our long-
standing policy of combating terrorist groups with
equal measure and focus and without any distinction.

The success of the peace process will depend on
a number of factors. We need to further strengthen
our unity, continue to keep our people informed and
involved at all stages of the process, ensure effective
management of future ceasefires and potential
negotiations, guarantee genuine implementation
of the Afghanistan-Pakistan Action Plan for Peace
and Solidarity, and work to further improve regional
and global consensus on the international effort in
Afghanistan. It is imperative that our zeal for peace
be based on political, social and diplomatic efforts,
coupled with security considerations whose only aim
should be to strengthen our unity and stability. We must
make sure that opportunities for peace are seized, not
lost or turned into new challenges. That will only be
possible by ensuring that the overall outcome conforms
to the wishes and expectations of all Afghans, across
the full spectrum of society.

To that end, ensuring transparency in all stages
of the peace process and preventing any degree of
misuse will remain important. It is also essential
that peace efforts serve to complement and reinforce
social cohesion and consensus on other national issues,
including the consolidation of democracy, in particular
through the forthcoming elections. Furthermore,
preserving fundamental human rights, particularly
of women, and ensuring justice for victims remain of
paramount importance.

With regard to regional cooperation, a number
of high-level reciprocal visits between Kabul and
Islamabad have led to a new framework in the form
of the Afghanistan-Pakistan Action Plan for Peace
and Solidarity. The seven agreed principles cover a
number of important areas, including counter-terrorism
cooperation and Pakistan's support for an Afghan-led
and Afghan-owned peace process. Pakistan's Chief
of Army Staff, General Qamar Javed Bajwa, visited
Kabul on 12 June, and important discussions were
held with Afghan leadership, focusing on the sincere,
effective and timely implementation of the Action Plan
through concrete measures. Last week, a senior Afghan
delegation visited Islamabad again in order to generate
positive momentum on the Action Plan for Peace
and Solidarity. The framework has the conceptual
ingredients to shift dynamics towards greater trust,
confidence and mutual cooperation, but an agreement
is only as good as the will there is to implement it. And
we, for our part, cannot overstate our commitment to
its terms in letter and spirit and expect Pakistan to do
the same.

In the broader context, we have expanded dialogue
for greater cooperation with a number of countries,
including those in our immediate region, as well as
our Central Asian partners. The past three months
have also witnessed developments that we hope will
strengthen regional consensus in support of the joint
strategy of Afghanistan and its international partners.
To that end, we wish to reaffirm our overriding
commitment to ensuring Afghanistan's centrality as a
platform for cordiality and win-win cooperation for all.
I repeat: to that end, we wish to reaffirm our overriding
commitment to ensuring Afghanistan's centrality as a
platform for cordiality and win-win cooperation for all.

Earlier this month, President Ghani attended the
summit of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
(SCO) in Qingdao, China. Together with SCO member
and observer States, we reiterated our position that
expanding regional connectivity and overcoming
the nexus of transnational crime and terrorism
are fundamental for stability and prosperity in the
wider region. With the revitalized SCO-Afghanistan
Contact Group, we look forward to increased
cooperation with that important forum.

Four months from now, we are scheduled to hold
our parliamentary and district council elections.
Preparations are under way for these, along with
presidential elections next year. So far more
than 7.3 million citizens have registered to vote,
demonstrating their firm conviction that democracy,
pluralism, and the rule of law are the bedrock of our
stable future. Our hope and expectation is to ensure that
these elections are transparent, credible and inclusive,
in accordance with our people's demands. We are
pleased that a number of young talented figures have
stepped up as candidates. To that end, reform measures
are under way in the Independent Election Commission
and the commission on electoral complaints. Moreover,
a list of new nominees for the position of Chief of the
secretariat of the Independent Election Commission
was presented to the leadership for consideration
and approval.

Ensuring security for the elections is another
important priority, and I am pleased to inform the
Council that comprehensive security arrangements
have been put in place for that purpose. As a final note
on this issue, we reiterate that the successful completion
of the electoral processes is of vital importance for our
unity and political stability.

The next main international event on the political
calendar concerns the Ministerial Conference on
Afghanistan, which will be co-chaired by Afghanistan
and the United Nations in Geneva in November.
We look forward to presenting the highlights of the
progress made against key benchmarks from the
Brussels Conference, based on our national peace and
development framework. These include progress in
the areas of governance, public-sector reform, local
governance, economic growth, and promoting and
protecting human rights. We look to international
partners to recommit new support over the coming years
for our stability and prosperity. We look forward to high-
level participation from our regional and international
partners. The Conference comes at an important time,
when the level of regional and international consensus
on Afghanistan, particularly on the imperative ofpeace,
is at its highest point since 2001.

Looking ahead, we will remain focused on other
pressing priorities, such as the looming effects of the
drought, with the prospect of displacing half a million
people. The situation warrants immediate international
attention. I strongly call upon the international
community to fully fund Afghanistan's Humanitarian
Response Plan covering 2018-2021. We thank the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and other United Nations agencies for their tireless
efforts on the ground and call on the broader donor
community to join the relief efforts.

By the same token, we will remain engaged in
implementing our national strategy to address the
lingering problem of narcotics in all its aspects. We
hope to do so with a greater degree of collaboration
with regional and international partners. This year,
we continued to work on multiple fronts to combat
this threat as a key priority in the work of the National
Unity Government. This included eradication, law
enforcement and alternative livelihood measures. In
the first six months alone, our counter-narcotics police
force carried out 1,688 operations nationwide, seizing
more than 112,500 tons of illicit drugs and destroying
a significant number of drug-processing laboratories.

We hope to witness more tangible progress in
this effort, which will be possible only with greater
cooperation among regional and international actors,
including in curtailing driving factors such as the
trafficking of precursors and reducing demand. We
appreciate the support role ofUNODC in this effort and
thank the Executive Director for leading the agencies'
work in Afghanistan.

We are looking to the future with a degree of
optimism in the light ofrecent developments concerning
our peace efforts, including the announcement of the
ceasefire and a possible shift in regional dynamics
in support of peace. Moreover, our progress towards
economic integration in the wider region, through
various mega economic and infrastructure projects,
continues unabated on a positive trajectory. Institutional
reforms will remain a key component of our strategy
for the promotion of the rule of law and our stability.
In the broader perspective, we believe that these gains
can best be solidified in an atmosphere in which all
partners work together, in unison and cooperation, for
a strategic objective that is vital to us all.

