Mr. Diop (Mali) (spoke in French): I am very happy
to see you, Mr. President, presiding over the Security
Council this month. I wish you and the entire French
delegation every success in as you guide the work of
the Council and assure you of the full cooperation of
Mali in those endeavours.

I also take this opportunity to welcome the
outstanding work of our brother Ambassador Tekeda
Alemu and the Ethiopian delegation during their
presidency of the Council last month.

I particularly welcome the forthcoming visit of the
members of the Security Council to three countries of
the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). We will be
very happy to welcome Council members to Bamako
on 19 October.

I also take this opportunity to express the gratitude
of the people and the Government of Mali to the
Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio Guterres, and all the
women and men of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
under the leadership of our brother Mr. Mahamat Saleh
Annadif, for their ongoing commitment and sacrifice
alongside the people of Mali in their quest for peace,
stability and development.

On behalf of the Government ofMali, I take note of
the report (S/2017/811) of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Mali from June to September, and thank
the Special Representative for his briefing, which
brings me to make the following observations.

At the outset, I should like to welcome the
clarifications made by the Special Representative on the
period covered by the report, in which the Secretary-
General states that "almost no progress was made in
the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali" (S/2017/811, para. 77). I thank
the Special Representative for his efforts in that regard.
Indeed, the Government of Mali was astonished at that
assertion, which at first glance gives the impression of
widespread inertia regarding the implementation of the
Agreement, despite the efforts of the Government of
Mali and the international community.

The Government of Mali recognizes the
difficulties that have plagued the peace process, but
it considers that remarkable progress has been made
in the implementation of the Agreement, a product of
the Algiers process. Today, that is evidenced in the
recognition by all the secular and republican signatory
armed groups of the State of Mali and, above all, the
fact that national unity is contested by no signatory
to the Agreement. It is also evidenced in the effective
cessation of hostilities between the armed groups
and the Malian defence and security forces, which
continues to this day.

To that end, I welcome and recall the conclusions
of the high-level meeting on the implementation of
the Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
held in New York on 20 September. At the end of the
meeting, the participants

"took note of the substantial progress made in its
implementation since the Ministerial Meeting of
23 September 2016. They noted, among others,
the holding of the Conference for national
understanding, the establishment of the National
Integration and Disarmament, Demobilization
and Reintegration Commissions and the National
Council for Security Sector Reform as well as the
efforts underway to pursue institutional reforms,
notably the establishment of the second chamber of
parliament in line with the provisions of the Peace
Agreement and on an inclusive basis. Also, noting
that the implementation ofthe Peace Agreement had
entered in its third year, participants stressed the
need for additional progress in the coming months".

The Secretary-General has expressed satisfaction in
his previous reports and hailed the progress made in the
implementation of the Agreement and the commitment
of the Government of Mali, led by President of the
Republic His Excellency Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar Keita,
to pursuing his efforts. Such satisfaction makes it
clear that the peace process is well under way, despite
the difficulties.

Despite all the challenges, I can assure the Council
that the Government of Mali remains committed to
expediting the implementation of the Agreement,
because we are convinced that there is no credible
alternative to that peaceful solution to the crisis, in
particular in light of the agreement that was concluded
today among all Malian actors. I understand the
impatience of the Secretary-General, the members of
the Council and our other partners with the delays in
implementing the Agreement. I know that the Council
also understands the complex challenges facing our
peace process, many of which are out of the hands of
the Government of Mali.

At the domestic level, the lack oftrust and persistent
tensions between the two signatory movements
constitute a major concern for the Government.
The deadly clashes between the Coordination des
mouvements de l'Azawad and the Platform coalition of
armed groups last July in the Kidal region are a perfect
example of that. Faced with a situation thatjeopardizes
the peace process, the Government has turned to its
own national crisis-settlement mechanisms. Thus, the
efforts of the religious and traditional leaders of Mali,
together with those of the High Representative of the
President of the Republic of Mali for the Implementation
of the Algiers Peace Agreement, have restored calm and
enabled the signing of a ceasefire agreement between
the two armed groups. Those efforts also allowed for
the return of the Governor of Kidal. In that regard, I
also thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General in Mali and his team.

Those positive dynamics need to be reinforced. I
welcome the adoption ofresolution 2374 (2017), through
which the Security Council instituted a sanctions
regime against the spoilers of the peace process in
Mali, at the request of the Malian Government. Yes,
we asked for sanctions, but we asked for sanctions that
would be fair, transparent and equitable, to be used as
an additional means to pressure the Malian parties to
accelerate the implementation ofthe Agreement, with a
View to achieving the legitimate lasting peace that our
people await.

However, I would like to point out that the delays
in the implementation of the Agreement are also and
above all attributable to the deterioration ofthe security
situation, characterized by asymmetrical attacks on the
Malian defence and security forces , which are on the
front line of the fight against terrorism. Those attacks
have also targeted Blue Helmets, the French forces,
civilians and even the signatories of the Agreement.

Regarding the other dimensions of the
implementation of the Agreement, the Government's
resolve remains steadfast. Joint patrols are becoming
increasingly operational, as are the interim authorities
and the emergency plan for the development of the
northern regions. The State will step up its efforts to
provide basic social services and peace dividends to
the populations affected by the crisis.

Municipal and regional elections are planned
before the end of the year. Only today, the Council of
Ministers decided to hold the elections on 17 December.
The Government of Mali has already acquired the
materials for the elections.

With regard to the holding of the referendum and
regional and local elections, I am pleased to announce
to the Council that, under the budget amendment
adopted by the National Assembly on 25 August, the
Government of Mali has fully addressed the issue of
the CAF18 billion gap mentioned in the report of the
Secretary-General. That is therefore no longer an issue.

Similarly, I would like to recall the promulgation
by the President, on 2 October, of the law on the
code for territorial communities, the law on the self-
administration of local and regional authorities and the
law on the special status of the Bamako district. Many
of the provisions are intended to meet our commitments
in the context of the Peace Agreement.

I should like to emphasize that, at the request
of a certain part of the national community, the
President has decided to postpone - and I underscore
that it is merely a postponement, wheres the report
mentions staying the referendum - the holding of the
referendum on the draft review of the Constitution of
Mali. However, the Head of State remains determined
to pursue that major reform, as he believes it to be
indispensable for the future of our country.

With regard to the processes of cantonment and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, the
Government of Mali calls on the signatory movements
to cooperate in good faith in order to ensure the
success of those programmes, which are crucial for the
stabilization and restoration of security in our country.

For its part, the Government of Mali, which has
already made enormous financial commitments,
will respect all its obligations in the context of the
implementation of the Peace Agreement. In that regard,
the draft State budget for the financial year 2018,
which is currently under consideration by the National
Assembly, duly takes into account the need to finance
the implementation of commitments undertaken
through the Malian Peace Agreement.

In parallel with the implementation of the Peace
Agreement in Mali, the Government is paying particular
attention to the situation in the central regions of the
country. As a result of that commitment on the central
regions, we have appointed Mr. Mahmoud Dicko, Chair
of the High Islamic Council, to work towards dialogue
and reconciliation between the communities of the
Mopti and Segou regions. We have already seen very
encouraging and appreciable results. In Segou, the
Prime Minister has just chaired the forum for peace in
the fourth region, the conclusions of which have made
it possible to hope for a gradual easing of the situation
in the central regions. That is a concrete example of
Malians themselves taking national ownership of
the process.

As in previous reports, in the present report
the Secretary-General expresses his concern about
human rights violations in Mali - a situation of
great importance. With regard to the cases of human
rights violations and attackes listed in the report,
the Government of Mali would of course like more
information on the localities concerned.

With regard to the arrest of persons by the Malian
authorities for acts of terrorism, the report mentions
116 persons arrested for terrorism, including 106
released persons, including five boys and two women.
Information gathered from our judicial services since
the publication of the report shows that it is rather four
boys, not five. While it is a small difference, I think
it is important to be precise. The four were handed
over to the Regional Director of the Ministry for the
Promotion of Women, Children and the Family from
the beginning of their questioning.

In addition, the report indicates that 239 people
were detained for terrorism, including five boys, and
that they were still in custody in State institutions.
For our part, the technical services in charge of the
issue have told us that out of a total of 277 people who
were taken to the Judicial Investigations Service of
the National Gendarmerie, 50 had arrest warrants for
suspicion of terrorism. In 2017, out of 102 cases heard
in the court of assizes, four individuals were convicted
of violations of human rights or attempts to undermine
human rights. On 31 August, at least 52 persons out
of 132 plaintiffs were summoned by magistrates.
Although no trial has been officially opened, the
procedure is following its legally outlined course. For
its part, the Truth and Reconciliation Commission set
up by the Government has gathered 5,267 testimonies
from victims and witnesses.

In any event, Iwould like to reiterate the commitment
of the Government of Mali to respecting and upholding
the norms of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. All cases reported in
areas under Government control are systematically
investigated and subsequent prosecutions are initiated
against the alleged perpetrators. There is not, nor
will there ever be, impunity in the matter of human
rights violations.

The Government of Mali welcomed the adoption
of resolution 2364 (2017), which renews the mandate of
MINUSMA. The resolution, which follows resolution
2295 (2016), calls upon MINUSMA to take a more
proactive stance and endows it with a more robust
mandate. However, it is clear that the major innovations
brought about by the resolution have not been reflected
in the situation on the ground. Accordingly, the
Government of Mali strongly hopes that the operational
capacities of MINUSMA will be strengthened by the
Security Council in order to enable it to implement its
mandate fully and effectively. I welcome the fact that
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
made the same point.

Equally important is the strengthening of
cooperation between MINUSMA and the Malian
defence and security forces. I know that the Special
Representative is equally committed to that important
aspect, which will one day allow for the gradual
withdrawal of the Mission. In particular, I would
like to highlight the need and urgency of supporting
the Maliand defence and security forces in their
daily struggle against terrorism on the ground. That
support need not wait for the completion of the reform
process to be carried out. I welcome the fact that such a
central issue has been taken into account by resolution
2364 (2017).

Similarly, the Government of Mali welcomes the
inclusion in the renewed mandate of the important
issue of MINUSMA's support for the restoration of
the State's authority throughout the country, including
through the return of the administration and Malian
defense and security forces in all regions of the north
of the country, particularly Kidal.

As the Council knows, the crisis in Mali is not a
solely domestic one. It has regional and international
dimensions, which are marked by terrorism, organized
crime and trafficking in human beings. That is what
brought about the creation of the Group of Five for the
Sahel G-5 Sahel (G-5) Joint Force, whose deployment
the Security Council welcomed. I also welcome the
holding of the G-5 high-level meeting in New York,
which featured the participation of the Heads of State
of G-5 Sahel, the President of the French Republic, the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission and the
Secretary-General of the United Nations. As a result of
that meeting, I would like to call for more substantial
and more consistent support from our bilateral and
multilateral partners, with a view to mobilizing the
necessary resources for the effective operationalization
and efficient deployment of the Joint force. I call on all
of our partners to participate actively in the planning
and pledging conference for the G-5 Sahel Joint Force
scheduled for mid-December in Brussels.

The violent and deadly clashes yesterday on
the Niger-Mali border once again remind us of the
urgent need for the rapid operationalization of the
G-5 Sahel Joint Force. The current Chair of the G-5

Sahel, President Keita, has just issued a communique
in which he condemns what took place yesterday in
the strongest possible terms. He also reminds us of the
urgent need to ensure that the G-5 Sahel Joint Force
be operationalized as soon as possible in order to
ensure that it can withstand those who are seeking to
destabilize the entire region, including terrorists and
armed groups.

I take this opportunity, on behalf of the President
of the Republic, to convey our sincere condolences to
the people and the Government and the people of the
Niger and the Government and the people of the United
States of America. We must continue to stand together
to keep up the pressure on these terrorist groups and
win this battle.

I thank every member of the Security Council
for their continued, invaluable support to Mali and
to the ongoing peace process. I reiterate the eternal
gratitude of the people and the Government of Mali
to the Secretary-General, his Special Representative
and all MINUSMA personnel, the troop-contributing
countries, the members of the Agreement Monitoring
Committee, led by Algeria, and all other partner
countries and institutions for their continued and
multiform support to the peace and stabilization
process in our country. On behalf of the people and the
Government of Mali, I also pay tribute to the memory
of all the victims of the Malian crisis - civilian and
military, foreigners and nationals - who have fallen
with honour in the line of duty in Mali.

In conclusion, I reiterate the resolute commitment
ofthe President ofthe Republic of Mali, His Excellency
Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar Keita, to maintain and intensify
his efforts in the implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali in the higher interests
of Mali and its people. The President is acutely aware The President (spoke in French): There are no
ofhis responsibilities, but also and above all convinced more names inscribed on the list of speakers.

that improving the situation in Mali will have a positive
impact on peace and security in the Sahel and on
international peace and security, which is the Council's
primary responsibility. The meeting rose at 11 (rm. 
1 now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
