Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased to welcome you, Mr. Minister,
as President of the Security Council. The briefings
by the High Representative for Foreign Affairs and
Security Policy of the European Union to the Security
Council have become a good tradition. We would like
to express our gratitude to Ms. Ashton for today's
briefing.

The Russian Federation has consistently advocated
the development and strengthening of United
Nations cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations. That cooperation must be based on the
firm foundation of the Charter of the United Nations,
in particular Chapter VIII. On that basis, pursuant to
General Assembly resolution 65/276, of May 2011,
there should be cooperation arrangements between
the United Nations and the European Union (EU).
Objectively speaking, one can say that the European
Union is one of the key political and economic actors on
the international stage and contributes to strengthening
multilateralism, with the United Nations playing the
leading role in combating new threats and challenges,
guarding against the impact of natural disasters and
eradicating poverty.

We note the efforts of the European Union to find
a peaceful settlement to the situation surrounding the
Iranian nuclear programme. We are convinced that,
through joint constructive efforts, we can ensure that the
initial steps stemming from the Geneva arrangements
will continue to be successfully implemented, together
with the joint plan of action of the 5+1 group, dated
24 November 2013. That will help to remove some of the
most difficult concerns about Tehran's nuclear activities
and to ensure that Iran can exercise all its rights as a
State party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, including its right to enrich uranium.

With regard to crisis management, the European
Union and its members should strictly abide by the
decisions ofthe Security Council. On that basis, Russia
remains open to establishing practical cooperation with
the European Union on crisis settlement. We continue
to be interested in developing a bilateral cooperation
agreement on the basis of the equal rights of both sides
in that area. The conclusion of such a document would
not only help to strengthen the capacity for security
cooperation between Russia and the European Union
but also significantly contribute to stepping up joint
capacities for crisis prevention and management.

We support the call of the Secretary-General to
strengthen international efforts to find a settlement to
the situation in the Central African Republic. In that
context, we trust that Brussels will pay due attention
to the recommendation that the EU should scale up its
peacekeeping presence in the Central African Republic,
including by accelerating the deployment of its mission
to that country. That is integral to the authority of the
Security Council, on the basis of which our European
Union partners so successfully and resolutely managed
to gain approval for its operation in the Central African
Republic prior to the African-led mission's being
deployed.

We will not conceal the fact that we were somewhat
surprised by reports that, to date, there is still no clarity
as to exactly which countries will provide peacekeepers
and that most of those countries may not be members
of the European Union. We are concerned that that may
have an impact on the management of the European
Union operation in an already chaotic situation in the
Central African Republic.

We share the approach of the European Union
to finding a settlement in the Middle East, and we
support reaching an acceptable final status agreement
for Palestinians and Israelis on the internationally
recognized basis of the Security Council resolutions,
the Madrid principles, the road map and the Arab Peace
Initiative. We intend to continue to constructively
cooperate with Brussels, within the Middle East
Quartet, in fully supporting the peace process by
involving with the parties to the conflict and regional
actors.

We acknowledge European Union efforts to provide
humanitarian assistance to the internally displaced
persons and refugees in Syria, but the positive effect
is largely being eroded by its unilateral sanctions on
that country, which only further exacerbate the already
difficult humanitarian situation there. Lifting those
sanctions would truly help to alleviate the suffering
of the Syrian people. In general, imposing unilateral
sanctions without Security Council authorization is
counterproductive.

Recognizing the importance of European Union
efforts to establish dialogue between Belgrade
and Pristina, we would like to underscore that any
arrangements between the two sides should be reached
by the parties themselves without any pressure
and without undermining the United Nations role.
Resolution 1244 (1999) remains fully in force and is the
internationally legally recognized basis for a settlement
in Kosovo. With Security Council approval, the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo has
transferred to the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo (EULEX) a number of powers that it cannot
support. Given that resolution 1244 (1999) remains
fully valid, those powers, in international legal terms,
remain within the competence of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo and cannot
be transferred to a third party, particularly a self-
proclaimed Pristina structure.

The Serbian leadership holds a similar view, as
stated in the Chamber as recently as 10 February (see S/PV.7108) by the Prime Minister of Serbia. In that
connection, we are concerned about the mention of
plans to reconfigure or even draw down EULEX.

Ms. Ashton recently touched on the Ukrainian
issue. We share the view that a solution to the crisis
must be found by the Ukrainians themselves. We hope
that that position will be consistently maintained in
practice, without any threat of sanctions or competition
to promote the European values of external actors
with regard to who should be the ministers in a future
Ukrainian Government. We also believe that the
European Union could share its experience with regard
to how one should respond to street protests.

In conclusion, I would like to underscore that,
despite the increasing need for effective mechanisms for
the division of labour between the United Nations and
regional organizations, including the European Union,
the primary role of the Security Council in maintaining
international peace and security remains unshakeable.
That is enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations
and cannot be reviewed.

