Mr. Logar (Slovenia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the States members of the Human Security
Network, namely, Austria, Chile, Costa Rica, Greece,
Ireland, Jordan, Mali, Norway, Panama, Switzerland,
Thailand and my own country, Slovenia, and on behalf
of the Republic of South Africa as an observer.

The Network is a cross-regional group of
States created in the context of the Anti-Personnel
Mine Ban Convention and promoting human
security as a people-centered, comprehensive and
prevention-oriented approach for achieving peace,
development and human rights. The protection of
civilians in armed conflicts is a core matter for the
Network.

I would like to start this statement by expressing our
gratitude to the Lithuanian presidency for organizing
this debate and for the concept note (S/2014/74, annex),
and by thanking the briefers for their contributions to
this debate, which is the first one since the Secretary-
General's most recent report on the protection on
civilians in armed conflicts (S/2013/689), of November
2013.

As the Secretary-General's report indicates, despite
the efforts undertaken and the existing legal framework,
the current state of the protection of civilians leaves
little room for optimism. We remain concerned about
ongoing conflicts around the world, especially in the
Syrian Arab Republic, the Central African Republic and
South Sudan. Civilian populations continue to account
for the majority of casualties in armed conflicts, and
that is why it is imperative to continue to discuss, on
a regular basis, mechanisms or ways to better ensure
the security and dignity of civilians affected by armed
conflicts.

In that respect, the Network welcomes the initiative
recently launched by the Secretary-General, entitled
"Rights up front", which contains important actions
to strengthen the role and response of the United
Nations in this field. We hope that the multiplier effect
of the change in institutional culture alluded to by the
Secretary-General becomes a reality.

This debate provides an opportunity to look into the
core challenges to enhancing the protection of civilians.
The first challenge is compliance by all the parties to
a conflict, including non-State armed groups, with
international humanitarian and human rights law. The
law and rules must be respected in order to guarantee
the protection of civilians. Full, timely and unimpeded
access for humanitarian assistance continues to be a
sine qua non requirement for the relief and protection
of affected populations. States must comply with
their obligation to allow and facilitate access for
humanitarian relief and the freedom of movement of
humanitarian personnel.

The Network reiterates its call on all parties to an
armed conflict to refrain from using explosive weapons
with a wide impact area in populated areas. It stresses
the importance of establishing mechanisms to track
civilian casualties so as to understand the impact of
military operations on civilian populations and adjust
such action. An important step was taken in April 2013
with the adoption of the Arms Trade Treaty and that
agreement's prohibition of transfers of arms or items
covered by it if the transferring State knows, at the
time of authorization, that the arms or items will be
used to commit serious crimes. We remain especially
concerned about the use of explosive weapons, in
particular improvised explosive devices, and stress
the need to enhance compliance with international
humanitarian law.

The second task is to enhance the role of
peacekeeping and other missions. The Network shares
the view expressed in the Secretary-General's report that
mandating peacekeeping missions to protect civilians
under imminent threat of physical violence is one of the
most significant actions taken by the Security Council.
In that regard, we underline the importance of providing
missions not only with clear and achievable mandates
but also with sufficient resources and capabilities to
fulfil those mandates. The Network views political
dialogue, physical protection and the establishment of
a protective environment as concrete and specific steps
for the effective implementation of mission mandates.

The third challenge is accountability. States have the
obligation to comply with international humanitarian
and human rights law and to investigate and prosecute
any serious crime committed within its borders. In that
regard, we condemn sexual and gender-based violence,
including the use of sexual violence as a military tactic.
Impunity is not an option. It encourages perpetrators to
continue their atrocious acts. The fight against impunity
should be a common effort, in which the affected State
delivers and ensures the conditions to bring about justice
and the international community provides technical
assistance and resources to such States. The Network
stresses the importance of commissions of inquiry and
fact-finding missions, which can substantiate alleged
Violations, thus opening the way to a possible referral
to the International Criminal Court or cooperation with
the Court or similar mechanisms.

We mentioned that there is little room for optimism.
However, we would like to take this opportunity to
publicly acknowledge the efforts and commitment of
United Nations peacekeepers. The concrete actions,
such as those taken by peacekeeping missions with
protection-of-civilians mandates, are encouraging.
Therefore, as we have said, it is important that such
missions have the necessary resources and capacities
to protect the lives of civilians in armed conflicts
effectively and in a timely manner.

We consider it to be of the utmost importance
that the Council remain seized of the question on the
protection of civilian in armed conflict and discuss the
topic biannually.

