Ms. Menendez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful to the delegations of the United States and
the United Kingdom for the report they have just given
Council members, pursuant to Council resolution
1483 (2003).

We express our satisfaction with the fact that the
presentation of this report has taken place in an open
meeting of the Council, since maintaining the security
of Iraq and the activities carried out for its political and
economic reconstruction are matters incumbent upon
the entire international community. Both delegations
have given us broad presentations that are extremely
useful for a close-up and in-depth view of the present
situation faced by the Iraqi people.

Iraq still bears the traces left by three decades of
dictatorship that we must not forget: the
disappearances, torture and general disregard of human
rights. Today we have heard the chilling figure of an
estimated 300,000 people in mass graves. Such figures
should remain in our memory so that situations of this
kind will not be repeated in the future. However, and in
contrast, today many of the Iraqi people are
experiencing better living conditions than during the
regime of Saddam Hussein.

We cannot ignore the fact that Iraq is facing great
problems and challenges. Unfortunately, we are now
witnessing a proliferation of brutal terrorist actions.
These are irrational acts that indiscriminately leave
behind victims among the personnel whose mission is
to help the Iraqi people and among the Iraqi population
as a whole. The only purpose of terrorism in this case
is to prevent Iraq from joining the prosperous and
democratic nations of the international community. In
the final analysis, this is terrorism that seeks to relegate
the Iraqi people to obscurity and marginalization.
However, the international community will not cease to
resolutely help the Iraqi people to prevent that from
happening.

I wish to briefly refer to the three main areas that
shape Iraq today. First, concerning the economic
sphere, we should stress that we are all, in one way or

another, contributing to the reconstruction of Iraq,
using, to that end, the mechanisms of bilateral
cooperation as well as the United Nations agencies
which are also doing admirable work. That is a joint
effort, as we were able to see at the Madrid conference
as well as from the situation on the ground.

As we have heard today, within a short period of
time important advances have been made in the supply
of water, communications, transport and energy. But
we have also been given one fact we find especially
significant and indicative of the effort that is taking
place - the fact that the budget for 2004 can now be
seen on an Internet web page. That is something that
would have been unthinkable a few months ago and
that expresses the desire for transparency on the part of
the Governing Council of Iraq and the Coalition
Provisional Authority (CPA).

Secondly, in the political sphere we have received
information which confirms that the agreement of 15
November has brought about a positive change in the
situation in general. Spain welcomes this agreement
with satisfaction, because we have always maintained
that the responsibilities of government should be
transferred to an Iraqi administration as soon as
circumstances allow. With this agreement, the Iraqi
political process begins to follow the path laid down by
resolution 1511 (2003), co-sponsored by Spain, that
will lead to the drafting of a fundamental law setting
up the legal guidelines for a process of political
transition that will, initially, lead to the establishment
of a transitional national assembly and the election by
that assembly of a provisional Government, to be
recognized by the Coalition before 30 June 2004.

In the process of political normalization in Iraq,
my Government attaches special importance to the
reform of the judicial system, whose independence and
proper functioning constitute the keystone of
democratic nations.

Furthermore, and again in the political arena, we
especially welcome the proposal to establish a high
commission for women.

Finally, concerning the security situation in Iraq,
my delegation heard with special satisfaction, of the
effort that the CPA is making to transfer the
responsibility for security to Iraq, which effort includes
rebuilding the Iraqi police and army. We have heard
that there are now more than 60,000 policemen in the

Sll'V.4869

 

streets, and by the end of 2004 there will be 35,000
military troops.

It is clear that the security situation is not as good
as we would have wished, and the news media
frequently convey to us images and events that are a
source of concern. However, it is also true that in
today's Iraq there are many areas of peace and
progress, and for that reason we hope that United
Nations personnel will return so that the Organization
can continue playing the vital role conferred on it by
the resolutions adopted unanimously by the Council.
My Government is convinced that all of those activities
will redound to the benefit of the Iraqi people and to
the formation of a free, prosperous and peaceful Iraq.

