The President: I thank the representative of
Chile for his kind words addressed to the presidency.

I should now like to make some very brief
comments in my capacity as the representative of the
Philippines.

First, I thank Chairman Bryant and Special
Representative Jacques Paul Klein for coming all the
way from Liberia to brief the Council on the latest
developments there. The important and comprehensive
information and views they provided are significant
inputs for the Council discussions on Liberia to be held
next week. We are also pleased to note that the United
Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) continues to
make steady progress in stabilizing Liberia and
creating the necessary security conditions for
implementation of the Accra Agreement.

The deployment of UNMIL troops throughout the
country augurs well for the implementation of the
programme of disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and rehabilitation - a crucial element for
Liberia in what Chairman Bryant has called breaking
through. I hope that the support given by UNMIL will
assist the National Transitional Government of Liberia
in performing its functions even as the various
government institutions are being rebuilt and
strengthened.

The Philippines has consistently maintained that a
regional approach is crucial to achieving peace and
security in Africa, and more so in the subregion of
West Africa. Generally, local actors are more sensitive
to the context and the content of the various problems
there. They are usually better placed to understand
local dynamics and have a greater stake in a return to
peace. Thus, we welcome the efforts undertaken in that
regard, such as the participation of Chairman Bryant in
the Mano River Union summit held in Conakry,
Guinea, on 20 May 2004 and the meetings of the
various United Nations peacekeeping and political
missions in West Africa over the past few months. It is
expected that the Council's mission to West Africa the
last week of June will dwell further on the regional
approach and come up with more ideas for the
application of that approach.

In that connection, and having in mind the
situation of West Africa, where the three largest
peacekeeping operations in the world are deployed, I
would like to ask how inter-operable UNMIL, the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL)
and the United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire
(ONOCI) are in cases where cross-border operations
have to be mounted in the present or near future.

I resume my function as President of the Council.

I now give the floor to Mr. Jacques Paul Klein to
respond to questions and comments.

