Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting.
We wish to begin our statement by welcoming and
paying special tribute to the efforts of Mr. Ismail Ould
Cheikh Ahmed, Special Envoy ofthe Secretary-General
for Yemen, who has performed his role with great
responsibility, prudence and perseverance in extremely
difficult circumstances. We also thank Mr. John Ging,
Director of the Coordination and Response Division
of the United Nations Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, for his precise yet broad
overview of the humanitarian situation in Yemen.

Peru is dismayed by the humanitarian situation in
Yemen and considers it urgent to reach an inclusive
political solution to the conflict. After more than three
years of violence and pain, in which none of the warring
parties has achieved military or territorial gains, it is
clear that there is no military solution. We therefore
consider it essential that the new Special Envoy,
Mr. Martin Griffiths, be able to count on the strong
support of the Security Council and on the assistance
required for the complex task of re-establishing dialogue
among all parties involved so as to resolve the conflict.
That will require a major coordination effort between
the Council and those countries with the capacity to
influence the warring parties, based on a cautious
and balanced approach to developments in Yemen.
In that spirit, we strongly condemn the violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law in
Yemen attributable to the various actors involved in
the conflict. These must be properly investigated, and
those responsible must not go unpunished.

It is imperative that the Council remain united

and consistent in assuming its responsibility to
protect civilian populations in all humanitarian crises,
wherever they occur, in line with international law and
international humanitarian law. In this regard, we must
ensure that humanitarian assistance reaches the more
than 22 million Yemenis who need it. The humanitarian
crisis must be addressed immediately, in parallel with
and independently of the political process, which
implies the permanent opening of ports, especially
Al-Hudeydah, as Yemen is a country completely
dependent on the importation of food, medicine and
other goods, as well as the opening of Sana'a airport
for commercial flights and emergency medical
evacuations, among other urgent measures. It also calls
for the cessation of all barriers to assistance, threats to
humanitarian workers in the course of their work, and
the establishment of conditions that seek to impose the
place and manner in which aid is distributed. We hope
that these points and others relating to the humanitarian
field will be agreed upon in the presidential declaration
which is currently being negotiated and which we hope
to adopt as soon as possible.

We would like to express our support for the United
Nations 2018 Yemen humanitarian response plan, and
welcome the announcements of significant contributions
from members of the coalition, in particular Saudi
Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, which are
expected to be channelled through the response plan,
as well as other donors. We also welcome the renewal of
Yemen's sanctions regime, whose 2140 Committee we
have the honour to chair. We therefore believe that it is
important to deter and restrict the ability of individuals
or entities that threaten peace, security and stability and
to contribute to the achievement of a political solution
in Yemen.

