Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to begin by again extending
our condolences to the families of the deceased, as well
as to the Governments of the countries whose citizens
were on board the flight that crashed in Ukraine on
17 July 2014. Russia has consistently advocated for
a swift determination of the reasons for the crash of
Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-l7 and the bringing to
justice of those responsible for the tragedy. Moreover,
we have repeatedly contributed to the achievement of
those objectives through concrete actions.

The Russian delegation did everything in its power
to ensure that the Security Council adopted resolution
2166 (2014) as soon as possible. In the course of its
drafting, we insisted on including provisions with regard
to the need for a comprehensive, thorough, independent
international investigation under international civil
aviation guidelines and with the International Civil
Aviation Organization playing a leading role. Moreover,
we were fully open to the immediate adoption of another
draft resolution that would provide early access to the
crash site to the joint investigation team. However,
the States concerned chose to act outside the Council
and on the basis of bilateral agreements with Ukraine,
whose elaboration took additional time.

In resolution 2166 (2014), we insisted on the
inclusion in the text of provisions concerning the
immediate cessation of all military activities in the area
directly adjacent to the crash site. It was the Russian
Federation that raised in the Security Council the issue
of Kyiv's violation of that provision in August, when
the Ukrainian authorities unilaterally declared they
would no longer adhere to the ceasefire agreement, as a
result of which the joint investigation team was forced
to suspend its work for a lengthy period.

Within the framework of the technical investigation,
pursuant to annex 13 to the Convention on International
Civil Aviation, Russian experts transferred to the Dutch
side all the information requested of us, including data
from the Rostov radar station of the air traffic control
system. A few days after the crash, the Russian Ministry
of Defence held a briefing during which it released all
Russian satellite data, which were also sent to the Dutch
side. Analysis and calculations regarding one version
of the catastrophe - that the flight was shot down by
a surface-to-air Buk-type missile - were also sent to
the Netherlands by experts of the Russian manufacturer
Almaz-Antey. To that end, data concerning the technical
characteristics of such missiles was declassified. Russia
was the only country to make public such data.

Unfortunately, a year after the adoption of
resolution 2166 (2014), serious issues remain as to how
the investigation has been conducted. Russian experts
were not provided equal access to the various aspects
of the technical investigation. They unilaterally provide
their data and calculations, but remain unaware of what
then happens to the information. We have repeatedly
offered to provide qualified experts and equipment to
carry out complicated work, for example, metallurgical
analysis, which would have enabled us, by testing pieces
of the wreckage, to determine the type of missile that
brought down the plane. All that remains unanswered.

Turning to criminal investigations, they are being
carried out by members of the joint investigation team
in a closed fashion. It was reported that an agreement
had been reached by the five countries not to disclose
information. Given this case, what grounds are there to
be assured of the impartiality of this investigation? Can
the investigation stand up to the backdrop of aggressive
propaganda from the media? Can it withstand the
pressure of an obvious political put-up job when
the causes of the disaster and those responsible are
announced in advance? Moreover, such statements are
being made by a number of the leaders of States that
make up the joint investigation team.

The Russian Federation was the only country
to point out that resolution 2166 (2014) provides for
comprehensive United Nations assistance for the
investigation. We offered to consider the creation of
the post of a Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, which would have helped to ensure a truly
international and transparent investigation. However,
our proposal was not accepted. Also not fulfilled was the
instruction to the Secretary-General in that resolution
to submit to the Security Council a comprehensive set
of options for facilitating United Nations assistance for
the investigation.

What did we get instead? We got something that
was summarily prepared outside the Security Council,
without thoughtful consideration of the available
options for a criminal investigation: a draft resolution
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.
Our position that this was a premature, ill-defined and
legally untenable step was not heeded. We have come
up with an alternative draft resolution aimed at ensuring
that we fully harnessed the potential of resolution
2166 (2014) and to ensure a genuine international,
independent and comprehensive investigation. After
reaching that goal, we could have revisited the issue
legal mechanisms to bring perpetrators to justice. We
would like to stress that our draft document remains on
table. We believe that its proposals and ideas are still
relevant.

We have repeatedly stated that we do not support
the idea of setting up a tribunal under Chapter VII of
the Charter. There are no grounds for it, given that in
resolution 2166 (2014) the Security Council did not
classify the Boeing tragedy as a threat to international
peace and security. It is difficult to explain how this
event, which a year ago was not considered to be
a threat to international peace and security, now
suddenly becomes one. In principle, issues pertaining
to organizing a criminal investigation do not fall under
the remit of the Security Council.

Well-known exceptions have been made owing
to the need to determine those guilty for mass crimes
deemed by the international community to be of the
most serious nature. However, the experience with the
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the Tribunal for
Rwanda can hardly be considered positive, given that
they were very expensive, that they took a long time to
carry out their work, that they were subject to political
pressure, et cetera. No precedent in principle exists
for the establishment by the Council of international
tribunals to bring to justice those responsible for
transportation disasters.

This is something that has also happened in Russia,
of course. In 2001, a Siberia Airlines flight was shot
down over the Black Sea by Ukrainian anti-aircraft
missiles. There was also the incident involving the
Iran Air flight shot down over the Strait of Hormuz in
1988 by a missile fired from an American destroyer.
National investigations were carried out at the time in
Ukraine and in the United States, but no determination
was made that a crime had been carried out. However,
resolution 616 (1998), adopted following the deadly
downing of the Iranian airliner, did not qualify the
incident as a threat to international peace and security.

Here is another example. In 2010, Russia proposed
an initiative to set up a special international tribunal
to prosecute pirates. We were prompted to do so by
the unprecedented increase in the number of pirate
attacks off the coast of Somalia. Effective mechanisms
for the prosecution of pirates did not exist at the time;
those apprehended at sea were often just released. The
idea of an international tribunal for pirates did not
enjoy support in the Security Council, despite the fact
that the qualification of the situation as threatening
international peace and security was quite clear.

Arguments regarding the lack of efficiency,
slowness and the unwieldiness of such mechanisms
then emerged as the main arguments, especially from
those who now support the draft resolution on the
Boeing incident. We must therefore note that the draft
resolution (S/2015/562) that was put to the vote today
lacked any legal basis or precedent. We have repeatedly
explained this to our colleagues and urged them to
consider alternatives. However, the authors of the draft
resolution have refused to act in a spirit of cooperation
and put it to a vote, knowing that it would not lead to
a positive outcome. In our View, this points to the fact
that political aims were more important to them than
practical objectives. This is regrettable.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that
Russia is ready to cooperate in the conduct of a full,
independent and impartial investigation into the causes
and circumstances of the crash of the Malaysian
airliner, based on the provisions of resolution 2166
(2014) in order to identify and punish the perpetrators.
The position that we have adopted today has nothing in
common with promoting impunity.

