Mr. Yamazaki (Japan): I would like to begin by
extending my sincere congratulations to you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of July. I am confident that with the
benefit of your wise leadership the Council's consideration
of today' s agenda item - disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of ex-combatants in a peacekeeping
environment - will be most fruitful. The Government of
Japan welcomes the timely decision of the Security
Council to focus specifically on this issue, and appreciates
the initiative of Malaysia that resulted in the convening of
today's meeting.

As the body with primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Security Council has, since the end of the cold war, often
been called upon to respond to regional conflicts by
launching a peacekeeping operation. Experience has
taught us that in responding to regional conflicts, it is
necessary to address the fragile post-conflict environment
in all its aspects. The success of these operations is to a
great extent dependent upon the smooth implementation
of measures aimed at the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of ex-combatants. Indeed, it may be said
that the ultimate objective of such a comprehensive
approach is the disarming, demobilization, and
reintegration of ex-combatants.

Today I would like to touch upon the question of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration in terms of
the following five aspects.

First, it is important to consider disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration in a coordinated and
consistent manner. Until now, different aspects of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration have been
addressed in various forums. The issue of small arms, for
instance, has been discussed in the General Assembly and
other forums. The Government of Japan has taken several
initiatives with a view to coordinating those various
efforts. It also sponsored General Assembly resolution
50/70 B which asked the Secretary-General to establish a
group of governmental experts on small arms.
Ambassador Mitsuro Donowaki, Special Assistant to the
Foreign Minister of Japan, serves as the Chairman of that
Group. In addition, and supplementing the work of the
expert group, Japan hosted the Tokyo Workshop on Small
Arms, to which it invited experts from the Group, as well
as delegations from interested States, the Department for
Disarmament Affairs and non-governmental organizations.

Secondly, illicit arms transfers to and within a region
should be controlled in order to prevent the resumption of
hostilities. Since this is a task that requires the full
cooperation of the international community, the General
Assembly at its fifty-third session adopted resolution
77 E, requesting the Secretary-General to submit his
recommendations to the General Assembly at its fifty-
fourth session in preparation for an international
conference on the illicit arms trade in all its aspects, to be

 

held not later than the year 2001. The success of that
conference is eagerly anticipated by the Group of
Governmental Experts on Small Arms. In this context,
during its presidency of the Security Council last year,
Japan coordinated the efforts of the working group on illicit
arms flows to and in Africa, whose results were reflected
in Security Council resolution 1209 (1998). We sincerely
hope that these efforts will be effectively utilized in
preparing for the 2001 United Nations conference on arms
flows.

The third point, and one whose importance to
sustainable peace cannot be overstated, is that of
development. Recognizing that one of the causes of social
instability is often extreme poverty, Japan hosted the First
and Second Tokyo International Conference on African
Development (TICAD), in 1993 and 1998, respectively. It
is hoped that the TICAD process will underscore the
importance of conflict prevention and post-conflict
reconstruction in restoring stability throughout society,
which is a prerequisite for development.

The fourth point to bear in mind when addressing the
issue of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration is
the importance of coordination among international
organizations and non-governmental organizations.
Inasmuch as disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
is a comparatively new area of endeavour for the United
Nations and its related bodies, the input and cooperation of
interested States and non-governmental organizations are
especially important. In this connection, Japan held an open
symposium to stress the importance of cooperation among
international organizations and non-governmental
organizations under the theme of civil society and small
arms on the occasion of the Tokyo Workshop on Small
Arms.

Fifthly, it is important to establish an institutional
memory so that past experience will be utilized to ensure
the maximum effectiveness of future peacekeeping
operations. Towards this end, the Government of Japan
funded a study on lessons learned from disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, and a workshop in Geneva
held by the Lessons Learned Unit. Through these and other
studies, we hope to devise a strategy for implementing
principles and guidelines for future peacekeeping operations
which will have a major bearing on disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration.

In concluding, let me reiterate the point that individual
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration measures,
such as those I have just mentioned, while important in
themselves, must also be undertaken as part of a
comprehensive approach to post-conflict peacekeeping
and peace-building. I sincerely hope that this important
subject will continue to be addressed by the United
Nations as a whole. The Government of Japan, for its
part, will continue to make every possible effort to
contribute to that endeavour.

