Ms. Mejia Velez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today's meeting, and in particular Mr. Jean Arnault,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
his entire team, for their report (S/2017/745).

On behalf of President Juan Manuel Santos
Calderen, we would like to express our appreciation
to the Secretary-General and the Security Council for
the effectiveness of the work of the United Nations
Mission in Colombia, the first special political Mission
in our country, which will come to a successful end
on 25 September. A long time before we signed the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace, they made a bold bet on
peace in Colombia. That demonstration of confidence
gave our peace process a major impetus that not only
resulted in that Final Agreement but also enabled us to
move decisively towards implementing the agreements
on reintegrating the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) into
civil, economic, social and political life and achieving
security guarantees. In the light of the provisions of
resolution 2366 (2017), the Government of Colombia
acknowledges that the Mission is a United Nations
mission, in all respects, whose sole mandate is to
verify that both the Colombian State and the FARC-EP
comply fully with the commitments in items 3.2 and 3.4
of the Agreement.

The report (S/2017/745) presented by the Special
Representative acknowledges the progress made by the
Government in implementing the Peace Agreement. I
would now like to address some of the points that we
believe to be of greatest importance.

To ensure coordination among all national entities
responsible for implementing the Agreement and for

decision-making at the highest level, a post-conflict
cabinet was established, led by the President himself,

who then appointed Vice-President Oscar Naranjo as
the interlocutor for the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia. Eighty-seven pieces of legislation
have been adopted, including five amendments to the
political Constitution, so as to provide a solid legal
structure to what was agreed upon and to form the basis
for the political reform that allowed the FARC-EP to be
registered as a political organization.

On 16 August, the so-called territorial areas for
training and reincorporation were established, where
activities are carried out to facilitate the initial phases
of returning the members of the FARC to civilian life
and to make a positive contribution to the surrounding
communities. The national council for reintegration
has held 44 meetings to lay the groundwork for planned
projects and decision-making among the parties.
Through decisions taken by council for reintegration,
three censuses were carried out in order to clearly
identify former combatants.

The socioeconomic census covered 10,015 people
and will provide the information required to facilitate
and structure the long-term process of reintegrating
members ofthe FARC into civilian life. The educational
census will allow us to start the process to help many
of them to become literate, through the implementation
of flexible educational models in the former 26 zones.
In all, 4,500 former members of the FARC-EP and
4,000 people in surrounding communities are taking
part. The health census will serve as the basis for the
development of a short- and medium-term strategy to
meet needs in that area.

An institutional resource matrix was also
established, which will allow for overall well-
being and provide psychosocial support, pensions,
academic training, labour force and productivity
training, initiatives in the areas of the arts, culture
and sports and community endeavours. The process
to facilitate financial inclusion and membership in
the national pension scheme is being developed. A
total of 9,491 savings accounts have been opened for
former combatants to enable them to receive financial
support, in line with the provisions of the Agreement.
Up to 30 August, disbursements equivalent to nearly
$8 million had been made, and 3,840 national pension
scheme memberships had been finalized.

The national apprenticeship service has started
providing support covering financial education,
community project management, entrepreneurship,
solidarity-based economics, integrated solid waste
management and information and communication
technology. It is very important to note, as has been
highlighted here, that a special reintegration programme
for minors was established, known as "A Different Way
of Life". It is a specialized programme that recognizes
them as victims, seeks the restoration of their rights,
comprehensive reparations and social and economic
reintegration. It provides support not just to the minors
themselves, but to their families, host communities and
relevant institutions.

The Government of Colombia is aware of the
immense challenge of carrying out those tasks and
the coordination it will require - that too has been
mentioned here. However, we remain willing and
we honour our decision to implement the Agreement
swiftly and efficiently so as to achieve the goal of stable
and lasting peace.

In conclusion, I am grateful for the expressions
of support following the recent announcement by my
Government and the Eje'rcito de Liberacion Nacional
to begin a temporary bilateral ceasefire on 1 October,
which will last for 102 days. In that regard, President
Santos Calderon has submitted a request to the
Secretary-General that the United Nations be part of
the oversight of the temporary agreement.

That piece of good news fills us with hope and
renews our faith in a Colombia where coexistence
prevails. That faith was mentioned here and by Pope
Francis yesterday before departing from his five-day
visit to Colombia. Peace is a duty that does not concede
defeat. It demands everyone's commitment, despite
obstacles, differences and the various approaches
to achieve peaceful coexistence, and persists in the
struggle to foster the "culture of encounter".

