Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): The
United States would like to express its appreciation to
you, Mr. President, for organizing today's meeting on
this important issue. We would also like to thank the
Secretary-General, Ambassador Gasana and Ms. Cliffe
for their thoughtful remarks.

The links between security and development are
complex but compelling. Stalled development and
violent conflict deal a double blow to far too many
people and countries. Conflict and violence impoverish
and severely undermine development gains through
displacement, disease and desperation. While there has
been an unparalleled drop in global poverty in recent
years, countries devastated by conflict and violence
have been left out of that trend. The statistics are stark,
as we understand from the World Bank's and other
recent studies. A person from a country in conflict,
compared to one from any other developing country, is

more than twice as likely to be undernourished; more
than three times as likely to be unable to send her
children to school; twice as likely to see her children
die before they reach the age of five and twice as likely
to lack access to clean water. And no low-income,
conflict-affected country is on track to meet a single
Millennium Development Goal.

Poverty and the lack of economic opportunities
also contribute to violence, as President Obama said at
the Millennium Development summit last September
(see A/65/PV.9). When millions of fathers cannot
provide for their families, it feeds the despair that can
fuel instability and violent extremism. We have heard
today that combating both poverty and conflict requires
us to prioritize core State capacities, especially the rule
of law, justice and security, and to create jobs and
immediate economic opportunities. We have also heard
about the need to bring women into decision-making
on key political, security and economic issues.

The United States could not agree more. We see
these issues at play in almost every conflict situation
before the Council. In the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, one of the chief priorities of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission is to help
strengthen the justice sector through training
Congolese police officers and supporting magistrates in
courts. In Liberia, we strongly supported the
Government's attention to rural electrification as a key
confidence-building measure, and also welcomed the
Peacebuilding Commission's support for Monrovia's
initial efforts to improve rural communities' access to
trained police and magistrates. In Afghanistan, we have
urged for international efforts to focus on reviving the
country's once-vibrant agricultural sector, in order to
create sustained economic alternatives to narcotics
production. In Haiti, the United Nations Stabilization
Mission has done important work with the Haitian
national police to build community confidence and
strengthen the rule of law. We have urged consistently
that attention be paid to building core national
capacities because we see that, until the basic
infrastructure of peace is in place, countries will be
blocked from progress.

Twenty years ago we were just beginning to
understand the links between security and
development. A little more than 10 years ago, we began
systematically incorporating peacebuilding elements
into peacekeeping mandates. Five years ago, we
created the Peacebuilding Commission to promote
coherence and coordination between security and
development actors. And, in the past two years, we
have held eight separate thematic debates on
peacebuilding and related issues. And yet we are still
not where we need to be. Ninety per cent of today's
conflicts arise in countries where we have been
unsuccessful in consolidating peace after prior wars.
There are no easy answers here, and we should not
overestimate the international community's role in
rectifying deep-seated problems that may have festered
for decades. Peace is ultimately in a country's own
hands.

But we must do more. A few areas are particularly
ripe for fresh thinking. First, while national actors bear
the primary responsibility for rebuilding their countries,
they often seek timely assistance from genuine
international experts. We have been encouraged by
early briefings about the forthcoming international
review of civilian capacity, which emphasizes more
diverse and flexible arrangements for international
civilian support to crucial State-building tasks. We look
forward to considering the report's recommendations as
we review peacekeeping operations.

Secondly, we see scope for new ways for United
Nations peace operations to have a positive impact on
daily life within their host communities: for example,
by using spare engineering capacity to fix a road or
clear debris, or increasing local procurement to help
revitalize the local economy. We need to be open to
such ideas, while also not insisting that peacekeepers
undertake key development tasks that others may be
more qualified or mandated to do.

Thirdly, the United Nations on its own does not
have the resources or capacity to help fully rebuild
Government institutions in the aftermath of conflict.
We are therefore pleased that the World Bank was
invited to brief us today. The Security Council needs a
robust and continuing dialogue with the Bretton Woods
institutions, multilateral development banks and major
donors, which will often underwrite key dimensions of
recovery.

Last December, the United States presided over a
special Security Council event on voices of a new
generation. Young people from around the world sent
in e-mails and videos repeating a common refrain: they
long for peace, they worry about conditions that could
ignite conflict and they see a clear link between
security and development. Through the debate you
have convened today, Mr. President, the Security
Council is demonstrating that their voices are being
heard.

