Ms. L¢j (Denmark): Let me express my gratitude
to you, Mr. President, for having convened this
meeting. We appreciate this opportunity to reflect on
the African dimension in the work of the Security
Council.

I would like to associate myself with the
statement to be delivered later by the Permanent
Representative of Luxembourg on behalf of the
European Union.

Peace and security in Africa constitute one of the
major challenges to the international community. The
problems we are facing are enormous. We have
experienced failures and successes - but mostly
successes - in our peacebuilding efforts. However, we
must do even better, and must constantly look for ways
and means to improve international efforts to secure
lasting peace in Africa.

Against that background, let me briefly offer
some thoughts on areas of action that we deem
particularly important.

Cooperation between the Security Council and
regional and subregional organizations should be
developed even further. Progress has been made, and
we welcome the strengthening of the practical
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union, as demonstrated in the case of the
African mission in the Sudan and the African mission
in Burundi.

Denmark firmly believes that African ownership
of and participation in conflict management should be
further strengthened and encouraged. The Council
should explore how to best support the ongoing efforts
to build an African security architecture and should
work closely with the African Union and regional
organizations to advance ways and means of
cooperation. That should not be misinterpreted as a
way of extricating ourselves from the problems of the
continent but, rather, as evidence of our firm
conviction that Africa needs home-grown solutions to
its problems. The goal should be to establish efficient

partnerships and an equitable division of labour
between the United Nations and African organizations.

Let me note that Denmark contributes actively to
enhancing African regional and subregional
organizations' capacity in conflict prevention, not only
through the European Union, but also through
substantial bilateral assistance. Thus, Denmark
provides, through its Africa Programme for Peace, $40
million for capacity-building.

In the post-conflict phase, immediate
peacebuilding efforts are essential for securing stability
and for creating a solid foundation for long-term
reconstruction and development. In that phase, a more
comprehensive approach and better coherence are
needed. Efforts in the field of institution-building,
democracy, human rights, the rule of law and good
governance, alongside disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programming, are crucial.

Making public institutions work in order to
ensure the rule of law and provide security and basic
welfare to the public is a long-term endeavour, but it is
central to the goal of conflict management and
peacebuilding. Whatever mechanism we set up to reach
that goal, the challenge is to ensure the involvement of
all stakeholders. These include national Governments
and regional organizations, as well as bilateral and
multilateral donors. Pooling resources and pursuing a
common peacebuilding strategy must be our goal.

In his report entitled "In larger freedom"
(A/59/2005), the Secretary-General proposes the
creation of an intergovernmental peacebuilding
commission. Denmark strongly supports that proposal.

The conflict pattern in parts of Africa is regional
in character. This regional aspect must be addressed in
peacebuilding efforts. Together with other actors in the
political, security, humanitarian and development
fields, the Council must design its response to conflict
within an overall subregional framework for joint and
integrated action. Creating lasting peace is complex
and needs a comprehensive and all-inclusive approach.

Cooperation among United Nations missions is
an important element in a comprehensive response that
recognizes the regional aspects of conflict. We strongly
believe that more could still be done to join forces and
pool assets across United Nations missions in West and
Central Africa to better tackle cross-border issues. The
effort to stop sanctions-busters, soldiers of fortune and
mercenaries from operating across borders and taking
their deadly business from one country to another
could be increased by mandating peace operations to
engage in the monitoring and enforcement of sanctions.
This effort would include joint cross-border controls.
Further sharing of resources would free up capacity for
other pressing tasks and make room for economies of
scale. We recognize the practical problems involved,
but instead of being paralysed by such problems, we
should stimulate new and constructive thinking.

In conclusion, peacebuilding is a complex
business, and we face enormous challenges. The
peacebuilding effort is an excellent investment, but we
must service it and be patient in protecting it,
eventually harvesting the fruit of success. We must be
in there for the long haul. Fleeting interests, premature
disengagement and lack of willingness to address the
root causes are likely to lead to renewed conflict and to
the loss of the initial investment.

