Mr. Lauber (Switzerland): I have the honour to
inform the Security Council today about my recent trip
to Burundi, which I undertook in my capacity as Chair
of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) from 5 to 10 May. As per established
practice, this statement has been approved by the 54
members of the PBC configuration, including Burundi,
the country concerned.

In line with the priorities identified together
with the members of the configuration, I focused on
the following issues during my recent visit: first, the
political situation and possibilities for supporting
Burundi on the path towards free, fair, inclusive and
peaceful elections in 2020; secondly, the socioeconomic
dimension and engagement between Burundi and
international partners around the priorities identified
in Burundi's national development plan for 2018-2027;
thirdly, national reconciliation and local-level conflict-
resolution initiatives; and, fourthly, the immediate and
longer-term needs of the Burundian people, including
with regard to the voluntary return and sustainable
reintegration of refugees.

In Bujumbura, I met with His Excellency
Mr. Ezechiel Nibigira, Minister for Foreign Affairs;
Mr. Martin Nivyabandi, Minister for Human Rights,
Social Affairs and Gender; the Permanent Secretaries
of the Ministries of Finance and Defence, as well as the
Assistant to the Minister for Public Security. I also met
with Lieutenant General Silas Ntigurirwa, Permanent
Secretary of the National Security Council; Mr. Pascal
Nyabenda, President of the National Assembly, who
was accompanied by the two Deputy Speakers, the
Right Honourable Agathon Rwasa and the Right
Honourable Jocky Chantal Nkurunziza. In addition, I
met with the Mr. Edouard Nduwimana, Ombudsman;
representatives ofthe opposition parties; representatives
ofthe Office ofthe Special Envoy of the United Nations
and His Excellency Mr. Michel Kafando, the Special
Envoy. Finally, I met with Mr. Huang Xia, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes
Region; Mr. Basile Ikouebe, Special Representative
of the African Union for the Great Lakes Region;
representatives of the private sector, civil society and
the diplomatic community; bilateral and multilateral
donors; and, of course, the United Nations country
team. I want to thank Ambassador Albert Shingiro,
Permanent Representative of Burundi, and United
Nations Resident Coordinator Garry Conille, and their
teams for their efforts to organize my programme.

My visit to Burundi confirmed the impression
that the upcoming elections in 2020 are already
attracting considerable attention. I therefore considered
it important to hear the views of a wide range of
interlocutors on the electoral process, given its
implications for peacebuilding.

The authorities informed me that all instruments and
processes required for a successful holding of elections
are in place and that Burundi will finance the elections
with its own resources. The electoral code was adopted
by the members of the National Assembly, including
the leader of the new opposition party Congres national
pour la liberte, Agathon Rwasa, by 105 of 108 votes.
The authorities reiterated that His Excellency President
Pierre Nkurunziza would not stand as a candidate in the
elections. With regard to preparations for the peaceful
conduct of the elections, the need for technical support
was mentioned 4 for instance, in the areas of police
training and security sector reform. I was informed that
the Independent National Electoral Commission would
invite observers to the elections from international and
regional organizations.

The interlocutors I met from some of the opposition
parties reiterated their intention to participate in the
2020 elections. They highlighted the advanced state of
preparations for the elections and underscored the need
for an inclusive process. A number of interlocutors
voiced concerns over difficulties encountered by
members of the opposition parties to gather freely.
Some interlocutors expressed concerns over recent
measures against of two foreign media outlets that
allegedly violated national regulations, according to the
national authorities.

During my stay in Bujumbura, the authorities
confirmed that the security situation in the country was
calm and stable. They highlighted that the situation in
the country did not pose a threat to international peace
and security. No security incidents were reported during
my visit, and the streets of Bujumbura were busy with
people and activity. However, a number of interlocutors
voiced concerns about alleged violent incidents and
human rights violations that were not being properly
investigated and prosecuted.

The Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights in Bujumbura was closed at the end of February
at the request of the authorities. The Minister for
Human Rights, Social Affairs and Gender confirmed
Burundi's readiness to engage with international
human rights bodies on technical cooperation and
highlighted the ongoing work on the implementation
of the recommendations from the Universal Periodic
Review of Burundi in the Human Rights Council.
The Independent National Commission on Human
Rights, under new leadership since April, expressed its
readiness to cooperate with relevant partners in order
to promote and protect the full spectrum of human
rights in Burundi.

My visit to Burundi also provided an opportunity
to follow up on the socioeconomic dialogue with the
Government and Burundi's international partners,
which has been a priority for the configuration over the
past years. The authorities expressed their satisfaction
with the successful outcome of the high-level side event
on nutrition organized by the Ministry of Finance, with
bilateral and multilateral partners, on the margins
of the spring meetings of the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund in Washington, DC, in
April. With regard to the implementation of Burundi's
national development plan for the period 2018-2027,
the authorities expressed the intention of mobilizing
external resources to complement internal funds
and indicated that preparations were under way for a
substantive dialogue with bilateral and multilateral
partners regarding the development plan.

A field trip to a project supported by the
Peacebuilding Fund, which is jointly implemented
by UN-Women, the International Organization for
Migration and the United Nations Development
Programme, highlighted the important work carried
out by a group of women mediators to mitigate tensions
and resolve conflicts at the community level. The
powerful testimonies shared by the women showed
the importance of supporting mediation efforts with
income-generating activities in order to strengthen
resilience and empower women to take on their role in
the consolidation ofpeace and to participate fully in the
political sphere.

As compared to the previous year, some
improvement was noted with regard to meeting the
immediate and longer-term needs of the population.
However, important funding requirements persist,
including for the humanitarian response plan. A
concern expressed by some interlocutors was the need
to ensure that the implementation of programmes and
projects would not suffer delays as the Administration's
focus turns increasingly to the elections. The important
role of non-governmental organizations in the delivery
of assistance was highlighted, as was the need to enable
them to operate freely, in line with relevant national
legislation and international standards.

I also had an opportunity to follow up with
Government representatives and with the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) on the return of refugees to Burundi from
neighbouring countries. UNHCR is assisting refugees
in Burundi, as well as people who voluntarily repatriate
to Burundi, primarily from Tanzania. Protection and
assistance for refugees and the sustainable reintegration
of internally displaced persons and those who choose
to return remain a core concern. Funding requirements
continue to be acute in those areas.

Based on the experience of my recent visit, my
conclusions and recommendations are as follows.

First, free, fair, inclusive and peaceful elections in
2020, the results of which would enjoy high legitimacy
both domestically and internationally, are crucial to
ensure favourable conditions for lasting peace and
stability, as well as for continued partnership and
cooperation around Burundi's development priorities. I
encourage the Government of Burundi, political parties
and other stakeholders, with the support of the member
States of the subregion and while building on previous
efforts, to create the conditions that support that
outcome. I furthermore encourage the Government of
Burundi and international partners to rapidly identify
what forms of assistance are desirable and feasible with
a view to supporting the preparation and conduct of the
2020 elections.

Secondly, the electoral period should not lead
to a slowdown in the socioeconomic development
of the country. I encourage the Government and its
international partners to pursue a substantive dialogue
on the implementation of the national development plan
and build on the successful partnership that was formed
around the event on nutrition held in Washington, DC.
I also encourage bilateral and multilateral partners and
the Government of Burundi to continue their dialogue
with a view to creating conducive conditions for the
resumption of suspended assistance.

Thirdly, I encourage Member States, United
Nations partners and Burundi to work together to create
a conducive environment for the full realization of all
human rights, including by exploring opportunities for
further engagement and support at all levels.

Fourthly, initiatives to promote reconciliation
and dialogue among all stakeholders, including at
the community level, play a crucial role in reducing
tensions during the electoral period, strengthening
resilience beyond the elections and helping to preserve
the gains achieved through the Arusha Peace and
Reconciliation Agreement. Building on insights gained
from programmes such as the women mediators'
network to support local-level initiatives, in particular
with regard to the empowerment of women and youth,
should be continued and even expanded.

Fifthly, the orderly and voluntary return of
Burundian refugees remains a key issue, which requires
additional funding in order to enable the voluntary
and dignified return of refugees and support their
sustainable reintegration. UNHCR and its partners
engaged in that important effort should be given
adequate resources, accompaniment and support by the
international community.

A written report of my visit has been shared with
the members of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission and discussed at the latest
meeting of the configuration, just two days ago.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the members of
the Security Council for their continuous support to the
configuration and for their interest.

