The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Romania.

The following is meant to be an explanation of
vote after the vote on the draft resolution. In fact, this
is no ordinary resolution. Before anything else it is, I
believe, an act of conscience - of legal, moral and
political conscience. The Security Council made a
powerful statement today. By adopting resolution 1636
(2005), it has helped to put an end to decades of
political assassinations left unsolved or gone
unpunished.

Before explaining my vote, I wish to pay tribute
to the memory of the late Rafik Hariri and express a
pious thought for all those who accompanied him in
death on that bloody 14th day of February, in Beirut.

We have voted in favour of the draft resolution
for four main reasons.

First, truth - the whole truth - has to be found.
We have to stand by Detlev Mehlis and his
Commission and fully back them. They are courageous
enough, they are competent enough, they are resolute
enough, to be the only key that Lebanon, and indeed
the international community, may have for unearthing
the terrible truth about the killing of former Prime
Minister Rafik Hariri.

We did not and could not agree with the argument
that either their work or their report was political. One
cannot inquire into a political assassination without
judicial exposure of its political context. That is, after
all - mutatis mutandis - what is expected from the
International Court of Justice in most, if not all, of the
cases referred to it. After we have asked the
International Independent Investigation Commission
team to perform this gigantic task, they need all our
support to carry it through to the ultimate conclusion.

By the same token, we are supporting the
Lebanese authorities in the discharge of their
responsibilities. Lebanon - I hope members will agree
with me - is a country of extraordinary revival and
that now seems to be true for its judiciary.

Secondly, the resolution seeks to secure - on the
basis of reporting the Council received from the
International Commission - Syria's full and
immediate unconditional cooperation with the Hariri
investigation. It does not demand less; it does not
demand more. Romania would not have agreed with a
resolution that she felt was calling into question the
responsibility for a terrorist act of a country as such,
rather than of its nationals or governmental agents.
Syria expressed its intention to cooperate, which has
not been the case so far. Several concrete steps in that
direction have recently been reported. And we hope
that Syria now seizes the opportunity, and the
obligation, to deliver on its professed good faith.

Thirdly, while respectful of the need to uphold
the presumption of innocence, the resolution lays down
a series of guarantees that those suspected or found
responsible in connection with the terrorist act in
Beirut will be made available to justice or be properly
held accountable.

Fourthly, the Romanian delegation's proposed
amendments on earlier formulations of parts of the
draft resolution and its suggestions for improving the
text have been adequately taken up and reflected in the
resolution just adopted. I wanted to express our special
appreciation to the original sponsors of the draft
resolution for that and, in general, for their overall
conduct of negotiations. The outcome of the Council's
common efforts is a balanced text that reflects the
broadly shared need for a strong, early and credible
reaction to the disturbing findings of the Commission's
report and its far-reaching implications.

Perhaps more important than anything else is for
the Council to emerge united in its consideration of the
complex and unprecedented inquiry into the killing of
the prominent Lebanese statesman, Rafik Hariri. The
Council's unanimous stand today reflects our
endeavours and decisions to support the attainment of
durable peace, stability and prosperity in the Middle
East. It is also testimony of a Security Council that,
more than ever, is tackling the world's crises, tensions
and conflicts and that, more and more, is in a position
to work effectively and deliver credible responses to
them.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Boutros
Assaker, the Acting Secretary-General of the Lebanese
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Emigrants.

