Mr. Regis (Haiti) (spoke in French): Allow me,
first of all, on behalf of the delegation of the Republic of
Haiti, to congratulate Sweden once again for its election
to the Security Council and for taking the initiative to
organize this very important open debate, which is
based on the need to take a new look at peacekeeping,
that privileged tool for crisis management and
conflict prevention.

Today's meeting is taking place within a specific
international context marked by the return of the
dynamic of war as an option for settling conflicts,
and by the threatening spectre of a new arms race,
the sustained expansion of violent extremism and
terrorism and the proliferation of crisis hotbeds where
the Council's authority and its credibility are often put
to the test owing to its inability to provide collective
responses in accordance with its mandate. Those
crises in various parts of the world do not end and
provide a perfect example of the problem. Those crises
underline, as if it were necessary, the appropriateness
of making certain changes to the right of veto, whose
scope should clearly be limited or reduced, particularly
in situations where human rights are being brazenly
violated and where crimes amounting to crimes against
humanity and serious violations of humanitarian law
are being committed.

On another front, over the past few decades
peacekeeping operations have been undergoing genuine
qualitative changes. Many of the intra-State conflicts
that the United Nations is concerned with today occur
against a backdrop of extreme poverty. In most cases,
it is no longer simply a matter of Blue Helmets acting
as an intervention force or monitoring a ceasefire
between the belligerents. These are increasingly
multidimensional operations involved in a whole range
of interrelated actions aimed at facilitating political
processes, establishing or restoring the rule of law and
creating momentum for security, stability and peace.

For its part, my country, where the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) has been
working to stabilize it for almost 13 years, considers the
ongoing review of strategic priorities for peacekeeping
particularly timely. My delegation fully endorses a
number of the key concepts that various United Nations
bodies have put forward in recent years in the context
of conflict prevention and resolution. Those proposals,
which have not lost their relevance in the light of
current challenges, give the most weight to solutions
that take into account the root causes of conflicts and
their underlying structural factors. In that regard, I
would like to make four points.

First, we consider it crucial to ensure that the
Security Council takes the lessons of the recent past
on board by fully reclaiming the mission entrusted to
it by the Charter of the United Nations, with a view
to providing strong responses to the string of current
threats to peace and security. Secondly, we cannot
stress the virtues and advantages of conflict prevention
enough. Thirdly, when considering the spectrum of the
factors that often lead inexorably to war, whether civil,
local or regional, we must not underestimate or obscure
the underlying causes of conflict - economic poverty,
social injustice, political oppression, marginalization
and exclusion. Lastly, we should emphasize that, in
every aspect ofits conflict-prevention and peacekeeping
activities, the United Nations should never shirk its
responsibilities to the peoples it is called on to protect,
including in cases of moral and material prejudice
of which it is itself the cause and in the name of the
respect for human rights standards that it is its essential
mission to promote.

In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to briefly sketch the most recent developments in Haiti,
which I know the Council has been monitoring and is
keenly interested in. On 3 January, Haiti's Provisional
Electoral Council confirmed the election of Mr. J ovenel
Moise as our new Head of State, after a vote that will
undoubtedly become a historic marker. On behalf
of my delegation, I would like to pay tribute to the
United Nations for its support, particularly through
MINUSTAH, which made an enormous contribution to
the result. Of course, we know that elections are not an
end in themselves. But the success of the municipal,
legislative and presidential contests will unquestionably
make it possible for us to turn the page on the political
instability that has so heavily mortgaged my country's
chances of socioeconomic development.

At a time when we are embarking upon a new
course, away from the path of internal struggles and
conflicts that have done nothing but hold back our social
and economic modernization, one need hardly stress
how important strengthening international solidarity is
for us. Haiti continues to rely on the support of every
component of the United Nations to enable it to continue
with its reconstruction process and make steady progress
along the road to democracy and the rule of law, which
is the only possible path to a stable, peaceful political
system and towards growth and poverty reduction - in
other words, sustainable development.

