Mr. Rogachev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): 1 would like to thank the leadership of both
Tribunals for their briefings and for the reports on the
completion strategies of the two Tribunals submitted to
the Security Council under resolution 1534 (2004)
(S/2008/726 and S/2008/729).

This meeting is being held just before the
beginning of a new year - 2009 - when, under
resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004), the Tribunals
are supposed to complete consideration of cases at the
first instance. Unfortunately, that expectation is simply
not realistic. The time frames for completion forecast
by the Tribunals are constantly shifting. The report of
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
(S/2008/726) sometimes gives some kind of
justification or explanation of the situation, but in the
case of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) report (S/2008/729), by no
means all of the aspects of that matter are commented
on.

One key element for carrying out the completion
strategy is the transfer of cases by the ICTY and the
ICTR to national judicial organs. We welcome the
efforts being made in that area by the ICTR. Although
the Tribunal has taken a number of decisions declining
to transfer arrested persons, citing the inadequacy of
legislation in Rwanda, we feel that the possibilities
there are far from being exhausted. The Tribunal could
be invited to work more actively with the Rwandan
authorities to improve their national legislation, so that
transfer of accused persons to the Rwandan judiciary
could become a reality. Moreover, the possibility of
transferring cases to third countries that might be ready
and able to hold trials of accused persons should not be
excluded.

It is the understanding of my delegation that the
ICTY has suspended, for the time being, the transfer of
accused persons to national jurisdictions. One
important element of the work of the Tribunals is that
there be a high level of cooperation with States of the
former Yugoslavia and Rwanda. We have noted the
references in the ICTY report to Serbia on that matter,
which show clearly how seriously Serbia takes the
matter of its cooperation with the Tribunal. This
involves providing access to documents, seeking
accused persons and protecting witnesses. In that
connection, we feel that the relevant sections of the
ICTY report might have been worded in a more
positive tone.

In conclusion, I will just comment on the matter
of the establishment of an international mechanism to
carry out residual functions of the ICTY and ICTR. We
hope that the Council will soon be able to reach
agreement on a document setting forth the key
parameters for such a mechanism, namely, that it be
small, financially efficient and temporary.

In that connection, my delegation thinks that it is
important that the Security Council be more actively
involved in the implementation of the completion
strategy. It would seem that, without the assistance of
the Security Council, the Tribunals will find it difficult
to complete their work within realistic time frames. In
any event, it would seem time for the Security Council
to shoulder the full responsibility it assumed in
connection with the establishment and the functioning
of the two Tribunals.

