President Tadic' (spoke in Serbian; English interpretation provided by the delegation): thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting of the
Security Council. Once again, we are gathered to
discuss troubling developments in Serbia's southern
province of Kosovo and Metohija, which have been
caused by the unilateral declaration of independence by
its Provisional Institutions of Self-Government, which
took place on 17 February of this year.

It is the position of the Republic of Serbia that
the unilateral declaration of independence directly
contravenes the Charter of the United Nations, the
Helsinki Final Act and other cornerstone documents
upon which the international system has been built.
Equally important is the fact that resolution 1244
(1999) clearly places a binding Chapter VII obligation
on all Member States to respect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of my country.

A great majority of this Organization's 192
Member States have continued to abide by those
principles and obligations. On behalf of the Republic
of Serbia, allow me to express my profound
appreciation to them for their commitment to the rule
of international law and to state clearly my country's
continued dedication to those same principles.

There is a minority that has, unfortunately,
chosen to support the attempt at secession by the
Kosovo Albanians. That has put at risk the
consolidation of peace and stability in the Western
Balkans has and set back more than a decade of hard
work by this Council. It has also created an
environment in which the international system as a
whole is becoming more unstable, more insecure and
more unpredictable. The potential damage to the
founding principles of this Organization is becoming
more apparent, as is the awareness that the legacy that
the United Nations will pass on to the future
generations will be tarnished.

The Republic of Serbia, for its part, has taken a
position entirely consistent with the fact that we were a
co-founder of this Organization in 1945 - one that
takes seriously international law and its aim of
promoting peaceful, just and consensual resolutions of
disputes. That is why our National Assembly has
declared the unilateral declaration of independence and
all subsequent decisions stemming from it to be null
and void, and that is why we have ruled out the use of
force, while affirming our right to employ all
diplomatic and political means to ensure that a
so-called independent Kosovo does not join the world
community of sovereign States.

I want to be very clear. Serbia will never
recognize the independence of Kosovo. We will
continue to work towards finding a legal way forward
that seeks to bridge differences and to find a
compromise solution to the long-standing conflict
between Serbs and Albanians.

It is in that context that I turn to a consideration
of the report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) (S/2008/354)
submitted to this Council and to the letter that I
received from him dated 12 June 2008. The report
refers to the emergence of a "new reality" (paras. 7 and 10) in Kosovo as a result of the unilateral
declaration of independence. It also refers to the recent
passage, by the provisional Assembly of our province
of Kosovo, of a so-called constitution intended to
implement the Ahtisaari proposal, which has not
received the endorsement of this Council and therefore
carries no legal weight whatsoever.

The report states that "the constitution is
designed in such a way that it would effectively
remove from UNMIK its current powers as an interim
civil administration" (para. 7). That usurpation by the
authorities in Pristina of the mandate this Council gave
to UNMIK is deeply troubling. Equally worrisome is
the fact that the report gives an impression of
acquiescing to an unjustifiable violation of resolution
1244 (1999).

I am led to conclude that the report is an
acknowledgment that an influential and determined
minority can set aside considerations of international
law in the name of appeasing an ethnic group that has
been threatening violence if its demands are not met.
That must not be the way forward. International peace
and security can only be consolidated through
dialogue, not imposition; through agreement, not
compulsion; and through law, not threats.

Since the unilateral declaration of independence,
the human rights record in our southern province has
not improved. Internally displaced persons have not
returned. Jobs have not been created. Destroyed homes
belonging to Serbs have not been rebuilt. Serbian
private property has not been returned. Organized
crime has not been reduced. Our cultural heritage has
not become more secure. In fact, since the unilateral
declaration of independence, things have gotten worse.
The uncomfortable yet incontrovertible truth is that the
"new reality" to which the report refers has caused a
further deterioration in the already unstable situation
on the ground.
I will provide an example. The Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Joachim

Riicker, finally agreed a few weeks ago to issue an
executive decision restoring illegally seized land to its
rightful owners: the thirteenth century Serbian
Orthodox Decani monastery - a UNESCO World
Heritage site. The unfortunate result has been the
refusal of the municipal authorities of the town of
Decani to restore the cadastral record as required by
the executive order, which was issued under the
authority of resolution 1244 (1999). United Nations
officials in Decani have been assaulted after having
been declared to be personae non gratae.

This illustration of the callous disregard for the
rule of law and the United Nations standards that we
face throughout the province is implicitly taken up in
the report through its assessment that "UNMIK will no
longer be able to perform effectively the vast majority
of its tasks as an interim administration" (S/2008/354, para. 1 7). This can only lead us to the conclusion that
the United Nations mission has not been accomplished.
In other words, its mandate has not been fulfilled and
its task has not been completed. Under those
circumstances, the United Nations cannot, and must
not, walk away.

It is therefore the position of the Republic of
Serbia that the course of action proposed in the report
cannot give rise to a process that leads to a
compromise solution on the future status of our
southern province. That is why the Republic of Serbia
cannot endorse the Secretary-General's report. Until
the process envisaged in resolution 1244 (1999) to
determine Kosovo's future status is complete, the
international community, led by the United Nations,
has to retain its central role in the maintenance of
peace and stability in Kosovo.

"Reconfiguration", to which both the report and
the Secretary-General's letter to me refer, must be
decided by the Security Council, which is the only
institution endowed with the power to legitimate
changes in the composition of the international
presence in Kosovo, as paragraphs 5 and 19 of
resolution 1244 (1999) make abundantly clear.

In addition, we agree that the six topics
mentioned in both documents - police, judiciary,
customs, transportation and infrastructure, boundaries,
and patrimony - require pressing attention. Every day
that goes by without working towards some sort of
agreement on these and other issues raises the
likelihood of the creation of unsustainable hopes and
dangerous, uncoordinated outcomes on the ground. My
country is therefore prepared to continue engaging in
dialogue with the United Nations in order to arrive at a
satisfactory agreement.

Finally, I am concerned that an implicit shift in
position by NATO took place in Brussels a few days
ago during NATO's most recent ministerial meeting.
While reaffirming its status neutrality and adherence to
resolution 1244 (1999), it also announced that KFOR
would undertake what it called "new tasks". I refer
more specifically to NATO's intent to supervise the
standing down of the Kosovo Protection Corps and to
supervise and support the establishment and training of
the so-called Kosovo Security Force, a new institution
whose establishment has not been approved by the
Security Council. This places it clearly beyond the
scope of resolution 1244 (1999).

Accordingly, I must express my country's
apprehension at the possibility that parts of the
international community presence in Kosovo have
chosen to participate in the formation and training of a
quasi-military force. Such a wrong step would call into
question the trust that KF OR has worked hard to attain
among all the communities of our southern province,
especially the Kosovo Serbs.

I would like to raise another issue with this
Council. This concerns what was perhaps the final
negligent act by the outgoing Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Joachim Riicker. Just a few
days ago, he issued an executive decision that initiated
a process by which funds totalling more than €426
million could be illegitimately transferred to the
authorities in Pristina.

I want to make it abundantly clear that these
funds, held in escrow by the United Nations to offset
future claims by workers, mostly Kosovo Serbs, who
have been laid off and Serbian companies as a result of
the questionable privatization process undertaken by
the Kosovo Trust Agency, are not the property of the
authorities in Pristina. The United Nations must
immediately take all appropriate measures to ensure
that these funds remain in its possession and guarantee
they continue to be available for their intended
purpose. We must work together to produce a solution
to this serious issue in the very near future.
I now draw attention to the fact that the Republic
of Serbia held parliamentary elections on 11 May. I
have a constitutional duty to guide the process of the

formation of the Government, which will be united in
pursuing the policy of defending the integrity of our
country and will implement the clear commitment of
the citizens of Serbia to move decisively forward to
full membership in the European Union. It will also
have the duty to complete the process of full
cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the former Yugoslavia at The Hague in the
conviction that a stable and secure future for the entire
Western Balkans lies in the European Union. The time
has passed for us to be part of the problem of the
Balkans: we want to be part of the solution.

I would like to stress the importance of finding a
legal way forward on Kosovo, acceptable to all
stakeholders and approved by the Security Council.
Only such an approach can produce a sustainable
outcome that will enable us fully to construct and
integrate, and so to grasp the infinite opportunities that
the Europe of the twenty-first century offers to all
visionary crafters of a more prosperous tomorrow.

That is why I see Europe as the key to Serbia's
future success. I draw strength for this fundamental
conviction from the solemn words of the preamble of
the Treaty of Rome: "pooling their resources to
preserve and strengthen peace and liberty". That is the
kind of Europe to which we are committed, and to
which we - and the entire Western Balkans - will
belong very soon.

Let there be no more divisions, no more discord
and no more conflict. The time to strengthen peace and
economic development is now.

