Mr. Giacomelli da Silva (Brazil): I wish to thank
Sweden for having convened this important debate and
the briefers for their presentations.

Brazil associates itself with the statement made by
the representative of Argentina on behalf of the Group
of Friends of the Safe Schools Declaration.

This year's report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict (S/2018/465) is especially
alarming, since it points to a large increase in the
number of verified violations. Brazil resolutely
condemns these violations and reiterates that all parties
must protect children and other civilians, in line with
their obligations under international humanitarian law.
Both children of war and child soldiers are vulnerable
groups and as such need to receive special protection.

Brazil also reiterates its concern at reports of the
detention of children on national security grounds
during armed conflicts. Apart from raising legal and
moral issues, these measures are counterproductive, as
they envisage children allegedly associated with armed
groups as security threats rather than as victims.

The violations were reported mainly in situations
on the agenda of the Security Council, which has an
important role to play in this regard, especially by
taking into account child-protection concerns in the
consideration of peace processes and peacekeeping
mandates. Achieving sustainable peace requires
strong support for political negotiations and preventive
diplomacy. In our view, prevention is always crucial.

Based on our experience in supporting initiatives
on the ground, allow me to very briefly elaborate on the
importance of programmes aimed at the rehabilitation
and reintegration of former child soldiers and some of
the related challenges.

Brazil has been promoting the practice of
capoeira, an Afro-Brazilian martial art, as a tool for
the reintegration of former child soldiers in Haiti and
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Because
many of those children had been separated from
their families and original communities from a very
early age, reintegration requires supporting them in
rebuilding their sense of identity and finding a place in
a peaceful social environment. It is also crucial to treat
all children primarily as victims of armed conflict and
prevent stigmatization by hosting communities.

There are many grass-roots initiatives similar to
this one that are of paramount importance to avoid
re-recruitment and to rescue children from the grip of
conflict. Such initiatives could be replicated.

In concluding, let me say that today's debate is
very timely and relevant. We recommend that it not
remain limited to the Security Council, since structural
prevention is a cross-cutting endeavour that requires
contributions from all pillars of the United Nations.
The Peacebuilding Commission, given its coordination
mandate and unique composition, is especially well
positioned to host discussions and contribute to
this debate.

