Mr. Oshima (Japan): Mr. President, my
delegation thanks you for the initiative you have taken
to convene this important and timely meeting to wrap
up your presidency, and I wish at the same time to
congratulate you on your effective handling of the
business of the Council during the current month.

Issues related to Africa continue, unfortunately,
to be a major preoccupation of the Security Council, as
demonstrated, for example, by the fact that an
overwhelming majority of United Nations
peacekeepers and related financial resources are
dedicated to Africa. And the work of the Council this
month has been no exception. It is therefore important
that we focus our attention at this meeting on how the
Council can effectively and efficiently address issues
related to Africa, bearing in mind both the regional
perspective and the aspects of specific conflicts and
situations. I would like to make a couple of brief points
in that regard.

First, we have said that the notion of African
ownership should be emphasized and supported as an
important guiding principle in addressing many Africa-
related issues that the Council is called upon to deal
with. We are encouraged that African ownership is
increasingly accepted by Africans themselves and
supported by the international community. It is
increasingly finding its clear and robust expression in,
for example, the important roles played by African
regional and subregional organizations.

That has clearly become the trend in a number of
conflict resolution and post-conflict peacebuilding
situations, as shown by initiatives of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development in the
north-south peace negotiations in the Sudan, by the
African Union mission in Darfur, by the African Union
engagement - in particular through President Mbeki's
mediation effort - in Cote d'Ivoire, by the effort of
the Economic Community of West African States with
regard to the situation in Togo, and so on.

That is very welcome, and not only must it be
encouraged, but also, where support is needed, such
support - moral and political as well as financial and
material - should be extended as much as possible by
the international community. At the same time, ways
should be found to develop closer pragmatic working
relationships and institutional linkages between the
United Nations and key African regional organizations,
in particular the African Union.

In that regard, resolution 1590 (2005) regarding
the Sudan, adopted last week, is the latest good
example. That resolution requires the Secretary-
General to report on how the United Nations Mission
in the Sudan can, through appropriate assistance to the
African Union Mission, reinforce the efforts to foster
peace in Darfur. We look forward to the Secretary-
General's report with great interest and stand ready to
actively discuss the matter in the Security Council in
the weeks to come.

Furthermore, we understand that the African
Union is exploring the possibility of sending troops to
contribute to the peace processes both in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Somalia -
which, if it materializes, will be another initiative that
reinforces the African sense of ownership. We hope
that the Council and the African Union will further
enhance their cooperation and coordination in that
regard so that the African Union will be able to play
greater roles in addressing the problems that Africa
faces, with, when required, the necessary assistance
from the international community.

The second point I wanted to make is that there is
a need to promote inter-mission synergies and
cooperation among the various United Nations
missions deployed in Africa. We note with interest that
cooperation and linkages are being developed among
various peacekeeping operations that have in recent
years been deployed in the same subregion of Africa,
as, for example, in coordinated patrols between the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and the
United Nations Operation in Burundi (ONUB) along
the borders and in periodic high-level talks between
those two missions aimed at addressing their common
problems. In West Africa, several United Nations
missions deployed in that subregion have initiated the
practice of sharing logistical assets and materials
through their inter-mission coordination mechanism.

Such inter-mission linkages in Africa should be
further strengthened, and we hope that a systematic
review of the operational concepts of the various peace
missions deployed in the subregion will be conducted.
My delegation referred to that suggestion at the open
meeting held earlier this week to discuss the situation
in Cote d'Ivoire (see S/PV.5152). Similar inter-mission
linkages could also be explored in, for example, Sierra
Leone, through an arrangement that will allow forces
of the United Nations Mission in Liberia to be made
deployable across the western border of Liberia to
provide a security stopgap measure that the withdrawal
of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone may
require in the coming months. With greater integration
and inter-mission synergies, flexible and more effective
use of the operational assets and resources of various
deployed missions will become possible, to the
advantage of all - and also possibly to save on
mission costs.

The ideas suggested in the report of the
Secretary-General of 2 March 2005 on inter-mission
cooperation in West Africa (S/2005/135) should also be
explored with regard to the missions operating in other
subregions, such as MONUC, in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and ONUB, in Burundi. We
encourage the Secretariat to explore such a possibility
with the cooperation of the countries contributing
troops to those missions.

