The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Iraq, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Hoshyar Zebari,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq, and invite him to
take a seat at the Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Zebari
(Iraq) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 8/2008/805, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of
America.

I wish to draw attention to document S/2008/783,
which contains a letter dated 12 December 2008 from
the Secretary-General, addressed to the President of the
Security Council.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
2

In favour:
Belgium, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, France, Indonesia, Italy, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Panama, Russian Federation, South
Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Viet
Nam


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1859 (2008).

I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Hoshyar Zebari, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Iraq.


