Sir David Hannay (United Kingdom): May I
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of your office
and thank the Ambassador of Rwanda for the work he did
in December. May I also welcome the new members who
joined the Council on 1 January.

The economic sanctions imposed by this Council on
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY) and the Bosnian
Serbs in successive resolutions have undoubtedly been a
major factor in the recent progress towards creating the
necessary conditions for ending the chaos in the former
Yugoslavia. Their impact on the FRY economy was
largely responsible for Belgrade's decision last August to
break with the Bosnian Serbs and to support
unconditionally the Contact Group peace plan for Bosnia.
The FRY authorities' decision to reinforce this change in
their policy by accepting an international presence on
their border with Bosnia was welcome and significant.
The Co-Chairmen of the International Conference on the
Former Yugoslavia (ICFY), the Mission Coordinator,
Mr. Pellnas, and all the members of the Mission deserve
our praise for their work, often under difficult conditions
and involving long hours. We call on Member States to
make the resources available so as further to strengthen
the Mission's work in the months ahead.

It was in recognition of the significance of the FRY
authorities' decision and the importance of the break
between Belgrade and Pale that the Council adopted two
resolutions last September. Resolution 942 (1994)
extended and tightened sanctions against the Bosnian
Serbs, and resolution 943 (1994) allowed for the limited
suspension of sanctions against the FRY, provided that
the ICFY Co-Chairmen continued to certify that the FRY
was complying with the terms of its original decision to
close its border with Bosnia. The Co-Chairrnen have now
submitted four reports, all of which have certified that the
FRY authorities are fulfilling their commitments. There
have, of course, been instances of leakage. But our
observation has been that the FRY authorities have
reacted quickly and taken the necessary steps whenever
reported violations have been brought to their attention by
the ICFY Mission. We welcome the action that they have
taken to maintain the effective closure of that border. It
is essential that this cooperation be continued and
intensified if the suspension of sanctions is to be
sustained.

The resolution which the Council has just adopted,
and of which my country was a sponsor, represents a
reasonable and balanced response to the cooperation from
Belgrade over the past hundred days. The resolution
allows for a further hundred days' suspension of the
various measures set out in resolution 943 (1994). It seeks
to remove any ambiguity about the application of
resolution 820 (1993) concerning transshipments across
the FRY-Bosnian border. And it directs the sanctions
Committee to give a clear priority to applications for
humanitarian assistance to the FRY.

Sanctions are imposed to achieve changes in policy,
not to punish. They reinforce the strategy pursued by the
Contact Group, of which my country is a member, to

 

increase the pressure on the Bosnian Serbs to return to the
negotiating table. It is essential that Belgrade continue to
support the Contact Group approach, to maintain the
embargo on the Bosnian Serbs and to keep up pressure on
the Krajina Serbs to cease violations of the Croatian-
Bosnian border and to implement the economic agreement
in Croatia. As we have said before, further sanctions relief
is possible, but only if further substantial progress is made
towards the objective of the achievement of a lasting
political settlement in the former Yugoslavia.

