Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
you, Mr. President, for being here today among us and
for your thoughts on the topic that we are addressing
here today. I also wish to thank the Secretary-General,
as well as Ms. Beerli, Mr. Turk and Mr. Waslekar, for
their in-depth and provocative briefings.

Uruguay is taking part in this debate, bearing
in mind the very appropriate treatment of the topic
of water in the setting of the General Assembly. It
is worth noting that General Assembly resolution
64/292 explicitly recognizes the human right to water
and sanitation, essential for the full enjoyment of life
and all human rights. General Assembly resolutions
68/157 and 70/169, have dealt with that resource, as did
Millennium Development Goal 7 in its target 7.C, which
called for reducing by half "the proportion of persons
without sustainable access to safe drinking water and
basic sanitation", and now Sustainable Development
Goal 6, entitled "Ensure availability and sustainable
management of water and sanitation for all".

In reality, the current armed confrontations
originate in complex and multiple political, economic
and social threats. Although we recognize that the
struggle for natural resources constitutes one of the
primary aggravating factors in armed conflicts, it
cannot be considered to be the sole cause. The need to
preserve water supply systems and sanitation services
in conflict zones is vital, because, to some extent, that
reduces the effect of the plague of war on the civilian
population. Uruguay would like to express its absolute
repugnance at the use of water as a weapon of war,
without exceptions, and it defends the human right to
water, indispensable for the life, health and dignity
of persons, and therefore Uruguay has enshrined it in
its Constitution.

We are concerned that, well into the twenty-first
century, more than 700 million people lack suitable
access to potable drinking water. That requires
profound reflection and action. For that reason, Uruguay
welcomes the fact that, in the context of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, the international
community has undertaken the commitment under Goal
6 to ensure the availability of water and its sustainable
management and sanitation for all. Uruguay firmly
believes in cooperation and policies focused on human
rights as the effective means for fighting scourges such
as water scarcity, poverty and climate change.

At the regional level, Uruguay, Brazil, Paraguay
and Argentina have signed an agreement on the
Guarani aquifer, one of the largest underwater
reservoirs in the world. The agreement enshrines the
principles of sovereignty, environmental responsibility
and the use of resources in a manner based on rational
and sustainable criteria. Cooperation among States is
vital in order to achieve more efficient management
of water resources and to detect possible elements
of friction. By way of example, Uruguay has made
significant efforts in order to increase its cooperation
in that area. In that regard, following the ruling of the
International Court of Justice, Uruguay and Argentina
have managed to establish an integrated mechanism for
the environmental monitoring of water in the Uruguay
River basin, which will strengthen the sustainable
development capacities of both countries.

In the case of Haiti, where cholera poses a serious
threat to health, the improvement of water systems is
a priority. In that regard, Uruguay has contributed to
Haiti not just through the presence of its troops as part
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
but also through the provision of water-treatment units
aimed at improving living conditions for the civilian
population.

Only through long-term solutions related to
capacity-building, investment in infrastructure and the
sustainable management of water resources through
international cooperation can the challenges of making
water accessible to all be overcome. Access to water is
a human right, but given its vital importance, it is also
part ofthe world's natural heritage, creating tangible and
intangible assets and generating civilization and peace.
To fight over water would be a lamentable contradiction.

