Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the initiative of the United States to convene
this meeting. We thank Secretary-General Guterres
for his briefing and for his nine reform points. China
supports the Secretary-General's important efforts to
enhance United Nations peacekeeping operations.

In the 70 years since their establishment, United
Nations peacekeeping operations have played an
important role in the maintenance of international
peace and security. Given the profound changes in the
international situation and the increasing complexity
of peacekeeping environments and missions, the
effective implementation of peacekeeping operations is
facing grave challenges. The international community
has high expectations for improving United Nations
peacekeeping operations, and in this respect I wish to
share the following observations.

First, it is key to abide by the basic principles of
peacekeeping operations and handle relations with the
host country appropriately. The purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and the principles
of the consent of the parties, impartiality and the
non-use of force except in self-defence or defence of the
mandate, otherwise known as the three peacekeeping
principles, form the cornerstone of peacekeeping
operations and retain an irreplaceable guiding role in
the new context.

In carrying out peacekeeping operations, it is
important to fully respect the sovereignty of the host
country and value its views, assist it in enhancing its
security capacity-building, and engage in beneficial
interaction with it.

When a host country requests it and the situation
allows for the exit of a peacekeeping operation, the
Security Council should guide the Secretariat in
establishing a clear exit timetable, so as to avoid
an indefinite stay on the part of the peacekeeping
operation in the host country. Peacekeeping operations
must adapt to changing dynamics and adjust their size
as appropriate, so as to optimize peacekeeping resource
flows and provide tangible assistance to countries with
more pressing needs.

Secondly, peacekeeping operations must have clear,
actionable and focused mandates. Such operations
revolve around the core tasks of conflict resolution and
sustaining peace. It is important to plan the mandates
ofpeacekeeping missions with full consideration given
to the actual needs of the host country, the security
environment on the ground and the capacity of the troop-
contributing countries (TCCs), as well as other factors,
while adapting its priorities to changing situations at
every stage of the mission.

The Secretariat must proceed from the overall
perspective and in the long-term interest of maintaining
international peace and security, take effective measures
to improve the command system for peacekeeping
operations, enhance missions' work by improving their
efficiency and efficacy and strengthen their ability to
respond to complexities so that they can better perform
the duties entrusted to them by the Charter of the
United Nations.

Thirdly, enhanced communication and coordination
with the TCCs is necessary, as they are the main
players in peacekeeping operations and have made
major contributions and sacrifices to such operations.
Peacekeepers from the TCCs have been performing
their duties on the front lines and are best informed
as to the challenges and difficulties facing them in the
fulfilment of their tasks.

The Security Council should enhance communication
with TCCs and receive in-depth knowledge of the
progress made by peacekeeping operations, the situation
in the host country and the difficulties facing TCCs. It
must fully respect the views of TCCs and take active
measures to enhance the security of peacekeepers and
strengthen early-warning capacities with respect to
potential security threats, as well as provide enough
logistical support to ensure that security and medical
equipment, supplies and measures are available.

Nine ofthe 16 UnitedNations peacekeeping missions
are located in Africa. Twelve of the largest-contributing
TCCs are African countries. Enhancing communication
and coordination with African countries in the field
of peacekeeping and increasing assistance to African
countries are imperative in order to effectively improve
peacekeeping operations. In recent years, the African
Union has been actively committed to enhancing the
joint self-reliance ofAfrican countries and has achieved
considerable success in self-reliant peacekeeping
efforts. China has always supported Africa in resolving
African issues in an African way. China has always
supported the African Union and other regional and
subregional organizations in their efforts to play active
roles in the resolution of regional issues.

China supports the United Nations in tfurther
expanding and deepening its cooperation with the
African Union in the area of peace and security, while
listening carefully to the views and concerns ofAfrican
countries on peacekeeping and actively supporting
Africa's peacekeeping capacity-building.

Over the years, African Union-led peacekeeping
operations have played a crucial roles. The United
Nations should increase its political support to them,
provide greater assistance in the areas of staff training,
logistical assistance and financial support and give
positive consideration to setting up a sustained and
stable funding mechanism.

As the biggest TCC among the five permanent
members of the Security Council and the second-
largest contributor in terms of assessed contributions
to United Nations peacekeeping, China has made an
important contribution to the cause of United Nations
peacekeeping. China is implementing across the board
all ofthe commitments announced by Chinese leaders to
further support United Nations peacekeeping operations
by actively building up a stand-by peacekeeping force,
vigorously advancing the dispatch of helicopters and
providing training to peacekeepers from around the
world, African countries in particular. China will
work to facilitate the China-United Nations peace and
development fund's ability to take more concrete action
for developing countries, especially African countries,
and help Africa to enhance its peacekeeping capacity-
building.

China is ready to work together with the
broader United Nations membership and make a
greater contribution to further improving United
Nations peacekeeping operations and better maintain
international peace and security.

