Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The acceding
country Croatia; the candidate countries the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Iceland
and Serbia; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; the European Free Trade Association
country Norway, member of the European Economic
Area; as well as Ukraine and Armenia, align themselves
with this statement.

Like others, I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2012/462) and Under-Secretary-General Ladsous
for his important briefing. I also thank the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and Ambassador Tanin for their statements.

It is important that the international community
take a holistic view of its post-2014 engagement in
Afghanistan, given the correlation between security
and long-term development. The recent conferences
held in Chicago and Kabul have been instrumental in
that regard. They have refined and further developed
the relationship between the international community
and the Afghan Government. In the same vein, the
upcoming Tokyo conference should focus on reviewing
and renewing mutual commitments by the international
community and the Afghan Government. I will briefly
touch on the topics addressed at both conferences and
then look ahead to Tokyo.

The NATO Summit in Chicago laid out plans for
sustaining and developing the Afghan National Security
Forces. At that Summit, the European Union stressed the
importance ofthe Afghan National Police refocusing on
civilian policing and on supporting the rule of law. Fair
and impartial policing is essential ifjustice and human
rights, especially those of women and children, are to
be promoted. We therefore announce that the European
Union is happy to increase its police funding by 20 per
cent from the EU budget over the period 2011-2013, and
also that the EU plans to make an enhanced contribution
post-2014.

The recent ministerial conference in Kabul
highlighted the important role that the countries of
the region must play in supporting conflict resolution,
better security and development in Afghanistan. We
therefore welcome the agreement reached in Kabul
on confidence-building measures to further regional
cooperation.

Acknowledging that regional initiatives must be
regionally owned and led, the EU stands ready to support
such measures. The European Union has considerable
experience and knowledge on how to advance regional
cooperation.

The upcoming Tokyo conference will provide an
excellent opportunity for the Afghan Government
to set out its development strategy for the country.
The European Union is ready to make an enhanced
contribution to support for Afghanistan. However,
that must be in the context of the Afghan Government
fulfilling the commitments of the Kabul and Bonn
conferences, as well as those in the mutual accountability
framework, to be agreed in Tokyo.

Inter alia, that means, first of all, the peaceful transfer
of power in 2014 as a result of inclusive, credible and
transparent presidential and parliamentary elections.
Secondly, further progress on the management of public
finances - in particular the implementation of the
International Monetary Fund recommendations - is
required. Thirdly, domestic revenue collection needs
to be increased through the development of more
efficient, transparent and accountable customs and
tax systems. Fourthly, guaranteed respect for human
rights, in particular of women and children, including
the support of an independent and active civil society,
must be ensured. Fifthly, there must be reform of the
justice sector to promote the rule of law.

Without tangible progress in those five areas, it will
be difficult for donors to maintain their support to the
Government of Afghanistan. Donors also need to make
good on their commitments. The European Union will
press for a better coordination of donor support and a
better alignment between the Afghan Government and
donors on priorities. We will also actively promote a
better use ofinternational mechanisms, all, of course, in
close coordination with the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).

Finally, it is essential that all resources made
available be transparently and accountably managed.
With regard to the latter, we are pleased to note that
the United Nations Development Programme reacted
promptly to the alleged accusations of mismanagement
at the Law and Order Trust Fund by launching a
full investigation. We await the conclusions of that
investigation, the outcome of which will be important
as regards our envisaged financial support for the
Afghan National Police. Let me underline that that is
an issue that we take very seriously.

In conclusion, the outcomes of the conferences will
structure the international long-term engagement in
Afghanistan beyond the end of the transition through
the transformation decade, as agreed to in Bonn
last year. As we move beyond transition, the United
Nations has an essential role to play. UNAMA should
have the resources and the political support needed to
assume that role. Its work will be of key importance in
supporting the preparations for the upcoming elections,
in monitoring the human rights and humanitarian
situation, and in making such coordination bodies as
the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board work
more effectively.

The aim of our overall strategy in Afghanistan
remains clear: to support Afghanistan on its path
towards becoming a more peaceful, democratic and
prosperous society.

