A few days ago, the Security Council virtually celebrated the seventy-fifth anniversary of the victory over nazism and fascism in the Second World War. The victors, including us, pledged to make concerted efforts to maintain international peace and security and to spare humankind from the ravages of war, which twice brought about scourges that were more horrifying than the black plague that invaded Europe and the world in medieval times. That led to the birth of the United Nations, whose Charter enshrines the international legal framework and fundamental principles of the structure of international relations, manifested in respect for the sovereignty and sovereign equality of Member States and refraining from interfering in their internal affairs and from threatening or using force. Today, 75 years after the collapse of the ideologies of extremist regimes that set a precedent for the emergence of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, Al-Qaida and the Al-Nusra Front in our region - regimes that were based on acts of aggression, hegemonic ambitions, discriminatory practices and hatred - we are witnessing the systematic violation of the fundamental principles of international law and the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations by the Governments of some Western States, which were supposed to have experienced the two World Wars and realized their impacts, and were therefore entrusted with the maintenance of international peace and security. However, those very same Governments have systematically violated the basic principles of international law and the provisions of the Charter and sought to undermine the choices of the peoples of Member States through acts of military invasion, armed aggression, investment in terrorism and economic and financial coercion. These practices are a consecration of the law of power and the law of the jungle rather, than the power of law and the power of justice. Moreover, we express our concern, condemnation and disapproval of the distortion of facts about the Second World War voiced by two permanent members of the Security Council, which deny the more than 27 million martyrs whom the Soviet Union and its successor, the Russian Federation, lost in the war against nazism. Whoever has the audacity to do that will not find it difficult to distort the facts about Syria's struggle and that of its people, army and leadership against terrorism. For its part, my country, Syria, still believes in the purposes and principles of the United Nations, to which it was a signatory in San Francisco, alongside the other founding Member States. Today, and every day, Syria is committed to maintaining its sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity, as emphasized in the relevant Council resolutions. The Turkish regime continues to violate its obligations under international law, the Adana agreement and the Sochi, Astana and Moscow understandings, as well as Security Council resolutions, especially those related to combating terrorism. That regime persists in providing multifaceted support and sponsorship to its affiliated terrorist groups operating in different parts of northern Syria. Those terrorist groups have taken advantage of the period of calm following the Moscow agreement and the global preoccupation with efforts to confront the coronavirus disease pandemic to reorganize their forces and increase their armaments in preparation for committing more terrorist crimes. The latest such crime was when the terrorist groups affiliated with Huras Al-Din and the Turkestan Islamic Party - as it is clear that these terrorist organizations do not even have Arabic names, but rather names associated with the Ottoman era and their Turkish operator - attacked one of the military points in the village of Tanjara, near Al-Ghab region in the north-west, and targeted it with a barrage of mortar shells and machine-gun fire, which led to a number of martyrs and wounded soldiers. Likewise, the terrorists of the Turkish-backed Turkestan Islamic Party destroyed the tower of the Zeyzoun power plant, in the Idlib countryside, after they had looted the equipment of the station, in cooperation with Turkish technicians, and transported it into Turkish territory through the crossings that some in the United Nations promote as so-called humanitarian. In addition to that, the Turkish regime violated the Constitution and Convention of the International Telecommunication Union by installing a number of cellular communications stations inside Syrian territory and providing Internet coverage and cellular communications, particularly to terrorist organizations, in northern Syria through a Turkish Internet service provider called HATNet and a Turkish telecommunications company called e-LUX. Furthermore, the cutting off of water from the Allouk station, which is controlled by the Turkish occupying forces and their affiliated terrorist groups, and the denial of drinking water to the more than | million citizens of Al-Hasakah and its vicinity are a war crime and a crime against humanity. We are saddened by the fact that those who claim to stand up for the right of Syrians to regain their security and daily livelihood, be they Western countries, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs or the specialized agencies of the United Nations, have not said a word to condemn these inhumane practices. On the other hand, the American occupation forces have begun to establish a new military base in the countryside of Deir ez-Zor governorate, in north-eastern Syria, with the aim of tightening their control over Syrian oil fields and continuing to plunder the resources of the Syrian people. The period since the Special Envoy's previous briefing (see S/2020/353) has also witnessed military attacks carried out by the Israeli occupying forces from over the occupied Syrian Golan and the airspace of neighbouring countries. These acts of aggression, comprising flagrant violations of international law and the provisions of the Charter, are the tip of the iceberg of aggressive practices aimed at prolonging the crisis in my country, obstructing settlement efforts and supporting terrorist organizations and proxy separatist militias. As usual, under pressure from its three Western permanent members, the Security Council has remained silent in the face of such actions, which threaten regional and international peace and security, seeking to render the Council a platform for NATO. That risks undermining the foundations of the multilateral international order and bringing it back to the pre-Second World War era. There are currently six NATO member States in the Security Council. With Turkey at this meeting, the number becomes seven, which is about half the Council members. In that context, my delegation reiterates that we will not give up our legitimate right to defend our homeland and its resources, combat terrorism and liberate our occupied territories, whether occupied by the United States, Turkey, Israel or their affiliated terrorist organizations. Any presence of foreign military forces on the territory of the Syrian Arab Republic without the explicit consent of the Syrian Government is an act of aggression and occupation, and it will be dealt with as such in accordance with our national Constitution and our rights under international law. The success of any political process requires the provision of appropriate conditions, notably respect for the first paragraph of the Council's resolutions, which affirms the strong commitment to the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic. Such a commitment requires an end to the illegal foreign military presence, acts of aggression, support for terrorism and unilateral coercive measures imposed on the Syrian people, as well as a cessation of the efforts of States hostile to Syria to impose their visions, intransigence and conditions on the Syrian people. My country is a victim of unprecedented and prescribed terrorism sponsored by States members of the Council and beyond in order to obtain political concessions commensurate with its interventionist agendas in the internal affairs of States of the region. That explains the frantic attempt to invade States in the region and to try to change legitimate Governments by force and impose new facts on the ground in order to undermine the possibility of establishing a Palestinian State, sustaining the Israeli occupation of the occupied Syrian Golan and achieving the illusion of the so- called "deal of the century" promoted by the American Administration. The tyranny of power and investment in terrorism will not lead us to drink from the river of madness. We have been, and continue to be, a safety valve for stability and moderation in the region, and our strong attachment to our sovereignty and independence reflects our true understanding of the victory over nazism and fascism in the Second World War. In conclusion, it is very unfortunate that I have not heard any comments from the Special Envoy or some Council members about condemning the cutting off of water by the Turkish regime in Al-Hasakah city for the third time this month. It is also very unfortunate that I have not heard any comment from the Special Envoy or some Council members with regard to how the hooligans of the Turkish regime affiliated with the Huras Al-Din terrorist group blew up the electricity station in Zeyzoun, located in the Idlib countryside, after they looted its equipment and transported it to the Turkish territories in order to be sold as scrap. It is very unfortunate that I have not heard any comments from the Special Envoy or some Council members about how the American occupation is stealing Syrian gas and oil around the clock. Furthermore, only yesterday the American air force dropped hot air balloons on farms in Al-Shaddadah town, south of Al-Hasakah, which led to the burning of more than 200 hectares of farms planted with wheat.
