The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of New Zealand.

It is deeply disappointing to have to acknowledge
that the comments I am about to make and that others
will make today could have been made with equal force
and relevance at any time in the two and a half years
since negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians
were suspended. We all express dismay and outrage
about the violence affecting ordinary Israelis and
Palestinians, and yet innocent lives continue to be lost.
We all condemn settlements, and yet they continue
to expand. We repeatedly encourage both sides to
compromise and find a road to peace, and yet angry
rhetoric and incitement prevail. The international
community does what it can to support the parties in
resuming negotiations, and yet despite the best efforts
of a range of players we are no closer to a solution. We

all proclaim our firm commitment to the two-State
solution as the only viable option, and yet the Council
remains a spectator as the two-State solution erodes.
There have been some positive developments, such as
this week's agreement between Israel and the pauth to
resolve the Palestinians' debt to the Israel Electricity
Corporation, but the picture painted by the Secretary-
General in his briefing should alarm us all.

New Zealand regards itself as a friend of both
Israelis and Palestinians. We are not a part of that
troubled region. We have no baggage or vested interests.
We try hard to bring a fair and balanced perspective
to this conplex and difficult topic. Today we say to
both parties that they are falling seriously short of the
expectations of the international community and that it
is time for them to step back and think again about what
they need to do to keep the prospect for a negotiated
two-State solution alive. And it is time that the Security
Council and the international community told them
so and resolve to take practical steps to help them on
their way.

Recent developments with respect to Israeli
settlements are of particular concern. The
announcement, on 31 August, of approvals for a further
463 housing units on the West Bank, including 284
new units, is at odds with Israel's stated commitment
to talk with the Palestinians and reach an agreement.
So far this year, plans for 2,623 settlement units have
been advanced, including the retrospective legalization
of 756 units. No amount of spin can hide the fact that
those actions are a violation of Israel's international
obligations and that they have profoundly negative
implications for the peace process.

The Palestinian side, too, has fallen short of the
expectations we should all have. Violence against
Israeli citizens continues to be condoned. The first
local elections in a decade - a chance to mend faces
and renew mandates - seem to have been postponed.
Reconciliation has been placed on the back burner. And
rockets from Gaza continue to target Israeli towns and
cities.

The result of those developments is that the two-
State solution - the vision and goal of the Security
Council for nearly 50 years - is close to becoming a
shattered dream. For those in Israel who think that that
does not matter, who think that time is their friend, I
urge them to think again. If the prospect ofa two-State
solution is shattered by the negative trajectory of events,
international attention will shift to the two standards of
citizenship that exist in the single State that remains.
No friend of Israel wishes to see such an outcome.

Therefore, today I say to colleagues on the Security
Council, time is running out. It has been eight long
years since the Council adopted a draft resolution on
this issue. History and the international community
will not judge us well. It is time for us to ask more of
each of the parties, to require that they face up to their
responsibilities, and to ask more of this organ, which
is charged with maintaining international peace and
security.

While we welcome other efforts to bring about
an improvement in this negative cycle, New Zealand
believes that the Quartet remains the body best placed
to harness the efforts of other parties and to report to
and give advice to the Council. In that respect, we note
with concern yesterday's reports that Israel's Defence
Minister has placed a boycott on Special Coordinator
Mladenov, That action, reportedly taken in response
to the Special Coordinatior doing the job we have all
asked him to do, is deeply counterproductive.

It was seriously disapponting that the recent
report (S/2016/595, annex) of the Quartet was subject
to such significant delays and that, when it arrived,
its recommendations were not adopted as a basis for
further Council engagement. That would have been a
modest step forward, and the Council could not even
agree on that. New Zealand intends to revisit these
matters over the coming weeks as we try to find a way
of ensuring that the Council becomes re-engaged in a
matter that cries out for its attention.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Council.

