Mr. Koenders (Spoke in French): It is a great
pleasure and honour to address the Security Council
today. I would like to give the Council an overview of
the political and security situation in Mali, the progress
made since my briefing on 16 January (see S/PV.7095)
and the challenges ahead.

The Malian people have continued to show their
determination to move forward through the inauguration
of the new National Assembly and the gradual return of
the public administration in the northern region. The
establishment of a new Government has given new
impetus to the peace process under way.

Furthermore, the President of Mali has just
announced the appointment of former Prime Minister
Modibo Keita as high representative for inclusive talks
in the framework of the preliminary agreement. In
that context, the commitment to an inclusive political
dialogue remains the top priority and must start as
soon as possible on the basis of a timeline accepted by
all parties. Also, it is important to agree a road map
that is acceptable to everyone, which absolutely must
be translated into concrete actions by the Government,
the movements and civil society, with the support and
involvement of the United Nations and the international
community.

The general principles for cantonment are laid out
in a consensus document that serves as a reference in the
ongoing peace process. Heads of State and Government
of the Economic Community of West African States
welcomed the signing of those principles at the recent
conference held in Yamoussoukro and urged all
signatories of the preliminary agreement to ensure
its full implementation. They also reiterated their call
to all armed movements to submit to the cantonment
and participate in the search for a peaceful settlement
of disputes, in the framework of an inclusive national
dialogue.

In the meantime, we have begun to identify the
priority cantonment sites for the armed movements.
However, the responsibility for the implementation
of the general principles on cantonment lies with
the parties, with the support of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) and the international community to
ensure supervision and the integrity of the process.

It is essential that all sectors of Malian society,
including women and young people, continue to
actively participate in all efforts to define the next steps
in the process of re-establishing peace and security.
The forums in Bamako and in the North, as well as
the recent informal workshops, have been positive
developments in the peace process. However, I deplore
the lack of consistency and the refusal of some armed
movements to take the opportunity offered by these
informal discussions to advance the peace process.

The peace train has left the station for good and
there can be no turning back. For the next stages of
the ongoing peace process, the stakeholders in the
preliminary agreement must be resolved to participate
in a constructive and inclusive process without
preconditions, since the ongoing informal discussions
must move towards inclusive formal talks. To that end,
it is essential that the armed movements strengthen
their internal cohesion and their respective positions.
Time is passing; there are no more excuses.

(spoke in English)

Mali has made significant strides and the support
of the international community has been critical to
that. I particularly applaud the cooperation, under
the aegis of the United Nations, with the African
Union, ECOWAS, the European Union and other key
partners. That cooperation must continue in order to
ensure the appropriate support for ongoing efforts to
achieve peace and stability. At this critical juncture, the
multiplication of international facilitation initiatives
should lead to synergies and build trust between and
among the parties, provided the initiatives are closely
aligned with the ongoing United Nations-coordinated
efforts on the ground towards inclusive talks.

The window of opportunity for consolidating and
sustaining peace and stability in Mali is wide open,
but it may close unless the sustained commitment
of all stakeholders is upheld, with the support of the
international community. This is all the more important
as the security situation in the northern regions remains
very fragile, as illustrated by the shellings in Gao,
Timbuktu and Kidal, and the increased activity of
terrorist groups. I strongly condemn this morning's
incident in which a peacekeeper was severely
wounded by an improvised explosive device during an
international visit.

Not only does this negative trend have an impact
on the situation in Kidal and elsewhere, it can also
thwart efforts towards early recovery and development.
The most effective way to root out all extremism from
communities is to win the hearts and minds of the
local population. That will require concerted national
efforts, with the international community's support, to
ensure the establishment of an effective and efficient
administration that can implement critical rule-of-law,
human-rights and recovery programmes that foster
reconciliation and community cohesiveness.

I am deeply concerned about the intercommunity
clashes in the northern regions. The sheer violence
of the recent incidents involving Tuareg and Peuhl
communities that resulted in 40 casualties in Gao is
worrying. MINUSMA has deployed forces and human
rights teams to establish the facts and discourage further
violence. Faced with continued considerable threats to
the Malian population, the Government is continuing
to hold grass-roots consultations, in particular in the
North, and intercommunity meetings, including in
collaboration with the Government of Niger. These
clashes are stark reminders of the fragility of the
social fabric and the importance of fast-tracking the
reconciliation process and strengthening the presence
of national and international forces on the ground, as
well as launching the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme.

Above and beyond all this, the problems of
Mali are embedded in the Sahel region and require
regional support and coordination to be effectively
addressed. I remain worried about the food-security
situation in the country, and call on donors to heed
the humanitarian appeal. The United Nations strategy
for the Sahel and the various mechanisms established
to support its implementation are steps in the right
direction. However, the proof of the strategy rests on
the willingness of the countries concerned to own and
implement it in a concerted and operational manner, as
well as on its positive impact on the livelihoods of the
population as a whole.

The successful negotiations to reach a final peace
settlement in Mali and the effectiveness of development
spending - which should be discussed in Bamako
next week as a follow-up to last year's Brussels
conference - are interrelated; they illustrate the close
nexus between development and security in the Malian
case and should be recognized as such. We will soon
discuss issues related to the possible renewal of the
Mission's mandate. There are signs of hope that Mali
can overcome its multifaceted crisis; we should not,
however, underestimate the risks and difficulties of
the road ahead. The Malians faced a deep crisis with
direct consequences for security in the Sahel region
and globally, which continues to require our focused
attention.

