Mr. Schulz (Germany): I thank Their Majesties for the honour of their presence at today's Council meeting, and I thank Belgium for having arranged this briefing on a very important topic. Minimizing the impact of armed conflict on the lives of children requires our undivided attention. Therefore, let me express our heartfelt gratitude to Belgium for its tireless efforts to keep the rights of children at the top of the Council's agenda. I wish also to extend a special welcome to the Ministers attending this morning's meeting, and I would also like to thank the Secretary-General, Commissioner Chergui and Ms. Becker for having shared their valuable insights. Their accounts have once again reminded us of the fact that the issue of children and armed conflict is more pressing than ever. More than 420 million children worldwide are affected by conflict. Germany therefore very much welcomes the launch of the practical guidance for mediators to protect children in situations of armed conflict. The guidance for practitioners is needed to support those working in the field dedicated to ensuring that the protection and welfare of children are taken into account in all aspects of peace negotiations and agreements. Our commitment to children's rights remains firm, and we see our engagement in the Security Council's Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict as an important part of that. Germany is also proud to support UNICEF as one of the largest donors with its contributions especially dedicated to programmes in countries dealing with conflicts and crises in order to support the resilience and perspectives of children. Many previous speakers have reminded us of the impressive achievements that have been realized in the past years. At the same time, we are all aware of the immense challenges that we continue to face in this context. I would like to refer to a few of the most pressing challenges. First, too many children are in need of immense resilience in too many places on the Security Council's agenda. We are deeply concerned about the many cases of sexual- and gender-based violence. Our humanity is measured by how we protect the weakest, and it is obvious that we still have a long way to go. Although there is constant underreporting, owing to difficult verification, the official statistics remain appallingly high. Those crimes require an adequate and resolute response. In line with resolution 2467 (2019), we need to ensure non-discriminatory and multisectoral assistance to all child survivors of sexual violence, as well as to children born of rape. That must also include access to sexual and reproductive health services. Secondly, it is shocking to see that, more than 10 years after the adoption of resolution 1882 (2009), there still seems to be no end in sight for the killing and maiming of children. The Secretary-General has identified Afghanistan, Syria and Yemen as cases of particular concern. We continue to call for abolishing the use of explosive weapons in populated areas. Yet in Syria alone air strikes, barrel bombs and cluster munitions have killed and maimed thousands of children, as just confirmed in the recent disturbing report of the Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic (A/HRC/43/ CRP.6). The Commission's report on Syria documented the large-scale increase of aerial operations and ground offensive causing damage to key civilian infrastructure. As initiators of resolution 1998 (2011), on attacks on schools and hospitals, we condemn all such attacks on civilian objects in breach of international humanitarian law. We urge all States to sign on to the Safe Schools Declaration. Together with its international partners, Germany continues to work hard to ensure that international humanitarian law is applied so as to prevent all grave violations. In that regard, we recall resolution 2427 (2018), which reminds all parties to armed conflict to comply strictly with the obligations applicable to them under international law for the protection of children in armed conflict. In echoing resolution 2427 (2018), let me also stress the need for accountability for all violations and abuses against children in armed conflict. All States need to continue to address impunity by strengthening national and international accountability mechanisms. Germany reiterates its fullest confidence in the work of the International Criminal Court in ensuring accountability, as well as its support for international investigative mechanisms, such as those set up by the Human Rights Council. The well-being of children should be at the centre of all our actions. We need to ensure that children affected by armed conflict are able to participate in community-based programmes anchored in the child's rights approach that complements accountability mechanisms.In view of the broad range of challenges, of which I just mentioned a few, we need to use all means, tools and instruments at our disposal, particularly in the field. Much of the concrete field-level work on the issue of children and conflict is entrusted to child protection advisers in United Nations peace operations. With the continued consolidation of protection functions in field missions, Germany renews its call to preserve that important function as a distinct role and for United Nations missions to be adequately resourced in that regard. As was said earlier, we commend the work of Special Representative of the Secretary-General Gamba and her leadership role in the development of the practical guide for mediators to better protect children in armed conflict. The simple truth is that child protection requires the efforts of the entire international community. We therefore also welcome the efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General to cooperate with the European Union, as well as NATO, where we have established the position of Senior Child Protection Adviser. In conclusion, it is important that we today renew our commitment to delivering peace and access to basic services and education to a whole generation of children suffering in conflict situations around the world.
