The President: I will now make a further statement
in my national capacity.

The contention seems to about the meeting on
Nicaragua. I said to some of the members this morning
that all the explanations and reasons that have been
raised for not having a meeting on Nicaragua are
the exact same responses that were given to us on
Venezuela. We were told that it was not a matter of
peace and security, that it was a regional issue and that
it was best dealt with at the Human Rights Council.

We went to the Human Rights Council. They would
not hear it because Venezuela was on the Council. We
had a meeting outside of the Human Rights Council, in
Geneva, to try to bring attention to the issue. Now, as we
look back to see where we are with Venezuela, we see
that the average adult in Venezuela has lost 24 pounds.
Ninety per cent do not know where their next meal is
coming from. Thousands are crossing the border every
day trying to get medical help and supplies. We have
dealt many times with the African Union on regional
issues; I do not know why we cannot deal with the
Organization of American States (OAS) on regional
issues. We have spoken with the OAS and give it full
support and respect. That is why the Secretary General
of the OAS is coming to brief us tomorrow.

I would ask any member who does not think that
Nicaragua is an issue ofpeace and security to talk to the
people of Nicaragua, the people of the region and the
countries that have to accept the people of Nicaragua,
to the Catholic Church, to which Ortega has turned
because of Nicaragua.

My final question is, how many people have to
die before it becomes a matter of peace and security?
I think we have already reached that point. That is why
the United States thought it was very important to have
a meeting on Nicaragua - because we do not want
another Syria or another Venezuela, and we think it is
the responsibility of the Security Council to ensure that.

I now resume my functions as President of the Council.

There is no consensus on the adoption of the
provisional programme of work, and there is no
requirement in the Council's provisional rules of
procedure that a programme of work be adopted.
Rather, the adoption of a programme of work is Council
practice and not required. Accordingly, the Security
Council will proceed in its work without the adoption
ofa programme of work. The President of the Council,
pursuant to rule 1 of the provisional rules of procedure,
will convene a meeting on the situation in Nicaragua
tomorrow at 10 a.m. in the Chamber.

Finally, I want to thank Ms. Egian and her team for
pulling together this open meeting on the provisional
programme of work. I also want to thank each and every
one of the members for supporting the transparency
effort of this meeting. Any one of them could have gel to us very quickly, for being flexible and realizing
stopped it, and I thank them for not doing so. I also want how important transparency is 10 the Umwd States,

to thank the interpreters, who probably had to rush to The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.
