Mr. Li Baodong (China): The Chinese delegation
welcomes you, Sir, to the Security Council to preside
over today's debate. We also thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his report entitled United Nations
support of African Union peacekeeping operations
authorized by the Security Council (S/20lO/514) and
for his briefing.

The Chinese delegation wishes to thank
Mr. Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and Security of
the African Union, for his briefing.

At present, peace and security in Africa continues
develop in a positive direction. However, peace and
security continue to be fragile in a number of areas,
where flashpoint issues have long eluded resolution.
Non-traditional threats to security, such as terrorism,
piracy and transnational organized crime, are also on
the rise.

The maintenance of peace and security in Africa
remains one of the most real and pressing challenges
facing the international community. This is also the
major reason for which Africa has designated 2010 as
the year for peace and security.

As the most important regional organization of
Africa, the African Union has been playing an
increasingly important role in the maintenance of peace
and security in Africa and the settlement of conflicts on
the continent. China expresses its great appreciation.

However, at the same time, the peacekeeping
operations of the African Union have become
increasingly constrained in terms of funding and
capacity-building. They urgently need the support of
the international community, including the United
Nations.

China supports the creation and development of
strategic cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union. We are pleased to see that the
United Nations Office to the African Union was
created on 1 July. China welcomes the continuation of
regular communication between the Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council and
expects such cooperation to continue, so as to use the
respective advantages of the two organizations to
achieve practical results in the important fields of
mediation, conflict prevention and security sector
reform. China hopes that the recently launched United
Nations-African Union Joint Task Force on Peace and
Security will be able to carry out its mandate and work
hard to promote the strategic partnership between the
two organizations.

China maintains that the United Nations should
help the African Union obtain reliable financial support
for its peacekeeping operations. China is pleased to see
that the package of logistical support provided by the
United Nations has markedly improved the living and
working conditions of its peacekeepers, but is
concerned about the financial constraints that African
Union missions continue to face.

We believe that, while the United Nations should
continue to provide active support, all countries
concerned should honour their commitments of
support. We believe that all parties concerned should
give positive consideration to the recommendations of
the Secretary-General contained in his report with
regard to various sources of financing and the criteria
for financial support, with a view to putting in place a
predictable and sustainable financing mechanism for
the African Union's peacekeeping operations.

We support institutional capacity-building for the
African Union's peacekeeping operations. The United
Nations should strengthen its cooperation with the
African Union through training and the sharing of
knowledge and lessons learned. It should also speed up
the implementation of the United Nations-African
Union Ten-Year Capacity-Building Programme.

We have also taken note of the fact that the
United Nations will view its support to and cooperation
with the African Union in the field of peacekeeping
operations from a new perspective, as pointed out by
the Secretary-General in his report. We look forward to
receiving a report from the Secretary-General in this
regard

China has always given importance and support
to having the African Union play a greater role in the
field of peace and security in Africa, and has provided
support to all AU peacekeeping operations in different
forms, through both bilateral and multilateral channels.

The second political consultation between the
Chinese Minister for Foreign Affairs and his AU
counterparts was conducted on 24 September in New
York as a General Assembly side event. During the
consultations, both sides reiterated the importance of
carrying out AU peacekeeping operations under the
auspices of the United Nations and the African Union
and their readiness to strengthen training to build up
the African Union capacity in this important field.

In the future, China will continue to provide
every support within its capacity to the African Union
and African countries and will continue its efforts to
strengthen the cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union.

China supports the draft presidential statement
prepared by Uganda on the theme of today's debate.

