Mr. Anshor (Indonesia): My delegation wishes
to join previous speakers in commending the Chilean
presidency for organizing this important debate. We
also wish also to thank the Secretary-General, the
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, and the
President of the Gbowee Peace Foundation Africa for
their respective briefings.

The interlinkages between inclusive development
and security are evident in the work of the United
Nations. It is widely recognized that peace, security
and development are interconnected; indeed, the
2005 World Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1)
underlined that security, development, and respect for
human rights and the rule of law are interlinked and
mutually reinforcing. We therefore cannot overstate
the importance of taking into consideration inclusive
development perspectives to the work of the Council in
addressing the challenges relating to the maintenance
of peace and security.

In our view, inclusive development refers to
development that observes democratic principles,
respect for human rights and the imperative of
equal opportunity and participation, as well as
non-discrimination. It also recognizes the important
role of women in all fields. As a country with a
multiplicity of cultures, religions, ethnicities and
languages, Indonesia strongly upholds the values of
diversity, inclusion, tolerance and harmony. Equitable
development, coupled with the locally and nationally
owned peaceful settlement of disputes, has been among
the major reasons behind Indonesia's stability and
progress.

Today's debate on the nexus between inclusive
development and peace and security in the context of
the responsibilities in situations within the purview of
the Security Council provides a valuable opportunity
to explore ways to mainstream inclusive development
perspectives into the broad spectrum of the Council's
mandate and functions relating to peacemaking,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and preventive diplomacy.
I wish to highlight the following four points in that
context.

First, the integration of inclusive development
perspectives into the overall work of the Council would
contribute to common efforts to develop a robust and
comprehensive framework of conflict prevention. We
understand that the Council is not the appropriate United
Nations organ to deal with the issue of development.
However, we cannot disregard the significant impact of
its decisions on the long-term development of countries,
which is a fundamental element of any sustainable peace.
The Security Council should therefore enhance its
engagement and coordination and form synergies with
the relevant United Nations agencies and international
organizations responsible for security and development.
Any measures taken by the Council should support or
at least give consideration to inclusive development

programmes carried out by United Nations agencies

and relevant organizations in the framework of conflict

prevention.

Secondly, the Security Council should align its work
with the overall endeavour of United Nations system
entities to develop common peace and prosperity,
beyond its engagement within the framework of the
Peacebuilding Commission. The Council should be part
of collective efforts to ensure that the United Nations can
act as one across the security/development spectrum,
and adopt a single approach across the multilateral
system. Coherence is key to the overall effectiveness
of the Organization. In this regard, we therefore believe
that the Council should engage with and contribute
to the ongoing process in the United Nations through
the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council, along with its relevant subsidiary agencies, to
establish a global framework to implement an inclusive
and comprehensive sustainable development agenda.

Thirdly, the Security Council should, within its
mandate, put the interlinkages between inclusive
development and peace and security into operation in
the field. The Council should make effective use of
the relevant work, practices and doctrines developed
within the Economic and Social Council and the
General Assembly, as well as the lessons learned from
the evolving work of the Peacebuilding Commission.
All United Nations presences in countries where
there is both a United Nations country team and a
multidimensional peacekeeping operation or political
mission should develop an integrated strategic
framework to guide their work in promoting peace
consolidation. In our strong view, however, they should
respect and ensure the ownership and leadership of the
host country in the development process, including in
identifying priority areas.

Fourthly, we should invest more in our joint efforts
to address the root causes of conflict and instability
in general, as well as in conflict resolution. Inclusive
development to eliminate poverty, backwardness,
injustice and marginalization, along with peaceful
conflict prevention, should be the core. While there
remains no single panacea to cure the variety of
conflicts unfolding in the world today, it is, however,
extremely important that there be a comprehensive
approach that is well supported and sustained
financially and politically, and fully conforms to the
principles ofjustice, fairness and human rights, while
upholding international law.

In conclusion, Indonesia stands ready to continue
its engagement in further elaborating the role and
contribution of the Security Council to the promotion
of inclusive development and conflict prevention.

