Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the convening of this meeting and for the
important briefings delivered by Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Ambassador Mansour Alotaibi and Ms. Justine
Masika Bihamba.

Peru notes with concern the grave security situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, particularly
in the east of the country, as well as the humanitarian
crisis affecting millions of Congolese. We deplore and
condemn the human rights violations, including sexual
violence, that are occurring in increasing numbers in
the country, as we have heard this morning.

In such a complex scenario, we would first like to
underscore the importance of creating an atmosphere
of trust, transparency, credibility and inclusion with a
view to ensuring a safe and mass turnout of citizens
and all political forces in the current electoral process,
as well as the peaceful recognition of its results. We
highlight the efforts made by the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in that regard,
which are focused on complying with the electoral
calendar and completing the audit of voter registration,
with the support of the International Organization of
la Francophonie. In addition, we consider it urgent to
deepen the following five main lines of action.

First, confidence-building must continue, in
accordance with the measures set forth in the political
agreement of 31 December 2016 to guarantee the free
participation of all political forces and their candidates.

Secondly, the security of all political actors
and their supporters must be guaranteed, including
commitments among all forces and measures to prevent
acts of intimidation and neutralize divisive rhetoric and
incitement to violence.

Thirdly, verification of the functioning of the
voting machines is recommended, in order to ensure
that it is not possible to manipulate the results. That
should be done through due coordination with the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
and the participation of the opposition and civil society.

Fourthly, adequate financing of the process must
be ensured, and the needs for support from MONUSCO
and eventually, the international community must be
identified in a timely manner.

Fifthly, it is important for the Government to
determine the role of the team of international experts
and regional and subregional organizations with
a view to ensuring their participation and issuing
appropriate invitations.

With regard to the security situation, we would like
to highlight the important role played by MONUSCO
and its joint action with the Forces armees de la
Republique democratique du Congo, as well as the
Intervention Brigade. We appreciate the success
achieved in reducing intercommunal violence and
encouraging the return of displaced persons in Ituri
and Tanganyika. We note, however, that security is still
precarious in South and North Kivu.

Regarding the human rights situation, we consider it
necessary for MONUSCO to expand its monitoring role,
particularly with regard to the increase in complaints
against State agents registered in recent months. The
authorities must cooperate with the investigations and
punish those responsible.

Regarding the humanitarian situation, we
deem it essential to strengthen the cooperation of
the United Nations, the African Union and other
humanitarian agencies and cooperating sources, based
on an immediate support strategy. We highlight the
coordination with the World Health Organization to
control the Ebola outbreak. In addition to the electoral
process, it is essential to address the root causes of the
crisis. This means promoting sustainable development,
improving the governance of agriculture, generating
rural employment and preventing the exploitation
of natural resources, among other urgent measures
required to build sustainable peace.

