Ms. Kuspan (Kazakhstan) (spoke in French): I
thank the French presidency for convening this open
debate on the issue of the protection of civilians in
peacekeeping operations. Today, armed conflicts are
marked by systematic violence and mass atrocities
against civilian populations. Therefore, the protection
of civilian populations constitutes a major challenge
to the ability of the United Nations and of its
peacekeeping operations.

My delegation would like to share a few thoughts
in response to the four issues identified in the concept
note of the French presidency. Kazakhstan already
supports the effective implementation of three United
Nations reviews, namely, on peacekeeping operations,
on the peacebuilding architecture in 2000 and on
resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace and security.
In order to improve the effectiveness of peacekeeping
missions in the protection of civilians, it is necessary
to ensure a close synergy of the Security Council with
those missions well before preparing their mandates.
In particular, it is important to define the nature of
the threats that a mission will have to deal with on the
ground, the duration of the operation and the goals that
must be achieved to clearly plan a multidimensional or
hybrid mission.

The Security Council should adopt a strategy
focused on crisis management planning, which
involves military personnel and is then supported later
by the Department of Political Affairs. The special
representatives of the Secretary-General must have a
clear and strong mandate to protect civilians. This will
allow the host countries to become involved and firmly
commit themselves. The local teams on the ground,
together with the intergovernmental organizations;
donor countries; and humanitarian, human rights and
civil society organizations should reach an agreement
as stakeholders.

The Special Representatives of the Secretary-
General, their deputies and mission personnel at
all levels, the force commanders and the countries
deploying their personnel should know what their
respective capacities are and ensure that their
personnel receive special training courses through
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, as
well as by Member States.

It is essential to focus on capacity-building in host
countries, while adopting a road map for the protection
of civilians at national and local levels. This requires a
greater awareness among community leaders, women,
young people and local communities to mobilize them
to participate in peacekeeping operations. It also
requires adequate resources and competent trainers.
The training modules developed by the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, together with United
Nations agencies and international non-governmental
organizations, such as the International Committee of
the Red Cross, Oxfam and Save the Children, can be
effectively used in this regard.

Kazakhstan proposes a broader use of the French
language through an appeal for more of French
speakers in peacekeeping operations. That will enable
us to better communicate with the local population in
certain countries.

The protection of civilians cannot be limited to
physical defence; it must also protect the human dignity
of women and children. The behaviour of peacekeepers
must be impeccable with zero tolerance with regard to
sexual exploitation and abuse, in accordance with the
guidelines issued by the Secretary-General.

A conflict environment is almost always
asymmetrical and dynamic. Peacekeeping operations
are frequently called upon to protect civilians under
very difficult and changing conditions. They are often
faced with new threats which can only be addressed
with the appropriate equipment - be it airborne, health-
related or logistical. Their capacity to react should not
be impeded by a low technical level.

The use of advanced technologies, such as
unmanned aerial vehicles or digital satellite imagery,
together with good media coverage, is fundamental to
the success of such interventions. The recommendations
of the Expert Panel on Technology and Innovation in
United Nations Peacekeeping show that clearly.

Inspired by the strong involvement of France,
Kazakhstan joined the code of conduct proposed
by the ACT group. As an observer country of the
African Union, Kazakhstan is contributing to the
protection of civilians by providing its highly trained
military observers to the United Nations Mission for
the Referendum in Western Sahara and to the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire. Before deploying
on the ground, our military complete an appropriate
United Nations training programme. We think that our
presence will increase in the future.

In the context of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) and
Agenda 2063, Kazakhstan believes in a broader concept
of peace and stability aimed at non-military and
people-oriented security. It includes food, water and
energy security, which together with nuclear safety, are
the major pillars of our candidacy for a non-permanent
seat on the Security Council for the period 2017-2018.

On 31 March, the President of Kazakhstan published
a manifesto, entitled "The World in the Twenty-first
Century", in which he called on world leaders to put an
end to all wars by creating fair global structures. This
document is important in the context of the protection
of civilians.

I would like to conclude by assuring the Council
that Kazakhstan is committed to working together with
the United Nations make the protection of civilians a top
priority, in line with the Charter of the United Nations.

