Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): Let me start by joining
previous speakers in condemning the terrorist attack in
Abuja, and in expressing our sympathy and solidarity
with Nigeria and the United Nations. This is a scourge
that we should all stand together to fight. There is
absolutely no justification for resort to terror.

I would like to join the speakers who have
preceded me in thanking you, Mr. President, for having
organized this open debate on United Nations
peacekeeping operations. We have found the brief
concept paper prepared to facilitate today's debate
(S/201l/496, annex) quite comprehensive and indeed
very helpful. We thank you for that as well. We also
appreciate the Secretary-General's statement.

Most of what I wanted to say has been covered by
the representative of Morocco and the representative of
the African Union, who have spoken on our behalf. I
will make one or two remarks more or less expanding
on some of the suggestions in the concept paper.

One very critical issue raised in the paper has to
do with the states of affairs or conditions that affect the
legitimacy and credibility of United Nations
peacekeeping. The challenge is described as having
two facets: the first relates to the apparent legal
ambiguity within which peacekeepers are often
compelled to operate, and the second to the constraints
on resources that lead to deficiencies in performance.
These are valid points.

But there is yet another major factor threatening
the legitimacy and credibility of United Nations
peacekeeping and of the Security Council itself, and
that has to do with the spectacle that we sometimes
witness, for example, when missions are left in the
lurch to fend for themselves and left to be humiliated.
Here one recalls the fate of the United Nations Mission
in Ethiopia and Eritrea.

That episode and other similar situations
underscore the need for missions to be supported
wholeheartedly by the Council, not only in words but
in deeds, which cannot be limited only to resources. In
all this, it is critical that there be no situations that
might plausibly give credence to allegations or
insinuations that the Security Council is unfair and not
even-handed. In other words, the body - the Security
Council - that authorizes peacekeeping missions must
protect its moral authority. In the absence of this,
peacekeeping missions are doomed from the outset. If
any of the parties has reason to suspect an absence of
impartiality, the mission will have no chance of
success.

The report of the Brahimi Panel on United
Nations Peace Operations (S/2000/809) suggested that
its recommendations are designed to balance principles
and pragmatism. I suppose that is the only viable
approach for making United Nations peacekeeping
credible and effective.

But again, perhaps the best option we have for
peace and stability - in our continent first of all - is
to do more in the other two principal activities of
United Nations peace operations: conflict prevention
and peacemaking, and peacebuilding. There is no doubt
that it is lack of sufficient attention to preventing
conflict, and to peacemaking in particular, that makes
peacekeeping necessary. But prevention falls within the
ambit of diplomatic initiative. As the Brahimi Panel
said, "Such preventive action is, by definition, a low-
profile activity; when successful, it may even go
unnoticed altogether." (ibid., para. 10)

But the Panel could have said more about why we
are all so weak in utilizing all the opportunities that
preventive diplomacy offers. One could talk at length
on this theme, but suffice it to say that one major
problem is that the early warnings of conflict are not
properly heeded, and more often than not, evil is
accommodated until it is too late.

In parenthesis, let me say that we did not discover
evil as a political concept; the Brahimi Panel did.
There is no doubt that, at this juncture in world history
when nations see possible future trajectories of the
dispersal of power and influence, the proclivity to
accommodate evil might possibly grow, not decline.
That is a rather scary scenario.

