Mr. Da Rosa (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from French): Since April 1996 the Central African Republic has
faced a dangerous political crisis caused by army rebellions.
The Government has been unable to bring about respect for
public order; the lack of security is worsening and threatens
to spread throughout the country. These serious tensions are
likely to affect regional stability and thus pose a threat to
international peace and security.

Hence, at the Nineteenth Summit Meeting of Heads
of State and Government of France and Africa, held at
Ouagadougou, those leaders, aware of the seriousness of
the issue and the urgent need to take action to halt the
spiral of violence, appointed four of their number to an
International Monitoring Committee to supervise the
implementation of the Bangui Agreements, chaired by
General Amadou T oumani Toure, former Head of State
of Mali. Its task will be to negotiate a truce between the
loyalists and the rebels.

At the request of the mediator and following
agreement at the Committee on Consensus-building and
Dialogue, held at Bangui from 11 to 16 January 1997,
those four Heads of State decided to dispatch the Inter-
African Mission to Monitor the Implementation of the
Bangui Agreements (MISAB), with the logistical support
of France. We take this opportunity to reiterate our
sincere thanks to the French Government for its gesture,
and to the other countries that responded so promptly to
President Patasse's request.

Thanks to the Committee's mediation efforts, calm
has returned to the capital, and on 25 January 1997 the
Bangui Agreements were signed under the sponsorship of
President El Hadj Omar Bongo.

We believe that the Security Council should lend full
support to these praiseworthy efforts. The mediation
efforts of the four Heads of State clearly demonstrate a
regional determination to resolve conflicts in Africa
through dialogue and joint action.

Guinea-Bissau therefore believes that the Council
should give full attention to the 4 July 1997 request
addressed to the Secretary-General by His Excellency Mr.
Ange-Felix Patasse, President of the Central African
Republic, and to that by President El Hadj Omar Bongo,
in which they express their grave concern over the
situation in that country and request the Security Council
to authorize the States members of MISAB to continue
their operations to achieve the objectives of their mandate.
At stake is not only the security of a single country, but
regional stability and even the maintenance of
international peace and security.

We believe that the wish of the Government and of
the International Monitoring Committee to place the
activities of MISAB within an appropriate legal and

 

political framework falls within the purview of the Security
Council. Thus, the Council, by acting promptly and
suitably, would send a most positive political signal to the
parties that they should comply fully with all initiatives
relating to dialogue and national reconciliation.

We wish in conclusion to praise the people of the
Central African Republic for the courage, wisdom and
patriotism they have displayed throughout the crisis. For
our part, we are committed to continuing to support efforts
at rebuilding and at consolidating peace in the Central
African Republic.

It is in that spirit that we will vote in favour of the
draft resolution before us, in the hope that MISAB will
fully achieve the objectives set out in its mandate.

