Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to thank Mr. Yamamoto for
his comprehensive and informative briefing on the
situation in Afghanistan and the activities of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
I also thank Mr. Yury Fedotov, Mr. Vladimir Voronkov
and the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
Mr. Mahmoud Saikal, for their excellent statements.

Despite the ongoing efforts of the Afghan
Government, which the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
commends and supports, it is evident that the peace,
security and, consequently, stability and prosperity
for the people of Afghanistan seems like a pipe dream
for those who, on a daily basis, suffer the catastrophic
consequences of lethal attacks. The incessant attacks in
public places and the indiscriminate use of improvised
explosive devices by anti-Government elements and
suicide bombers are nothing more than cowardly
attacks on the vulnerable in society. Such attacks are
highly disturbing. We therefore urge all parties to the
conflict to take all possible measures to protect the
civilian population, in particular women and children,
in accordance with the provisions of international
humanitarian law and the basic norms of human rights.

Likewise, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea is
concerned about the ongoing increase in the recruitment
and use of children in armed conflict. In that regard,
we welcome Mr. Yamamoto's remarks with regard to
urging the Government to adopt the necessary measures
to ensure referral and rehabilitation mechanisms for
the victims.

The threat of terrorism and the drug problem are
closely linked. Drugs continue to be an significant
source of funding for terrorists in Afghanistan. Close
cooperation between the Government and the relevant
regional organizations is therefore necessary to combat
the trafficking in such drugs, especially opium.

Bearing in mind that the elections constitute a
crucial moment for the renewal of political trust and
the forging of the desired stability in Afghanistan,
the Government of Equatorial Guinea welcomes the
decision of the Independent Election Commission to
set a date for the parliamentary and district council
elections. It is vital that the Independent Election
Commission and all the political parties concerned
join forces so that transparent, inclusive and credible
elections can be held on the scheduled date in the
manner lawfully established by the country's national
legislation. To that end, the United Nations must play
an significant role in supporting the holding of free and
fair elections. We commend UNAMA in particular for
supporting the Afghan Government in ensuring that
voter registration is completed in accordance with the
agreed deadlines.

Like all the representatives who have spoken here
today, we believe that the only effective way to ensure
the long-term security and stability of Afghanistan is
by means of a political process and broad and inclusive
reconciliation that are Afghan-led and Afghan-owned.
The international community must therefore continue
to provide robust support to Afghanistan so that it
can respond to the many political, economic and
security challenges.

To conclude, we would once again like to reiterate
our praise for all the efforts made by the Government
of Afghanistan that are reflected in the report
presented today (S/2018/539). We encourage it not to
give up on developing a strategy based on open and
inclusive negotiations so as to achieve stability for the
Afghan people. Clearly, we once again underscore the
commendable work of Mr. Yamamoto and of his entire
team in supporting Afghan society, in promoting and
monitoring the human rights situation, in furthering
peace and reconciliation and in providing valuable
assistance to the Government of Afghanistan.

