Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Under-Secretary-General O'Brien for
his briefing.

Recently, thanks to the joint efforts of the
international community, the political settlement of
the Syrian issue has gained momentum. Recently
concluded Geneva talks have made progress, while the
last round of Astana dialogue has created conditions
for the consolidation of the ceasefire and the scaling
up of humanitarian relief. China commends the
mediation efforts of the United Nations and the efforts
by Kazakhstan, Russia, Turkey and Iran in advancing
the Astana dialogue, and hopes that it will be conducive
to the alleviation of the humanitarian situation in Syria
and the promotion of a political settlement.

Despite recent difficulties on the ground, United
Nations humanitarian agencies continue to dispatch
relief convoys to relevant areas in Syria. China
commends those efforts and urges parties in Syria
to effectively implement relevant Security Council
resolutions, observe the ceasefire agreement and
actively coordinate with United Nations humanitarian
relief operations by providing rapid, safe and
unhindered access. The international community
should implement as soon as possible the outcomes
of the Brussels international conference on Syria by
providing assistance to Syria and to relevant countries
in the region.

Political settlement is the only viable way to
completely ease the humanitarian situation in Syria.
Special Envoy De Mistura has announced that the
next round of Geneva talks will be held in June. The
parties concerned should adhere unswervingly to
diplomatic efforts and continue to support the role of
the United Nations as the main mediator and the work
of the Special Envoy; jointly encourage the parties in
Syria to participate constructively in the next round of
Geneva talks, under the principle of Syrian-owned and
Syrian-led and take part in dialogue and negotiations,
in the quest for a comprehensive, lasting solution that is
acceptable to everyone.

Attacks launched by terrorist organizations in Syria
severely impede international relief efforts. China calls
on the international community to step up counter-
terrorism coordination efforts, adopt unified standards
and resolutely combat all terrorist organizations
identified by the Security Council.

China continues to support the alleviation of
the humanitarian situation in Syria and the political
settlement of the Syrian question. The Special Envoy
of the Chinese Government on Syria attended the most
recent round of Geneva talks to promote dialogue
for peace. China stands ready to continue to play
a constructive role in reaching a comprehensive,
impartial and appropriate solution to the Syrian issue
at an early date.

