Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka: Two years ago, the
international community celebrated with the people
of South Sudan their independence, new Statehood
and entry into the United Nations. Today, South Sudan
has lost its peace, and the international community is
called upon to help the people of South Sudan restore
their hard-won peace, as violence by conflicting parties
is continuing. The situation has caused a serious
humanitarian crisis that has had a disproportionate
impact on women and girls.

Since the current conflict began, in December,
I have met with women from civil society and
representatives from South Sudan inside the country,
in Addis Ababa during the African Union Summit and
in New York this week in the course of the ongoing
session of the Commission on the Status of Women.

One month ago, I had an opportunity to visit Juba.
On my arrival, I was greeted by nearly 100 women
bearing the slogan "South Sudan Women for Peace"
and calling for peace and the support of UN-Women
and the United Nations. Those women came from all
parts of the country and from all sides of the conflict.
They are partners of UN-Women, as well as the
Security Council's partners for peace and security in
South Sudan.

During my trip, I met with President Salva Kiir,
key Cabinet Ministers, including the Ministers for
Cabinet Affairs, Justice, Education and Finance. I also
met with donors, representatives of United Nations
agencies, the Speaker of Parliament, members of the
National Legislative Assembly, women leaders and
displaced women living in the United Nations Mission
in the Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS) civilian
protection sites.

I was appalled at the conditions of those living in
the protection sites. The onset of the rainy season has
worsened an already critical situation. The density of
people in living spaces was 13 times the recommended
humanitarian minimum. Such conditions pose
significant health, protection and security risks to girls
and women. In those sites, there is only one latrine for
more than 200 people, and open sewers run through the
camp itself.

Women and girls have been exposed to heightened
levels of violence and crime, including sexual and
gender-based violence. Attacks are occurring both
inside the camp and outside the camp. When women
leave the camps to search for food for their families,
they are also exposed to violence. The population in
the camps I saw were overwhelmingly women and
children. The women I spoke with were often distressed
and traumatized.

Data from one of the sites indicates that 58 per cent
of households are headed by women, and 34 per cent of
households are missing one or more family members.
Some women did not know where their children were;
some had husbands who were missing or who had been
killed. Many had experienced violence themselves. All
expressed a feeling of not knowing their own or their
family's future and were struggling to survive.

The current conflict has exacerbated the already

dire conditions of poverty and violence. In addition,
South Sudanese women experience the highest levels
of maternal mortality in the world. More than 8 in
10 women are illiterate. A recent United Nations study
found that as many as 40 per cent have been affected by
physical or sexual violence. What they are facing is a
matter of extreme urgency - of life and death.

The response from the international community has
been vastly insufficient thus far, with only 24 per cent
of the appeal funded. Our colleagues from the United
Nations and other humanitarian organizations have
worked extremely hard, with very limited resources.

I urge the Council to use its voice to ensure a
more immediate and decisive response in support of
the people of South Sudan and the agencies that are
bringing relief to the country. For our part, together
with our partners, such as UNMISS, we are doing our
best to make sure that the humanitarian response fully
takes into account the special needs of women and girls
and facilitates their full participation.

During my visit, I made a commitment to initiate
UN-Women's humanitarian efforts in the Juba-based
UNMISS civilian protection sites, which support the
commendable efforts of our sister agencies. Our focus
is on providing safe spaces and psychosocial support,
as well as income generation and skills training. We are
also engaging in start-up literacy courses for adults and
exploring ways to support education so that children
and youth who are trapped in a camp do not miss out on
their education during the current crisis.

The women I met in the protection sites shared
the impact of the current humanitarian crisis, their
concerns for the future and their demands for inclusion
in the peace negotiations. Their resilience is striking,
and so is their overwhelming desire for peace. They
have mobilized across divisions and built inclusive
coalitions. They are demanding a voice in the decisions
being made to resolve the crisis and rebuild their
country.

I also engaged with the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) on the representation of women
in the peace talks. Today I commend Ambassador
Mesfin, the chief mediator for the IGAD peace talks,
for his efforts to encourage the inclusion of women.
I applaud the efforts of both sides to ensure women's
participation. Each has had three women mediators.

President Kiir has also expressed his commitment
and has asked UN-Women to support women's
representation in Addis Ababa, in addition to women
who are in the delegations. However, much more remains
to be done. To be sustainable, negotiations must reach
beyond the confines of the two parties to the conflict.
The equal representation of women at the talks, a robust
role for civil society and gender expertise and analysis
are needed. UN-Women has offered a senior gender
adviser to the IGAD mediation team and looks forward
to supporting its efforts through that and other means
of support.

I also welcome the signing of the cessation of
hostilities agreement and its inclusion of rape as a
recognized violation. The commitments on paper will of
course need to be translated into action. The monitoring
and verification mechanism must be established and
deployed to enforce the ceasefire.

UN-Women is ready to offer any support necessary
to the IGAD efforts to increase the numbers of women
in monitoring and verification efforts, to link to civil
society efforts and to provide dedicated expertise on
the monitoring of sexual violence. I echo the voices of
women in South Sudan that urge both sides to return
to the peace table as a matter of urgency, to renew
their commitment to a ceasefire and to find a political
solution that allows the displaced to return home and for
South Sudanese to continue to build their new country.
Women told me of their desire to go back to their homes
and communities.

While negotiations are needed to resolve the
immediate political crisis, accountability and
reconciliation are equally needed to ensure that we
build a foundation for sustainable peace. I welcome
the efforts of the African Union in establishing a
commission of inquiry to investigate conflict-related
human rights violations in South Sudan and to make
recommendations on accountability and reconciliation.
I was particularly pleased by the announcement, last
week, of the appointment of five commissioners to
head that body, in particular the appointment of two
women commissioners, one of whom is the African
Union's own Special Envoy for Women, Peace and
Security, Ms. Bineta Diop. That enables greater efforts
to be focused on ending impunity. UN-Women stands
ready to offer the support of a dedicated sexual and
gender crimes investigative expert to form part of the
Commission's team. That is in line with the support we
have provided to all United Nations commissions of
inquiry since 2009, largely with good impact.

The last time I addressed the Council was
last October (see S/PV.7044), during the Council's
adoption of resolution 2122 (2013). In that and previous
resolutions, the Council made very significant promises
to women to address their needs and to deliver on
the commitment to women's participation. Those
commitments are being tested now in places such as
the Central African Republic, Syria and South Sudan.

UN-Women benefits from the attention and support
that the Security Council provides as we take those
resolutions to the people who need them the most. That
includes briefings such as this one today and briefings
that the Council receives from envoys.

Together we can demonstrate to the women of
South Sudan, who continue on in the most desperate
of situations, that their courage and determination can
be matched by our own commitment to their cause,
through stronger support for the implementation of
all Security Council resolutions dedicated to women,
peace and security.

Once more, Madam President, I thank you for this
opportunity and I look forward to our discussion.

