Mr. Michon (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, as well as Ambassador
Meza-Cuadra, for your commitment as Chairs of the
Committees established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism, resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities, and resolution 1540 (2004). Terrorism and
nuclear proliferation are some of the most serious
threats to international peace and security today. I
would therefore like to touch briefly on the activities of
each of the Committees.

I would first like to discuss the 1267 Committee,
responsible for sanctions against Da'esh and Al-Qaida.
While Da'esh has suffered some important military
defeats in the Middle East, it continues to pose a
complex threat and its barbaric ideology still inspires
radicalized individuals to move from words to deeds.
In some parts of the world, particularly in Afghanistan,
Da'esh, through local franchises, has been the cause of
particularly deadly attacks. The end of its territorial
hold does not therefore mean the end of the terrorist
threat posed by Da'esh.

Al-Qaida also remains very active in some regions
such as the Sahel or the Arabian peninsula. In this
context, France attaches great importance to the
1267 Committee continuing to fulfil its two essential
missions. The first is the analysis of the terrorist threat,
through the reports of the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team, which is very valuable
for Member States. In this regard, France encourages
all States to cooperate actively with the Group of
Experts in order to enrich its analyses. The second
mission is the implementation and rigorous monitoring
of the sanctions list, the largest in volume among all
United Nations sanctions regimes. If the regime is
to remain credible and effective, it is essential that
it be fully implemented by States, as required by
Council resolutions, and that its procedures respect
the fundamental freedoms of listed individuals. France
therefore reiterates its full support for the Office of the
Ombudsperson and encourages all States to continue to
cooperate actively with it.

My second point concerns the 1373 Committee
on counter-terrorism, which also fulfils at least
two major functions. The first of these functions
is the Committee on Counter-Terrorism's core
activity, namely, implementation assessments. The
assessment visits of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED) are a unique tool for
a comprehensive audit of national counter-terrorism
measures and for making the best recommendations,
including those concerning the technical assistance
needs of States. We encourage all States to accept the
visits of the CTED and to fully implement the Security
Council resolutions on the fight against terrorism,
including the most recent one adopted by the Council
less than two months ago, in resolution 2462 (2019), on
the fight against terrorist financing.

The second and equally important function of the
CTC is to be a laboratory ofideas. In this context, with
the valuable support of the CTED and its network,
the Committee makes it possible to raise States'
awareness of the emerging challenges that characterize
an ever-changing terrorist threat. Special meetings
of the Committee, such as the one we will soon have
on vulnerable targets, are an excellent way to reflect
together on specific issues. France therefore encourages
the continuation of the joint meetings of the CTC and
the 1267 Committee, as we did on 26 April last, in order
to compare the threat analysis and the assessment of the
implementation of Council resolutions.

Finally, I would like to say a few words on the
efforts made in the 1540 Committee. The risk of
radiological, biological, chemical and nuclear materials
and delivery systems falling into the hands ofterrorists
is real. We know this, and we have seen it in Syria and
Iraq. In addition, there are major suspicions about the
state of Syrian chemical stockpiles, which increases the
possibility that, with the potential existence of residual
capabilities on Syrian territory, there is a risk that
terrorists may get their hands on these weapons.

We are also particularly concerned about the
transfer to the Middle East of goods and technology
for the development of weapons and means of delivery
capable of carrying weapons of mass destruction.
In this worrying context, it is important to adapt
our action to the evolution of the threat. Progress in
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and its
aftermath is tangible, both at national and regional
levels. Today, the vast majority of States Members of the
United Nations have adopted measures incorporating
the provisions of the resolution into national law.
Whether it concerns the security of sensitive materials
and goods, the strengthening of border controls or even,
where necessary, the establishment of export-control
mechanisms, States ensure that such sensitive materials
and goods do not fall into the hands of terrorists.
But we must go further: the 2020 deadline for
reviewing the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) should encourage us to intensify our efforts.
This includes strengthening the logic of coordination,
assistance and interaction that underlies our action, for
it is only through greater cooperation that we will be
able to better prevent the risk of acquisition of weapons
of mass destruction by non-State actors. France is fully
involved in this regard, in this forum, as Coordinator
of the Working Group on Assistance, at the General
Assembly, at the European Union and in the context of
its presidency of the Group of Seven.

