Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to begin by
adding my sincerest words of thanks and paying tribute
to our colleague Ambassador Samantha Power. I thank
her for the opportunity and privilege to work with
her over the past year. I appreciate that we were able
to work so closely. I thank her for her convictions and
strong stand for justice. That is not to be forgotten. As
in Italian, in Ukrainian we say, "see you soon". I hope
very much to see her soon again.
I would like to thank all three briefers for providing
factual and substantial reports on the status of the
implementation of both resolution 2231 (2015) and
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), as
well as for giving a detailed presentation on the work
conducted in that area over the past six months.

In that regard, I would like to point out that in
December 2016 Ukraine submitted to the facilitator its
national report on steps undertaken last year to bring
its legal framework into compliance with resolution
2231 (2015). Ukraine joins others in welcoming
implementation day on 16 January 2016, which we
believe marks a new stage in the Iranian nuclear issue
and in the promotion of peace and security in the
region. We highly commend the concerted efforts ofthe
Secretariat, the European Commission, the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and the facilitator's
team to ensure the full and proper implementation of the
JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015). Those instruments
have provided a platform of convergence for the
common interests of the international community and
have contributed to strengthening the non-proliferation
regime, in general.

As a staunch supporter of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Ukraine
stresses the importance of full and faithful compliance
with that crucial treaty, which aims at striking a
balance between the legitimate right to develop
nuclear energy and the need to stem the proliferation
of nuclear weapons. The JCPOA fully respects such a
balance. We welcome the detailed IAEA reports on the
implementation of Iran's nuclear-related commitments
under the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action,
including heavy-water restrictions. We support the
Agency's role in the verification and monitoring of the
use of nuclear material and technologies exclusively
for peaceful purposes. The provisional application
by Iran of the Additional Protocol Additional to
the Safeguards Agreement between Iran and the
International Atomic Energy Agency and Teheran's
compliance with the transparency measures set out in
the JCPOA significantly contribute to the sustainable
implementation of the entire agreement.

Over the past six months, we have witnessed the
smooth and effective functioning of the procurement
channel mechanism, with the approval of several
proposals to supply the relevant goods and technologies
to Iran. We welcome that no actions were carried out in
contravention of the ballistic missile-related provisions
of annex B to resolution 2231 (2015) during the
reporting period, as the Secretary-General indicated.

At the same time, we share concerns relating to the
incidents involving the seizure of conventional arms,
allegedly originating in Iran, that were likely bound
for conflict zones. We fully support the intention of
the Secretary-General to continue examining those
cases and obtain additional information. The incidents
of non-compliance with the travel ban stipulated
by resolution 2231 (2015) jeopardize its successful
implementation as well.

Having stressed the imperative of full compliance
with the relevant obligations, Ukraine reiterates the
importance for all parties engaged in the process to
interact constructively to resolve outstanding issues
for the sake of the hard-won non-proliferation deal.
Its proper and diligent implementation represents a
key contribution to regional and global security and
stability. We call on all stake-holders involved to
ensure that the concerns raised in the reports of the
Secretary-General (S/2016/l 136) and the facilitator (see S/2017/49) are not allowed to lead to further disputes;
they should rather be duly considered and resolved
through constructive dialogue.

Proceeding from what I have just stated, and taking
into account the current tense situation in the Middle
East, it is important to further raise public awareness on
the progress achieved since the entry into force of this
historic nuclear agreement. That is even more important
at this juncture when we are about to enter a new cycle
of Non-Proliferation Treaty Review Conferences.

To conclude, I reiterate the significance of unity in
the Council's stance when dealing with this sensitive
issue and its determination to ensure the further
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).

