Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): Let me also join other
to express our gratitude to you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting.

We all agree on the need to streamline the
working methods, but the years that have passed since
2007, despite some progress, have shown the many
difficulties in achieving convergence ofMember States'
positions to overcome the structural shortcomings of
the Security Council vis-a-vis the emerging global
threats and challenges. A more expeditious arrival
at a comprehensive package is absolutely necessary,
whereas further delay will continue to put the Council
at further risk of becoming either inadequate or dilatory
in responding to existing or emerging global challenges
and threats to international peace and security. We very
much hope that inthe coming months, in accordance with
the statement by the President, the Informal Working
Group intends to work towards a comprehensive
document in the form of an updated presidential note
S/2010/507 that would consolidate all decisions on
working methods, with the fuller participation by the
broader membership in relevant discussions.

Georgia believes that a more focused and succinct
discussion in the open debate format must be viewed as
an important tool in improving and democratizing the
working methods ofthe Security Council. A meaningful
streamlining of the working methods should also imply
the reform of the use of the veto, the modalities and
decision-making principles of the Security Council and
more accountability before the General Assembly.

Given our own experience, we already formally
endorsed - and here I also want to reiterate our full
support for - the joint French-Mexican proposal with
regard to the use of the veto in the Security Council,
as well as the initiative introduced by Liechtenstein
on a code of conduct with regard to Security Council
action against genocide, crimes against humanity
and war crimes. When I said our own experience, I
do not mean a theoretical exercise but an actual and
unfortunate fact - when a permanent member of the
Security Council, while being a party to a conflict, with
a single-handed veto, terminated the United Nations
Observer Mission in Georgia. We faced a paradoxical
scenario that, when a security presence was most
needed right after a full-scale war, the United Nations
withdrew. As aftermath, 20 per cent of my country's
territory remains under illegal foreign military
occupation following waves of ethnic cleansing.

We should all learn from such examples. Therefore,
Georgia believes that the right to the veto should be
restricted under the following circumstances: first,
when a decision of the Security Council aims at
preventing crimes against humanity, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and genocide; and, secondly, when a
Permanent Member is involved in the conflict under
consideration, and, therefore cannot exercise its
rights impartially.

In conclusion, let me once again express our firm
support for this process. We participated in the previous
discussions, and we are determined to continue to
contribute to this very important process.

