The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity.

First of all let me extend a warm welcome to
High Representative Valentin Inzko. We would like to
thank him for the report before the Council today (see S/2009/588*). Let me take this opportunity to reaffirm
our full and continued support for him and his Office
as well as for the efforts that he undertakes in
upholding the Dayton process and facilitating reform.

In addition I should like to warmly welcome the
presence of Prime Minister Nikola Spirie, Chairman of
the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We should also like to congratulate Bosnia and
Herzegovina on its election to the Security Council,
and we look forward to working with it, as its
immediate neighbour at the Council table. We also
hope that this important challenge and responsibility
will provide an element of cohesion within Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

We should also like to align ourselves with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of
Sweden on behalf of the European Union, but I should
like to make the following additional points.

We are encouraged by the recent progress on visa
liberalization, and we hope that the implementation of
the road map will soon be completed. Bosnia and
Herzegovina must not fall behind its neighbours on the
path towards Euro-Atlantic integration. Membership in
the European Union (EU) offers by far the best
medium-term and long-term chance for a solution to
most of the current problems in the region.

We share the concerns of the High Representative
about the prevailing political climate, which continues
to prevent the country from completing outstanding
reforms. Closure of the Office of the High
Representative and the transition to a reinforced EU
Special Representative remain crucial for Bosnia's
further advancement. We appeal to all political leaders,
with the assistance provided through the EU-United
States initiative, to speed up key reforms related to the
Euro-Atlantic perspective, constitutional functionality
and the conditions that have been set for the closure of
the Office of the High Representative.

It is time to correct the current course. The path
Bosnia and Herzegovina chooses today will be decisive
for the future prosperity and well-being of the country
and its people.

Austria fully supports the ongoing efforts to
establish and consolidate the rule of law in South-
Eastern Europe and welcomes progress achieved in that
regard by the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Judicial and police reform present a very important -
but by no means the only - challenge in this area.

In this context, I should like to draw the attention
of the Council to the work done by the Regional
Women's Lobby for Peace, Security and Justice in
Southeast Europe. This body unites women politicians
and activists from all countries of the region. It is an
important grass-roots initiative, which Austria and the
European Union support, in the implementation of
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008). Former
Austrian Foreign Minister Ursula Plassnik is actively
involved in this work. A policy paper recently

published by this pressure group makes the very valid
point that respect for the rule of law is critical not only
in the judiciary but in all aspects of State
administration, especially in those areas with which
citizens interact on a daily basis, such as the education
and health sectors, where corruption regrettably
remains a fact of daily life. The policy paper 4 which
we shall be happy to share with members of the
Council and other interested Member States - also
stresses the need for increased rule of law activities
related to gender-based violence.

We agree with the assessment of the High
Representative that the European Union military
operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR) still
plays a key role in contributing to a safe and secure
environment that helps the Office of the High
Representative and other international actors to
implement their mandates. This is also reflected in the
recent extension of the EUFOR mandate by the
Security Council, through resolution 1895 (2009).
Austria will continue its commitment as a troop
contributor to the operation. An Austrian officer, Major
General Bernhard Bair, has recently assumed the
responsibility of Force Commander.

Finally, let me reiterate that we are convinced
that the stability and prosperity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina is key for the realization of a broad zone
of stability in the Balkans. I should like to assure our
friends in Bosnia and Herzegovina that Austria is and
will remain a reliable partner of Bosnia and
Herzegovina on its path towards lasting stability and
European integration. Its future, like that of the entire
region, lies in the European Union. It is my firm
conviction that the major challenge facing the political
leadership of Bosnia and Herzegovina today is to make
that future possible.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Sweden.

