Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): We
had hoped that the Security Council would today have
been able to listen to an exposition of serious positions
from both the Palestinian and Israeli parties. We have
tried to do our best and have kept to the agenda.
However, Israel's statement has fallen to low levels
that are improper for this international forum. Such a
statement could nevertheless assist the Council in
adopting a more strongly worded resolution. That
statement represents a flagrant challenge to the
international community and reflects Israel's arrogance
of power based on automatic protection of Israel.

The Israeli representative's statement also
included racial allusions to the entire Palestinian
people. That comes as no surprise, given the mentality
of occupation and colonialization. His statement was
also replete with falsehoods and misrepresentations of
the facts, particularly with regard to President Yasser
Arafat. I will not even attempt to answer those points.

However, the representative of Israel speaks on
behalf of a Government whose Prime Minister and
many of whose members have been accused of war
crimes. Prime Minister Sharon, in particular, was
responsible for the Sabra, Shatilla, Kibya and Khan
Younis massacres. Some of Israel's leaders were
responsible for introducing terrorism to the region in
the first place. One can ask the United Kingdom, the
Power that held the Mandate in Palestine, about that.
One could also refer to Count Bernadotte, who was
also in Palestine. The list is very long. Many official
massacres have been committed, including those at
Deir Yassin and Kufr Kassem, among other places.
There have also been attacks against airports, like the
Beirut airport, the downing of airplanes, including a
Libyan airliner; the sinking of the USS Liberty; the
assassination of many members of the Palestinian
cadres; the targeting of Arab civilian targets in the
Golan; and the assault on the Bahr Al-Bakar school,
among other incidents.

However, the worst war crime in modern history
is the transfer of over 400,000 settlers to Palestinian
territories in order to colonize them: a colonialist
settler movement at the beginning of the twenty-first
century.
That is to say nothing of the long list of war
crimes that have been committed during the last three
years, foremost of which are extra-judicial killings.

At any rate, speaking outside the Chamber
between the morning and afternoon sessions of this
meeting of the Security Council, the representative of
Israel stated that the Council had been hypocritical. He
also decided that the Permanent Observer of Palestine
did not represent the Palestinian people. I hope he does
not decide at the end of this meeting to withdraw
official status from all of us.

