Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): Since
Ambassador Gary Quinlan of Australia briefed
the Council in November 2014 (see S/PV.7316), the
Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities has continued to
devote special focus to the issue of foreign terrorist
fighters, as mandated by paragraph 21 of resolution
2178 (2014). The threat posed by foreign terrorist
fighters is serious and affects all States and societies.
The response to this threat to international peace and
security must be comprehensive and coordinated and
employ a range of tools. The Al-Qaida regime's targeted
sanctions are an important part of the toolbox.

The Security Council has established a framework
through its resolution 2178 (2014) to address foreign
terrorist fighters and their networks. That exists
alongside Council resolutions on the threat to
international peace and security posed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), also known as Daesh,
and the Al-Nusra Front. Resolution 2178 (2014) sets
out a number of obligations and measures for Member
States. Two of those obligations in particular intersect
with the work of the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee.
First, Member States are called upon to prevent the
movement of foreign terrorist fighters across their
borders. Secondly, Member States shall prevent the
recruiting, facilitating or equipping of individuals who
travel to a State other than their States of residence or
nationality to carry out or prepare for terrorist acts or
training and the financing of such activities.

The measures imposed upon individuals and
entities designated by the Al-Qaida Sanctions
Committee are threefold: an assets freeze, a travel ban
and an arms embargo. In addition, any individual or
entity that provides financial or material support to
those designated, including arms or recruits, is eligible
to be added to the Al-Qaida sanctions list.

The Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee has approved
several designations this year aimed at the foreign
terrorist fighters threat. In January 2015, the Committee
designated Tarkhan Tayumurazovich Batirashvili and
noted that he led approximately 1,000 foreign terrorist
fighters for ISIL. In March 2015, the Committee
designated the Hilal Ahmar Society Indonesia and
three of its leaders based upon their recruiting, funding
and facilitating travel of foreign terrorist fighters to
the Syrian Arab Republic. In April, Ali ben Taher
ben Faleh Ouni Harzi, a member of Ansar al Shari'a
in Tunisia, was designated partly due to his efforts to
recruit foreign terrorist fighters. Further ISIL-related
designations are expected in the near future. As with
all designations, INTERPOL-Security Council Special
Notices have been issued. Cooperation between the
Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee and INTERPOL is
key to improving the implementation of the sanctions
measures. That is particularly true for foreign terrorist
fighters, given the need for timely information sharing
about cross-border movement.

On 26 May 2015, the report of the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team established
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1526 (2004),
which supports the work of the Al-Qaida Sanctions
Committee, on foreign terrorist fighters (S/2015/358)
was published pursuant to resolution 2178 (2014). The
headline conclusion from that report is there are now
more than 25,000 foreign terrorist fighters from over
100 countries. Many have travelled to fight for terrorist
entities associated with Al-Qaida, especially ISIL, and
the main movement has been into Syria and Iraq. The
report addresses three main areas concerning foreign
terrorist fighters: first, the analysis of the threat,
including the scale, predictions for growth and ancillary
risks; secondly, the trends, including demographics,
recruitment and financing; and thirdly, the challenges,
including information-sharing and border control. As
directed in resolution 2178 (2014), the Monitoring Team
made a number of detailed recommendations on the
basis of which the Committee has now taken decisions,
and will be following up and facilitating including with
the Security Council and Member States. This will be
reflected in a position paper from the Committee.

The Monitoring Team concluded that there are
three essential elements in the international response
to foreign terrorist fighters. First, Member States
should share actionable information on potential and
known foreign terrorist fighters, such as advanced

passenger information and material from national
watch lists. Secondly, at the national level Member
States should build capacity to disrupt foreign terrorist
fighter networks. This capacity can be enhanced
through legislative frameworks and national strategies
that allow Governments to act quickly and nimbly.
Thirdly, the Monitoring Team considers countering
violent extremism at every stage of an individual's
involvement to be at the heart of any successful policy
response. Member States need to develop strategies to
counter violent extremism that aim to prevent, assess
and reintegrate foreign terrorist fighters into society.

In resolution 2178 (2014), the Security Council
called on Member States to propose foreign terrorist
fighters, and those who facilitate or finance their
activities, for designation on the Al-Qaida sanctions
list. Some progress has been made since September
last year, but there is more work to be done. I take
this opportunity to recall that any Member State may
propose an individual or entity for inclusion on the list.
The Monitoring Team can advise any Member State
considering proposing designations, and the Team
takes part in regular outreach and training. I encourage
Member States considering designation proposals to
make early contact with the Team and the Chair of the
Committee.

To encourage proposals for listings, on 24 April
my predecessor as Chair of the Al-Qaida Sanctions
Committee, Ambassador Jim McLay, organized an
open briefing for all Member States on the Committee's
work. This briefing provided an informal opportunity
for interested Member States to interact with the
Committee and its work through the Chair and the
Monitoring Team coordinator. A variety of issues were
discussed, including the procedure for adding names
to the Al-Qaida sanctions list. I intend to continue to
hold such open briefings periodically throughout my
chairmanship.

We need intelligently targeted and well-implemented
sanctions as part of our toolbox to counter the threat
posed by foreign terrorist fighters and the harm they
cause to Member States, their societies and peoples.

