Mr. De la Calle Garcia (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Spain welcomes the adoption of resolution 2295 (2016),
which it co-sponsored. The resolution is the Security
Council's response to the unanimous request received
from the Government, the signatory parties of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, civil
society, troop-contributing countries and the political
stakeholders during the Council's visit to Mali in
March. It is a request for the strengthening of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).

In this resolution, the Security Council has tried
to define an appropriate framework and authorization
of force in a peacekeeping operation in a climate
of asymmetric attacks. Blue Helmets will now be
able to carry out operations to anticipate, deter
and combat asymmetric threats against civilians in
legitimate defence and in defence of their mandate.
This is an important step. It demonstrates the
Council's commitment to peace in Mali. It is also an
acknowledgement of troop-contributing countries,
whose men and women risk their lives and who now
have a mandate that will put them in a better position to
act in an extremely hostile environment.

However, the resolution is not the end, but rather
the beginning of what should be a new chapter. If
we want to be successful, this mandate should be
accompanied by a significant strengthening of the
capacity and equipment of the Mission; in particular,
however, it is essential for the parties to accelerate the
implementation of the Peace Agreement, which we
continue to consider the best opportunity for Mali to
achieve peace and security in a lasting way.

Finally, I would like to thank France for its
leadership and efficiency in helping the Council reach
an agreement on such a solid text. We would also like
to highlight the importance we attach to the inclusion
of a focus on women and peace and security in a
crosscutting way throughout the text. That inclusion
fulfils the promise that the Council members made to
the Malian women's organizations that we interviewed
in March.

