At the outset, let me congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for this month. We wish you every success in performing your duties during these unprecedented circumstances caused by the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). I would also like to thank the President and the Prosecutor of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals for their respective reports and for today's comprehensive briefings. We are grateful that the Mechanism continued to make progress in its work during the reporting period and continues to function despite the COVID-19 pandemic. We note the continued progress made by the Mechanism in fulfilling the remaining activities of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). We wish to underline the importance of successfully concluding the mandate of the Mechanism in an efficient manner and within a reasonable time frame, which is crucial for justice and reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the region. The coronavirus disease pandemic has had an impact on the actions and activities of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals since the Security Council last met on this topic (see S/2020/527). I would like to inform Council members that the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in coordination with the authorities of both entities and the Breko District of Bosnia and Herzegovina, has taken all responsible measures in combating the spread of COVID-19. The overall situation with the spread of the coronavirus disease, as well as the introduction of adequate measures to suppress the epidemic, has had a significant impact on the work of judicial institutions in the country. The work of the Prosecutor's Office and the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which mostly deal with the still unfinished and most complex war crimes cases, was particularly affected. I would like to inform members that the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, at its session held on 24 September 2020, adopted a revised national war crimes processing strategy. The adoption of this decision was recognized by the Security Council, and we are very grateful for its support. The revised strategy is important for our judicial institutions to make additional efforts and conclude all unresolved war crimes cases. It is also a step towards strengthening the rule of law in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as stated in the opinion of the European Commission issued in May of 2019. The implementation of the revised strategy will send a very strong message that impunity will not, and must not, be allowed. It is also important for reconciliation and progress in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as in the Western Balkans region. I would like to remind you, Mr. President, that over the years the cooperation of Bosnia and Herzegovina with the ICTY and its successor, the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, has been stable and complete, as evidenced by its reports. In the same vein, we remain committed to actively contributing to the Mechanism's efforts to accomplish its mission. We would also like to reiterate our commitment to its work and to call on all Member States to meet their obligations and contribute to the smooth running of the Mechanism. We would like to express our gratitude for the support of the European Union, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the United Nations Development Programme in terms of strengthening the human and material resources of judicial institutions prosecuting war crimes and in terms of general capacity-building. Bosnia and Herzegovina reiterates the importance of consistent cooperation among the prosecutors' offices and the competent authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina and neighbouring countries, Croatia and Serbia, in accordance with the principles of international justice and the rule of law, which is crucial for the investigation and prosecution of war crimes. Finally, I would like to emphasize that Bosnia and Herzegovina remains committed to investigating, prosecuting and punishing all persons responsible for war crimes, regardless of their nationality, political or other affiliation. We would also like to emphasize that witness protection is of the utmost importance for all judicial institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina. This is most important for reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as our path towards membership in the European Union, the main foreign policy goal, which has broad consensus among all political parties in the country. Keeping in mind that we recently marked the twenty-fifth anniversary of the end of the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the signing of the Dayton Peace Agreement, we are fully committed to continuing to strengthen the rule of law, human rights and economic development. We will continue to work to strengthen the justice system in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Full justice means more trust, stability and progress.
