Mr. Serbini (Brunei Darussalam): I have the
honour of speaking on behalf of the members of the
Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN),
namely Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, the
Lao People's Democratic Republic, Malaysia,
Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and
Viet Nam.

At this juncture, ASEAN wishes to thank the
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC),
His Excellency Sir Jeremy Greenstock, the Vice-
Chairmen, the other Committee members and all the
experts involved for their dedication and hard work.

We very much welcome these open meetings to
hear updates by the Chairman of the CTC on its work.
We appreciate the progress made by the Committee and
note that it has already issued 127 responses to the
reports submitted by Member States in response to
paragraph 6 of Council resolution 1373 (2001), and is
ready to review the second round of reports. In that
regard, we wish to emphasize that all ASEAN member
countries have already submitted their first reports and,
at this stage, are progressing towards fulfilling the next
requirements of the CTC. We look forward to further
efforts by the Committee and others to provide
assistance to ASEAN member countries in need of help
in implementing resolution 1373 (2001).

Allow me to give a further update on ASEAN's
ongoing efforts to combat international terrorism. An
important ASEAN achievement was the special
ministerial meeting on terrorism held in Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia, on 20 and 21 May 2002. While noting with
concern the close links between transnational crime
and terrorism, which lend greater urgency to efforts to
combat transnational crime, our ministers agreed to
endorse a comprehensive work programme on
terrorism to implement the ASEAN Plan of Action to
Combat Transnational Crime, which included, among
other things: exchange of information; the compilation
and dissemination of relevant laws and regulations of
ASEAN member countries; the compilation and
dissemination of bilateral and multilateral agreements
and information on relevant international treaties where
feasible; the development of multilateral or bilateral
legal arrangements to facilitate apprehension,
investigation, prosecution, extradition, inquiry and
seizure in order to enhance mutual legal and
administrative assistance among ASEAN member
countries where feasible; the enhancement of
cooperation and coordination in law enforcement and
intelligence sharing; and the development of regional
training programmes.

Offers were also made at the meeting by
Malaysia, Singapore and Indonesia with respect to
training and capacity-building for all ASEAN member
countries. The ministers also agreed to designate
principal contact points in all ASEAN member
countries on counter-terrorism matters. The progress
made in the implementation of these programmes will
be reviewed at subsequent meetings of ASEAN
ministers responsible for transnational crime issues.

An ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) workshop on
the prevention of terrorism was held in Bangkok on 17
to 19 April, organized by the Governments of Thailand
and Australia. It was opened by the Foreign Minister of
Thailand. The workshop concluded that greater
exchange of information and intelligence and further
cooperation among law enforcement and other relevant
security agencies were essential tools in the fight
against terrorism. Participants agreed that training and
exercises among ARF countries could contribute
usefully towards the development of national and
regional capabilities to prevent terrorism. They further
agreed that ARF participating countries be invited to
submit to the ARF Chair summaries of measures taken
nationally in response to the terrorist threat.

Earlier, another ARF workshop on financial
measures against terrorism was jointly organized in
Honolulu by the United States and Malaysia from 24 to
26 March 2002. Japan, the Republic of Korea and
Singapore will also jointly organize the third ARF
workshop on counter-terrorism in Tokyo in September
or October 2002, which will focus on security
arrangements for large-scale events. These workshops
are examples of ASEAN-led efforts to promote
cooperation between countries within South-East Asia
and those outside the region to combat international
terrorism.

In addition, various projects and initiatives
related to combating international terrorism were
planned by individual ASEAN members such as the
agreement on information exchange and establishment
of communication procedures signed by Indonesia,
Malaysia and the Philippines in Kuala Lumpur on
7 May 2002, under which the parties to the agreement
will cooperate to combat transnational crime, including
terrorism.

These steps reflect our commitment to tackle this
enormously challenging task. Countering terrorism
remains very high on our agenda, and I would like to
take this opportunity to reassure the Council of
ASEAN's continued cooperation in preventing,
countering and suppressing all terrorist acts in
accordance with the Charter, all relevant United
Nations resolutions, in particular Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001), and the principles of
international law.

