I thank Special Adviser Karim Khan for his briefing today. Despite the challenges of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, my delegation is reassured by his leadership and his team's commitment and efforts to adapt and ensure the continued implementation of the mandate of the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD). Let me make three brief points. First, with regard to the innovative approach to the situation, we are fully aware of the situation, as well as the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic to the Investigative Team's operational work on the ground during the reporting period. We are pleased to note the progress and positive developments that the Team has continued to achieve. We continue to be encouraged by the innovative response, including in the field of evidence collection, especially the continued cooperation with the Iraqi national authorities in this matter. As protecting survivors and witnesses should always be a priority, we believe that it is also important to continue to engage closely with relevant community groups in the process of evidence collection. That leads to my second point - capacity-building initiatives. From the report (see S/2020/1107), we are pleased to learn that the Investigative Team has made significant progress regarding cooperation in strengthening the capacity of Iraqi judicial and executive organs. We commend UNITAD's engagement and continued efforts to share knowledge and provide technical assistance and training to the Iraqi authorities. We also note with appreciation UNITAD's partnership with non-governmental organizations as well as its continued engagement with religious actors, survivor groups and community leaders. That brings me to my final point - the future work of the Investigative Team. We would like to reiterate that the ability of the Investigative Team to fulfil its mandate will also depend on its ability to maintain the trust and support of the Iraqi Government and, most important, the Iraqi people. Therefore, all elements of Iraqi society must continue to be engaged. In addition, we believe that they also need to be empowered and involved in UNITAD's activities. Today we have witnessed significant developments in UNITAD's work, as compared to almost two years ago, when for the first time, we engaged with the agency's file in the Council. No doubt that plenty of work still needs to be done, but we believe that we are a step closer to holding to account those responsible for the atrocities. Let me once again applaud Iraq's commitment to prosecuting the perpetrators of those crimes, rebuilding the country and bolstering national unity among all components of Iraqi society towards preserving its unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity. We must continue to show our support for their endeavours. Before concluding, I wish to reiterate the commitment of Indonesia to continue cooperating with the Investigative Team in support of its activities and mandate, in accordance with the relevant Security Council resolutions. As this will be our last intervention on this file during our current term in the Council, I would like to wish Special Adviser Khan and his team the best of luck with the valuable and substantial tasks that lie ahead of them.
