Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Feltman, Under-Secretary-
General O'Brien and Ambassador Apakan for their
useful and comprehensive briefings today.

This is my first appearance in the Chamber as
the Permanent Representative of the United States. It
is an immense honour for me to sit behind the United
States placard and to follow in the footsteps of so many
giants of American diplomacy. It is humbling to be
part ofa body whose responsibility is nothing less than
maintaining international peace and security. I look
forward to working closely with all Council members.
The United States is determined to push for action.
There is no time to waste.

I consider it unfortunate that the occasion of my
first appearance here is one in which I must condemn
the aggressive actions of Russia. It is unfortunate
because it is a replay of far too many instances over
many years in which United States representatives have
needed to do that. It should not have to be that way. We
do want to better our relations with Russia. However,
the dire situation in eastern Ukraine is one that demands
clear and strong condemnation of Russian actions.
The sudden increase in fighting in eastern Ukraine
has trapped thousands of civilians and destroyed vital
infrastructure. And the crisis is spreading, endangering
many thousands more. The escalation of violence
must stop.

The United States stands with the people okaraine,
who have suffered for nearly three years under Russian
occupation and military intervention. Until Russia and
the separatists it supports respect Ukraine's sovereignty
and territorial integrity, the crisis will continue.

Eastern Ukraine, of course, is not the only part of
the country suffering because of Russia's aggressive
actions. The United States continues to condemn and
call for an immediate end to the Russian occupation
of Crimea. Crimea is a part of Ukraine. Our Crimea-
related sanctions will remain in place until Russia
returns control of the peninsula to Ukraine.

The basic principle of the United Nations is that
States should live side by side in peace. There is a clear
path to restoring peace in eastern Ukraine - the full and
immediate implementation of the Minsk agreements,
which the United States continues to support. For the
people in eastern Ukraine, the stakes are high. With
each passing day, more people are at risk of freezing to
death or dying from a mortar blast.

The United States calls on Russia and the
combined Russian-backed separatist forces to fulfil
their commitments in the Minsk agreements and fully
restore and respect the ceasefire. The Minsk agreements
require the disengagement of forces and the withdrawal
of heavy weapons from both sides of the contact line.
That is the formula for a sustainable ceasefire. Pulling
back forces and taking heavy weapons out of the area
will save lives. The Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring
Mission must also be granted full, unfettered access.
The presence ofOSCE monitors can help calm tensions.

Cooperation on this issue is possible. Earlier this
week, both Russia and Ukraine supported this Council's
unanimous call (SC/12700) to return to a ceasefire. It
was the first time in years that the Council was able to
come together on Ukraine. The parties on the ground
should heed that signal and hold their fire. The United
States expects that those who can influence the groups
that are fighting - in particular Russia - will do
everything possible to support an end to the escalation
of violence.

