Mr. Adi (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): First of all, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council this month. I would also like to commend
you for holding this important meeting. It takes place
following the terrorist incidents in Mumbai, India,
which resulted in the death and injury of many
innocent civilians. My country was one of the first to
condemn those attacks through the President of the
Republic, Bashar Al-Assad, who also expressed his
condolences on behalf the Syrian people to the
fraternal people and Government of India.

The representative of Israel has once again used
the venue of the Security Council to falsify facts about
the terrorist acts that have been organized and carried
out by her State for decades now. The representative of
Israel thought that, through attacks against my country,
she could distract attention from the problems of
violence and terrorism in our region.

The essential fact here is that Israel is occupying
Arab territories and committing crimes against
humanity. These acts have been carried out by
successive Israeli Governments against the defenceless
Palestinian people. Everyone knows that Israel is
imposing an unfair embargo against Gaza and has
adopted a slow-kill policy against more than
1.5 million Palestinians there. Israel has folded its arms
when confronted with the terrorist acts of Israeli
settlers committed against Palestinians in Hebron. The
intervention by the representative of Israel cannot
change the terrible past of terrorism - the archives,
encyclopaedias and museums are filled with facts
about ethnic cleansing, war crimes and genocide
committed by Israel in the course of its bloody history
against Palestinians, Syrians, Lebanese, Egyptians,
Jordanians and nationals of other countries.

Israel introduced State terrorism in the region.
The terrorist gangs are well known to everyone. They
include Shtren, Irgun, Stern Gang, Haganah and

Balmakh, which have killed thousands of Palestinians
and evicted millions of them from their land. Israel
assassinated United Nations special envoy Count
Bernadotte. By hijacking a Syrian civilian aircraft in
1954, Israel committed the first act of air piracy in
history. Israel carried out political assassinations in
Beirut in 1968, killing unarmed civilian intellectuals.
In the 19805, it carried out attacks against heads of
Palestinian municipalities, using booby-trapped cars.
Israel bombed the American intelligence vessel, USS
Liberty, during the 1967 war, after it had intercepted
orders for the mass execution of Egyptian prisoners in
the Sinai. In 1971, Israel shot down a Libyan civilian
plane.

Israel attacked the headquarters of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon in southern
Lebanon, killing 106 civilians who had taken refuge in
the United Nations building. In 2006, Israel attacked
observer positions in the areas of Maroun Al-Ras and
Al-Khiam. Let us not forget the report issued by the
Canadian Army, which investigated a terrorist crime
that had led to the deaths of a Canadian commander
and three Austrian, Chinese and Finnish observers.
That report revealed that Israel had deliberately
attacked their position. There were also other
suspicious operations against peacekeeping forces in
southern Lebanon.

A Belgian commander, killed on 5 September
2008, was the most recent victim of Israeli attacks in
our region. He was killed during a demining operation
to remove mines planted by Israel in southern
Lebanon. Israel continues to refuse to provide maps of
where it has planted mines and cluster bombs in
Lebanon, which have caused the deaths of hundreds of
Lebanese, including dozens of women and children,
despite repeated calls by the Security Council and the
United Nations to provide such maps.
That is the reality of the terrorist State of Israel,
whose representative has unsuccessfully attempted to
detract attention from its terrorist nature. The
representative of Israel has also labelled Palestinian
refugee organizations as terrorist groups - refugees
whom the State of Israel has forced into exile from
their lands and homes for decades. Those refugees are
attempting to regain their rights and to have recourse to
international legality through international resolutions.
Arab States, including Syria, have hosted those
brotherly refugees, providing them with the support
they need while they wait to return to their country,
Palestine. They have done so in line with resolutions of
international legality, especially General Assembly
resolution 194 (III), on the Palestinians' right of return.

Like the majority of States, Syria has supported
the right of peoples to freedom and self-determination.
For many years, Syria condemned the odious apartheid
regime in South Africa, whose main partner was Israel.

Let us not forget Israel's terrorism against the
rights of the Syrian people in the occupied Syrian
Golan. That State terrorism has been condemned
annually by the United Nations in most of its Main
Committees, as well as by the yearly vote on and
adoption of resolutions condemning Israel's occupation
of the Golan and its annexation of it in 1981. The
United Nations has likewise condemned the repression
of Syrian citizens by Israeli occupying authorities.
Israel's practices are tantamount to collective
punishment and war crimes, and run counter to
international law.

Had Israel not pursued its occupation in the
Palestinian, Syrian Golan and Lebanese territories for
many decades, we would not be Witnessing the
legitimate acts of resistance that Israel and those who
protect it deem to be terrorism. Had influential
countries in the United Nations not continued to
support Israel's crimes in our region, international
cooperation and efforts to combat terrorism would have
been more effective, useful and productive.

