Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): Allow me to convey
Nigeria's profound appreciation to the Republic of
South Africa for having convened this high-level
meeting in continuation of the dialogue on
strengthening the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union (AU). Let me affirm
Nigeria's unalloyed support for that laudable initiative.
President Goodluck Jonathan, in his capacity as Chair
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), greatly appreciates the invitation extended
to him to participate in today's debate.

I would also like to express my appreciation to
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his leadership and
commitment to peace and security in Africa. His
comprehensive report (S/2011/805), which
appropriately sets the tone for today's debate, is
pertinent for its concrete proposals for improving the
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union. We owe a great debt to the Kenyan
Foreign Minister, Chair of the Peace and Security
Council (PSC) of the African Union, and
Commissioner Lamamra for their illuminating
perspectives and important insights.

In Africa's increasingly dynamic and complex
security environment, the need to strengthen the
partnership between the United Nations and the AU,
two organizations whose efforts have proven critical in
addressing peace and security challenges, cannot be
overemphasized. We therefore welcome the important
milestones that have been achieved in the relationship
between the two bodies over the past two decades. We
appreciate, in particular, the increasingly horizontal
and vertical cooperation between the two organizations
and their key organs and institutions.

The launching of the United Nations-AU Joint
Task Force on Peace and Security on 25 September
2010, the establishment of the United Nations Office to
the African Union in Addis Ababa and the regular
desk-to-desk meetings have all borne fruit and
significantly enhanced the cooperation and
coordination between the United Nations Secretariat
and the AU Commission. It is encouraging that the
meetings of the Task Force have provided valuable
opportunities for both organs to seek lasting solutions
to the conflict situations in Somalia, Cote d'lvoire, the
Sudan and Libya.

For the partnership to be viable, sustainable and
strategic, it must be underpinned by clarity of

guidance. Indeed, we share the Secretary-General's
view that the partnership should be based on
comparative advantages, the complementarity of
mandates and optimal use of resources and capacities.

It must be stated that cooperation between the
Security Council and the AU Peace and Security
Council is of singular importance to the growing
partnership between the United Nations as a whole and
the AU. As a current member of the AU Peace and
Security Council, having just concluded our tenure in
the Security Council, we are fully cognizant of the
central role that both organs play in the maintenance of
international peace and security. Regular consultative
meetings between them are, therefore, not only
desirable but imperative.

In July 2010, under Nigeria's presidency of the
Security Council, both organs, meeting in New York,
agreed to a specific format and modalities for their
annual consultative meetings. That is a good step
forward. We expect qualitative progress on that
understanding and more Vigorous discussion of
substantive, not just procedural, issues at future
consultative meetings.

Peacekeeping in Africa is an integral and vital
part of the maintenance of international peace and
security, for which the Council has primary
responsibility. Undoubtedly, it is the core area of
cooperation between the United Nations and the AU
and, conversely, the area bearing the greatest and most
significant challenge.

When the AU undertakes a United Nations-
mandated peacekeeping operation, it faces multiple
financing, equipping and mission support challenges.
Those demands often outweigh its resources and
capacities to effectively respond. The lessons learned
from the workshop of November 2010 between the
United Nations and the AU reinforces our View that a
great deal still needs to be done on mission planning,
the development of doctrines and policies and the
operationalization of the African Standby Force.

On Somalia, while we welcome the United
Nations effort to augment its footprint with the
establishment of the United Nations office in
Mogadishu, we also believe that the full provision of
both light and heavy support packages for the African
Union Mission in Somalia will be a realistic way to
underpin recent security gains. Ultimately, a full and
robust United Nations peacekeeping operation will be
the panacea to the relentless insecurity, piracy and
humanitarian challenges in the country.

With respect to Darfur, the signing of the Doha
agreement provides the impetus for the Security
Council to give its consent to the convening of the
Darfur political process, as called for by the African
Union.

In their statements this morning, several
delegations aptly acknowledged that the success of any
peacekeeping operation is largely dependent on
adequate and timely financial and logistical resources.
Yet, financing AU peacekeeping operations remains a
daunting challenge. Indeed, as the Prodi panel report
notes, "financing options are not difficult to identify"
(5/2008/813, paragraph 7).

The problem persists because we, the
stakeholders, have failed to adopt the far-reaching and
creative alternatives required. Existing frameworks
have so far not been found conducive to building
sustainable strategies for peacekeeping partnership.

The Council must consider endorsing a financing
option that guarantees the predictability, sustainability
and flexibility of funding for AU peacekeeping
operations. In that regard, Nigeria welcomes the
establishment of the AU High-Level Panel on
Alternative Sources of Funding, set up in July 2011
under the chairmanship of former President Olusegun
Obasanjo of Nigeria, and hopes that the Panel would be
supported in achieving its critical mandate. Greater
progress is also required in the implementation of the
Ten-Year Capacity-Building Programme.

Looking ahead to a more strategic partnership,
both organizations must intensify their investment in
conflict prevention, mediation and peacebuilding.
Nigeria believes that preventive diplomacy strategies,
such as early warning systems and mediation, are
pivotal to the attainment of peace and security on the
continent. Indeed, for that reason we sought to address
the issue of conflict prevention during our presidency
of the Security Council in July 2010 (see S/PV.6360).

The AU has worked assiduously over the past
decade to build a viable framework for prevention and
response, not least through the Panel of the Wise and
the AU Peace and Security Council. ECOWAS has also
made great strides in that area, primarily through the
steady implementation of its conflict prevention
framework, including its council of elders, fact-finding
and electoral support missions and early warning
systems.

Even more significant, both organizations have
developed robust peacekeeping mechanisms. Such
seminal work at the regional and subregional levels
must be supported by decisions taken within the United
Nations. That is why Nigeria welcomes the effort by
both the United Nations and the AU secretariat to
develop common guidelines that are delineated in the
framework for mediation in Africa from lessons
learned in Kenya, Darfur, Somalia and Guinea-Bissau.

We take this opportunity to call for increased
collaboration between the United Nations and the
African Union in the drafting of resolutions that would
not only address our inherent challenges, but also
propel us towards meeting our shared aspirations for a
more peaceful world. That is, indeed, an achievable
objective if it is underpinned by a closer partnership
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
particularly the African Union and ECOWAS.

