Mr. Lasso Mendoza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):

I should like to thank the United States presidency for
convening this debate on the security of journalists
in armed conflict. To me personally as a professional
journalist, this subject is ofparticular interest, as it is for
my country, which is a champion of the right of access
by all to truthful, timely and verified information.

It is important to note the duty of States to protect all
their citizens in any situation that puts their lives at risk
as a result of criminal and delinquent activities. This
protection should be for all, regardless of condition or
profession. We must, however, be careful not to consider
that every murder of an individual who happens to be a
journalist is necessarily an infringement of the freedom
of expression when in reality it may simply be a case of
common crime. In every circumstance, Ecuador calls
on all States not to allow the killing ofjournalists to go
unpunished.

The specific theme oftoday's debate is the protection
of journalists in armed conflict. This protection is
defined, first and foremost, as that which international
humanitarian law grants to civilians in cases of armed
conflict. In that context, Ecuador condemns the deaths
of all civilians and non-combatants - most certainly
including journalists - as a result of collateral damage
in actions not directed against military objectives, as
defined by the laws ofwar, or in extrajudicial executions,
which are illegal under international law and may even
be carried these days using remote-controlled means
that do not distinguish between armed combatants and
civilian populations, includingjournalists, who must be
protected in all circumstances.

A second element underpinning the need to
protect journalists in armed conflicts is the right of
society to have access to truthful information, and its
corresponding right, that of freedom of expression. The
presence ofjournalists in the midst of armed conflicts
has helped societies to better understand the horrors of
war and clearly understand who are the true aggressors
and who are the people exercising their right to self-
defence and self-determination.

This role of a committed, independent and truthful
journalist must be protected. However, we believe it
necessary to reflect on the situation of those who, in
the exercise of journalistic activities, are really more
the agents of propaganda, even if involuntary, of one
of the Powers in conflict when they are embedded in
military units that are subject to censorship behind
which war crimes are often hidden. There are ethical
and ontological considerations in that regard that should
not be overlooked in this debate.

As on other occasions, my delegation reiterates its
appeal for respect for the basic mandates of the various
United Nations bodies in order to avoid ineffective
duplication of effort and, above all, distortions from the

appropriate treatment that these issues deserve. While
we value the attention that the Council and UNESCO
are now giving to the safety ofjournalists, we believe
that it is up to the Human Rights Council specifically,
and its Special Rapporteur in general, to address the
issue ofjournalists' safety, in particular because of the
valuable tools at its disposal, including its emergency
appeals and its universal periodic review mechanism.

In our View, the ever-present risk of politicizing
matters related to the protection of human rights, in
this case forjournalists, by taking them to bodies that
are eminently political, as is undoubtedly the case of
the Security Council, weakens the necessary message
of complete and total respect of the human rights of
all human beings. At least this is our reading and our
understanding; of course, there are many others. Who
knows how many other readings there may be? A
number of opinions have been expressed on this very
same issue, and from this diversity everyone will draw
their own conclusions.
That brings us to an issue that should be key and
ineluctable - context. Journalists have died in my
country. There were recently two disturbing cases in
Ecuador. The first one, this year, involving Fausto
Baldiveso, is currently being investigated. My country's
prosecutor and police have detained seven suspects
to date, all of whom have been linked to usury and
drug trafficking in the past. The other case, of 2012,
involves Juan Antonio Serrano Selgado, the brother of
Ecuador's Minister of the Interior, a photojournalist
who was murdered by a group of young people who
had been taking drugs. According to the investigations
to date, neither of those two unfortunate cases are
linked to the journalistic lives of those citizens. When
Ms. Kathleen Carroll read out this morning a list of
countries - an incomplete one at that, without context
or qualification - she was undertaking a perverse
exercise that belied a lack of serious and honest
journalism. At a time when that is what we are seeking
today, it seems that when haste is placed before rigour,
the result is politicization.

In conclusion, I cannot fail to mention that the type
of indiscriminate electronic monitoring that the world's
citizens have experienced in recent weeks can also
jeopardize the lives of journalists and their sources,
especially in situations of armed conflict. As an
associated State of the Common Market of the South,
Ecuador endorses the comments of the Permanent
Representative of Brazil this morning with regard to the
need to adopt multilateral rules governing the Internet,
in order to ensure the protection communications, the
privacy of individuals and respect for the sovereignty
of States.

