Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank the Chinese presidency
for convening this very important meeting.

The twenty-first century has presented us
with formidable challenges, such as regional and
ethnic conflict, poverty, climate change, terrorism,
cybersecurity and the abuse of human rights. All of
those challenges have something in common - they
cannot be solved by any of us alone. Globalization,
trade and technological innovation have offered us
a prosperous and interconnected world, but one that
depends on peace and stability.

Faced with those challenges, we must not be
passive. Japan wishes to be proactive in its international
cooperation with a view to overcoming obstacles in our
way. As a proactive contributor to peace, Japan plays
its part. Japan believes that we cannot achieve our
nation's own security and prosperity without peace,
security and stability in our region and around the
world. We are making every effort to promote human
security, peacebuilding and sustaining peace, as well
as the Sustainable Development Goals that underlie
those situations.

Japan will continue our support for United Nations
peacekeeping operations, including by providing
training for enablers, such as engineers and medical
personnel from troop-contributing countries, through
triangular partnership projects. We will also continue
our work in the Peacebuilding Commission to help
enhance stability and prevent any relapses into conflict.

As a leading trading and maritime nation, Japan
seeks peace and stability on the high seas and in the
airspace above. It is on and over those waters that the
world's commerce travels. We underscore the importance
of open seas and the rule of law as the bases for peace
and prosperity. We embrace the international law of the
sea, which is based primarily on the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea, as indispensable for
securing our maritime rights and interests, as well as
for undertaking maritime activities smoothly. We will
continue to make every effort to promote and maintain
a free and open Indo-Pacific ocean region.

As a forum for collective problem-solving,
the importance of the United Nations cannot be
overemphasized. Japan strongly supports the reform
efforts initiated by Secretary-General Antonio Guterres.
The Secretary-General seeks to improve United
Nations management, its development apparatus, and
its peace and security architecture, and Japan will be a
constructive participant in those efforts.

Of course, reform of the United Nations will not be
complete without the reform of the Security Council.
The world has seen enormous changes since 1945,
but the Council's composition has not kept pace. The
Council must be reformed to reflect the twenty-first
century's realities so that it can tackle twenty-first
century problems. As Prime Minister Abe said at the
General Assembly's general debate in September,

"[i]n light of the lack of progress in reforming the
Security Council, the significance of the United
Nations in the twenty-first century world is already
being severely questioned" (A/73/PV.7, p43).

In closing, let me reiterate Japan's commitment
to multilateral engagement, the rule of law and the
peaceful settlement of disputes. Today's problems can
be resolved as long as we are ready to work together to
resolve them.

