Nana Effah-Apenteng (Ghana): At the outset, let
me express the appreciation of my delegation to
Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, and to Ambassador
Ibrahim Gambari, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for their updates on the situation in
the Middle East, regarding the ongoing Israeli military
operations in Lebanon in response to the latest rocket
attacks launched by the Hizbollah group. The repeated
violations of the Blue Line by Hizbollah have been
denounced consistently by the Security Council, and
we note that the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon has done its best to prevent the situation from
getting out of control.

We further welcome the decision of the
Secretary-General to send a three-man delegation to
ascertain what can be done to end this unfortunate turn
of events. We hope that the visit will succeed in
bringing an end to the violence.

We also take this opportunity to reiterate the call
for the immediate release of all kidnapped Israeli
soldiers; the same applies to the Palestinian
parliamentarians who have been abducted by Israel.

Yesterday, Ghana voted in favour of the draft
resolution on the Middle East (S/2006/508) that the
Security Council failed to adopt, much to the regret of
those who see in the dangerous escalation of violence
in the Middle East a real threat of a regional war with
unpredictable consequences. Once unleashed, force is
difficult to control. Worse still, its casualties are
frequently innocent civilians and it involves a general
deterioration in the humanitarian situation. That was
true of Gaza, and we are hearing of similar
displacements in southern Lebanon. Furthermore,
mistrust grows, positions harden and the prospects for
a diplomatic solution recede, to the frustration of all.

The Security Council is fully aware of all of these
dangers and has repeatedly called for restraint on both
sides of the Middle East peace divide. Beyond that, the
Council has repeatedly reminded the parties of their
commitments under international law and international
humanitarian law.

Against that background, the widespread
bombardment of Vital Lebanese infrastructure,
including the airport, highways and several other
targets, in order to enforce a total blockade on a
sovereign State is not acceptable. Diplomacy was
hardly given a chance in spite of the well-known
difficulties faced by the Lebanese Government in
disbanding the militia and extending control over all of
its territory in full compliance with Security Council
resolution 1559 (2004).

While some success has been achieved through
the strategy of containment, including the deployment
of peacekeeping missions, not much has been achieved
in addressing the underlying causes of the conflict in
the Middle East. Objectively, the Middle East crisis
revolves around the Palestinian question, which boils
down to the achievement of an independent and viable
State for the Palestinians within internationally
recognized boundaries.

We therefore call for an immediate cessation of
hostilities between Israel and the various armed groups
and for a speedy resumption of the peace negotiations
without preconditions.

These are dangerous times, and the Security
Council must live up to its responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security by
refocusing its energies and attention on seeking a just
and lasting solution to the Middle East question.

