Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I thank the Secretary- General for his remarks and Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing. As we have stated our positions on issues relating to Syria on many occasions, I will not repeat them all. In the light of the recent developments, I would like to highlight the following. First, we are deeply concerned about the most recent escalation of the situation in north-western Syria and even more concerned about the terrible risk of a more serious and uncontrollable conflict in the next few days. We would therefore like to reiterate our support for the Secretary-General's call for an immediate ceasefire. We welcome the ongoing exchanges among the relevant parties at various levels. We nevertheless urge all parties to exercise maximum restraint and strengthen dialogue to find a feasible solution to the conflict in this area. That is needed more than ever before. Secondly, our consistent position is that the conflict in Syria must be settled through a political solution in accordance with the principles of international law, the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant Security Council resolutions, including resolution 2254 (2015). We fully support the important facilitating role of the United Nations, including that of Special Envoy Geir Pedersen, as well as any viable diplomatic efforts, bilateral and multilateral, towards peace and stability in Syria. Thirdly, we are of the view that the deteriorating situation in Idlib is now too great a burden for millions of civilians to bear. Humanitarian concerns must be addressed and humanitarian work must be facilitated, including through feasible ways and means that can ensure the timely delivery of aid. We must spare no efforts in fighting against United Nations-designated terrorists and_ terrorist organizations but we must combat them in a way that defeats their purpose. We must therefore uphold international law, the Charter of the United Nations and international humanitarian law. The protection of civilians must be our top priority.
