Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we thank and commend Mr. Staffan de Mistura
and Mr. John Ging for their comprehensive and detailed
briefings. We reiterate our appreciation for all United
Nations efforts in every facet of the crisis in Syria.

Ambassador Olof Skoog will speak on behalf of
Kuwait and Sweden during the informal consultations
later, as the two countries were the co-penholders on
the resolution on the humanitarian situation in Syria.
Nevertheless, I would like to make the following
main points.

First, we welcome the reasons that Mr. De Mistura
just gave to us as to why we should remain cautiously
optimistic about progress made concerning the
establishment of the constitutional committee. If
carried out, that step will be critical to the transitional
political process. In that regard, we stress that there is no
military or humanitarian solution to the crisis in Syria.
The only way to resolve the crisis is through a political
solution, which will require all ofus to accelerate ending
the crisis through such a solution to a prolonged crisis
that does not have repercussions only for the Middle
East but far beyond the region. In that connection, I
underscore what my colleague Mr. Skoog said, namely,
that we believe in the importance of committing to
resolution 2401 (2018), which needs to be implemented.
As members we shoulder an important responsibility
to follow up on that consensus resolution and ensure
its implementation. The guarantors of the Astana
agreement also must follow up on its implementation.

We agree with the assessment of the Secretary-
General in his report (S/2018/617) on cross-border
operations and humanitarian aid. Providing such
assistance is in line with resolution 2393 (2017) and
other previous relevant resolutions, and is part of the
humanitarian response in Syria. As was just said by
Mr. Ging, reliance on such assistance for people in
certain provinces is on the rise. We therefore have to
maintain and find ways to improve it so as to reach
remote and hard-to-reach areas.

Secondly, we share the Secretary-General's
concern about the recent military escalation in south-
west Syria, to which Mr. De Mistura referred, and its
potential humanitarian repercussions. We have already
seen some of its negative consequences in the number
of displaced persons, which, to date, has reached almost
50,000. Concerning the statistics relating to health-
care facilities cited by Mr. Ging in his briefing, we are
deeply concerned about and condemn the targeting of
such facilities, which is a clear violation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions and most certainly
constitutes war crimes. We urge all parties to respect
the provisions of international law and international
humanitarian law, especially the de-escalation zone
and ceasefire agreement in south-western Syria, which
had been calm over the past year.

Before concluding, it seems wise to remind all of
us that we are only a few days away from the sixth
anniversary of the Geneva communique' (S/2012/522, annex) of 2012, which serves as the cornerstone for
reaching a solution to the Syrian crisis. It was endorsed
by the Security Council via resolution 2254 (2015) and
enjoys the support of the League of Arab States.

The people of Syria, with their rich culture and
history, are no longer able to bear further humanitarian
suffering. It is incumbent upon us to support the political
track agreed by all segments of society of the brotherly
Syrian people, which would maintain the territorial
integrity, unity, independence and sovereignty of Syria
and meet their legitimate aspirations.

