Mr. Al-Bader (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I
warmly thank you, Mr. President, for having provided
us the opportunity to participate in this debate on a
serious and important issue that is threatening
international peace and security.

For 54 years now, the General Assembly - under
resolution 181 (II), which called for an end to the
British mandate for Palestine by the end of August
1948, has attempted to partition Palestine into two
independent States that would live peacefully side by
side with economic ties between them. The resolution
also provided special status for Al-Quds Al-Sharif, or
Jerusalem. Chapters 2 and 3 of the text laid down the
borders for the two States. The Assembly also decided
to establish a Special Committee that would monitor
events in Palestine after the withdrawal of the mandate
Power and would be charged with adopting the
measures and laws necessary for the establishment of
the two States.

Subsequently, when the State of Israel came into
being, the Palestinians unfortunately were unable to
create their own State, given Israel's continued
violations of resolution 181 (II) and its annexation of a
great number of Palestinian territories. As a result,
conflict and violence erupted between the Israeli and
Arab sides. Today, Israel continues to violate both
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions,
including resolution 242 (1967) which demands Israel's
full withdrawal from the territories occupied in
1967 - including Al-Quds Al-Sharif - and resolution
338 (1973), which demands that Israel fully implement
resolution 242 (1967) and stipulates that the parties to
the conflict must begin negotiations leading to the
establishment of a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East.

We are meeting today at a time of escalating
military threats that threaten the whole region and that
are difficult to control. We cannot predict the results,
given Israel's provocations on several fronts. Its most
recent acts of aggression against Syria and Rafah are
irrefutable proof of Israel's ongoing violations of
international law and of the principles of international
conventions, including the Fourth Geneva Convention
of 1949 relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War, and Israel's defiance of international
legitimacy and its resolutions. At a time when we are
seeing a deterioration of the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories and acts carried out against the
Palestinian people in full public View, we note with
sadness the grave deterioration of the security situation
in the occupied Palestinian territories as a result of the
recent Israel invasion of Rafah, the full siege and the
imposition of a curfew on civilian populations that has
made it impossible for officials of international
humanitarian organizations to carry out their work.

The Israeli occupying forces are flagrantly
defying international law and the international
community by putting President Yasser Arafat and
other elected Palestinian leaders under siege and by
demolishing houses, killing individuals and attacking
religious sites - barbarities that we have not seen
since the end of the Second World War - which have
led the International Committee of the Red Cross and
officials of various humanitarian organizations to
condemn those acts. The responsible parties should be
brought to justice before international tribunals and
charged with human rights violations on the scale of
war crimes.

The situation has continued to deteriorate,
particularly since Israel's decision to build the
separation wall, which has been condemned by the
international community - even including a portion of
Israeli society - given its negative effects on the
economic and social life of the Palestinian people, on
the movement of citizens and on free trade. The wall
has annexed the lands of 25 Palestinian towns,
completely destroying their economies and cutting
them off from one another. The second phase of the
wall will isolate East Jerusalem, and thus 200,000
Palestinians will be living within the Green Line.
According to an estimate by the World Bank, the
separation wall will take up to 12 per cent of the West
Bank's territory. While we witnessed the fall of the
Berlin wall - a wall that was condemned by the
international community - today we are witnessing
the building of a wall that is much more dangerous
than the Berlin Wall was, since it does not only directly
threaten the establishment of a Palestinian political
entity but will have negative effects on the Palestinians
themselves, on the fabric of their daily lives, on their
economic, social and cultural situation and on their
health. Moreover, it will have negative effects on the
entire negotiating process and on the prospects for a
lasting settlement. Israel has imposed this wall as a fait
accompli, thereby occupying the territories it wishes to
occupy.

Violence can only lead to counter-violence; thus
this violence must end. The Palestinian people must be
provided guarantees for the return of their refugees, for
their right to self-determination and for the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State,
living side by side with Israel in peace, in conformity
with Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), which reaffirm the principle of land for peace;
with other Conventions concluded by the two parties;
and with various peace initiatives, particularly that of
the Summit of the Arab League, held at Beirut, and
with the road map.

