The President (spoke in Spanish): 1 shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Plurinational State of Bolivia.

Bolivia wishes at the outset to thank Mr. Feltman,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs;
Ambassador Joao Vale de Almeida, Head of the
European Union delegation to the United Nations;
and Ambassador Sebastiano Cardi and his team, as
Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015).

Bolivia shares in the satisfaction expressed by
the Secretary-General in his third report on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2017/515)
at the efforts and commitments of the States involved in
the implementation of this historic agreement.

Bolivia reaffirms its commitment to the diplomatic
triumph represented by the adoption of the resolution,
which endorsed the Joint Competitive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) and highlighted the compulsory nature of
its implementation by the parties as well as their
commitments. We believe that the progress made
in this area represents an important milestone in
joint diplomatic actions in the quest for horizontal,
transparent dialogue in good faith and with reciprocity.

The International Atomic Energy Agency, on
15 January, verified that the Islamic Republic of Iran
had removed all excess centrifuges and infrastructure
from the Fordow Fuel Enrichment Plant and their
transfer to storage at the Natanz Fuel Enrichment Plant
under continuous Agency monitoring, in compliance
with the agreed timeline. My delegation sees this as a
clear sign of the commitment of the Islamic Republic of
Iran to the fulfilment of the commitments made under
the J CPOA.

We also wish to highlight the efforts of the
procurement channel, in accordance with the JCPOA,
which processes the transfer by States of nuclear or
dual-use goods, technologies and/or related services
to the Islamic Republic of Iran. These activities, along
with periodic reporting, strengthen transparency as
regards the proper implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) and the activities set out in its annex B.

As on a previous occasion, my delegation expresses
its concern at the fact that the report contains no
reference to annex A. We believe that both annexes,
A and B, are integral and complementary parts that
are required for the comprehensive implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015).

Finally, thePlurinationalStateofBolivia,as apacifist
State, reaffirms its commitments in the framework
of respect for the principles of non-interference and
respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of States. In this particular case, I wish to
stress that politicization, provocative rhetoric and zero-
sum logic are completely contrary to and incompatible
with diplomatic means and purposes, multilateralism
and what has been agreed upon on the issue that brings
us together this afternoon.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the Permanent Representative
of Germany.

