Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank you, Madam President,
and the entire Nigerian delegation, for your capable
leadership of the Security Council in August, and we
would also like to express our appreciation for the work
of the New Zealand presidency in July. We would also
like to join the rest in offering our condolences for the
sudden death of the Brazilian peacemaker.

We have done a pretty good job this month. We gave
a great deal of attention to the Middle East and North
Africa. Sadly, the state of affairs there leaves much to
be desired. The region is unstable, there are bloody
conflicts everywhere and the prospects for solving
them are dim. In August we have traditionally tried to
tackle the still unresolved Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
which continues to pose risks of increasing tension and
radicalization. The uncertainty of the situation around
the Gaza Strip compounds the continued absence of
intra-Palestinian unity.

Unfortunately, the situation in Libya also remains
extremely problematic. The gross violations by some
Council members of the Security Council resolutions
on Libya adopted in 2011 continue to result in serious
damage with new and tragic effects. One such is the
recent wave ofillegal immigrants attempting to flee the
chaos of Libya for the shores of Europe. Despite the
cautious optimism expressed last week (see S/PV.7512)
by Mr. Bernadino Leon, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, regarding the prospects of the work
being done on a political agreement, there are many
reasons for concern. The longer the State continues its
collapse, the more that will be exploited by terrorist
organizations, including the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL). They continue to expand their
presence on Libyan soil.

We had a detailed discussion of Yemen, where
violent clashes continue and the humanitarian situation
is worsening. Civilians are dying almost daily.
Yesterday it was reported that a single air strike killed
at least 13 people. There is currently no light visible at
the end of that tunnel. We urge that the bloodshed cease
immediately and call on all sides to adopt a constructive
attitude in the negotiations being conducted under the
the auspices ofIsmail Ahmed, the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General.

The issue of Syria was once again a major item on
the Council's agenda. It was encouraging that we were
able to adopt several important documents, including
a political statement by the President of the Security
Council on Syria (S/PRST/2015/15) urging Syrians to
engage urgently with the diplomatic efforts of Special
Envoy Staffan de Mistura. On 7 August we adopted
resolution 2235 (2015), which establishes the Joint
Investigative Mechanism on incidents involving the use
of toxic chemicals in Syria, which we hope will work
professionally and impartially. That is particularly
important in view of the fact that, as the Council's work

on this subject has shown, various members of the
Council are prepared to shield terrorists in pursuit of
their own political aims. We are concerned about recent
reports on the growing numbers of cases in the region
where ISIL fighters have been using not only toxic
chemicals such as chlorine but also chemical warfare
agents and mustard gas in particular. There is evidence
that ISIL has been given access to the relevant technical
documentation and has been attracting experts from
abroad to work on synthesizing such agents in labs on
territory they have captured. The nature and extent of
the threats emanating from ISIL and other terrorist
organizations have reached unacceptable levels.

At the same time, in just the past few days, and
after the adoption of resolution 2235 (2015), on the
establishment of the Joint Investigative Mechanism,
there have been reports of ISIL's increasing use of
chemical weapons in Syria's neighbour Iraq. Any
failure to attend to such incidents is both unacceptable
and extremely dangerous. In that regard, the Russian
delegation believes the Security Council should adopt
a draft resolution extending the mechanism's mandate
to Iraq, and we have begun working on that. We believe
that such a resolution is urgent, even if it represents
only one brick in the wall needed for a foundation for
settling the region's worst problems, which have left
a number of countries in the Middle East and North
Africa facing real threats to their territorial integrity.
The proliferating conflicts fuel the potential risks
of terrorism. ISIL's fighters are trying to bring ever
greater expanses of territory under the control of their
quasi-State.

It has become ever more critical that we undertake
a comprehensive analysis of the nature of the conflicts
in the Middle East and North Africa with the aim of
deciding the direction of our collective work on the
basis of the Charter of the United Nations. We must
find the common denominators and form a shared
understanding of both the reasons for the current
massive security crisis in the region and the political
and other factors that are compounding it. That is
the only way that the international community, with
the Security Council playing a key role, can achieve
the measures agreed on for preventing the region's
growing potential for conflict and terrorist activity.
On 30 September we plan to hold an open debate at
the ministerial level on the subject "Maintenance of
international peace and security: settling conflicts
in the Middle East and North Africa and the fight
against the terrorist threat in the region". Based on
its conclusions, we plan to adopt a draft presidential
statement highlighting the urgent measures we need to
take to resolve and end the conflicts in the Middle East
and North Africa, as well as possible further steps for
mitigating the risks of terrorism in the region. We are
hoping for the broad participation of Member States at
a high level. We believe the topic's relevance has been
fully affirmed by the work of the Council in August,
in which we have attempted to unravel the Middle
East's knotty problems strand by separate strand. That
experience has shown that we can restore the region
only through a comprehensive approach on a firm basis
of international law, without double standards and
founded on the prerogatives of the Security Council.

In conclusion, I would like to express our thanks
to all the members who have promised their support to
the Russian presidency of the Council for the month of
September.

