Mrs. Juul (Norway): This meeting takes place
against the backdrop of yesterday's Israeli military
action in Gaza. The numbers are indisputable and
shocking: 19 Palestinians were killed in Beit Hanoun
alone, a majority of them women and children. Our
condolences go to those who lost loved ones. Norway
condemns this massive use of military force by the
Israel Defense Forces in their attempts to stop the
firing of home-made rockets from Gaza.

Since June this year, more than 300 Palestinians
have lost their lives, many of them children. Countless
others have suffered injuries and have been left
homeless and traumatized. Along with the damaging
effects of the Israeli military action, the overall
humanitarian situation in Gaza is becoming more and
more critical, increasing human suffering and
undermining the prospects for peace.

Norway's Minister for Foreign Affairs was in
Gaza yesterday and could see for himself the rapidly
deteriorating humanitarian situation and the
widespread destruction left behind by the recent Israeli
military campaign. In Gaza, my Minister met with
President Abbas; he also met with Israel's Minister for
Foreign Affairs. He brought with him a clear message:
while Norway recognizes Israel's right to defend itself
and its citizens, we cannot accept military retaliation
that is so disproportionate and contrary to international
humanitarian law. Actions such as yesterday's serve
only to cultivate hatred and to reinforce continued
armed resistance. That is not the way to improve
Israel's security. There is no military solution to this
conflict, and we urge Israel to end its incursions into
Gaza.

It is also our long-standing position that the
Palestinian leadership must bring an end to the firing
of rockets into Israeli territory. Such acts of terror
serve neither the Palestinian population nor the
prospects for peace. We also urge the Palestinian
leadership to provide for the safe return of the
kidnapped Israeli corporal Gilad Shalit.

Norway supports the efforts of President Abbas to
establish a Government of national unity reflecting the
principles set out by the Quartet. We strongly
encourage all parties and the international community
to support those efforts. The road to peace starts at the
negotiating table. Only a process of negotiations can
bring about a comprehensive settlement based on the
Road Map, the commitments made at Sharm el-Sheikh
and all relevant resolutions adopted by the Security
Council.

