Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): We want to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today's meeting, which
provides ample opportunity to reflect on recent
developments in the Middle East. We also want to
acknowledge the presence of the Ministers and to thank
Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson for his profound
and inspiring briefing. And we express our appreciation
to the Secretary-General, not only for his personal
involvement but especially for the moral voice that he
has lent to the search for peace in the Middle East.

The surge in Violence and senseless killings in the
occupied Palestinian territory, so well articulated by
speakers before me, is deeply troubling. What began
as clashes around the holy sites has spilled over into
multiple locations in East Jerusalem and across the
West Bank. It is a clear manifestation of the extent of
the escalation. Indeed, fears have been expressed that if
the situation is not contained, the rise ofa third intifada
might not be far-fetched.

We condemn the indiscriminate killings in the
strongest possible terms. They are unjustifiable, they
are immoral and they are self-annihilating. Extremists
on both sides must not be allowed to dictate the political
agenda, as that will provide fuel for the conflict and
further complicate the search for peace. Provocative
actions and hostile rhetoric must be avoided, and
political leaders on both sides must take the lead in
ensuring that calm is restored. We believe that a crucial
element of that is the maintenance of the status quo
around the holy sites.

It must be stated that recent developments must
not obscure the underlying problem in the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict. As is widely acknowledged, the
underlying difficulty is the lack of progress in the
Middle East peace process. We would like to see a
genuine effort on the part of Israeli and Palestinian
leaders to return to negotiations directly.

The current situation does not offer a sustainable
solution to the question of Palestine. Indeed, it is
creating despair among the people of Palestine and
causing anxiety among the people of Israel.

It cannot be overemphasized that the two-State
solution lies at the heart of the Middle East peace
process. Continued settlement activity by Israel greatly
undermines that. It is evident that the two-State solution
has the support of the international community. It is
also widely acknowledged as the path to lasting peace
between Israel and Palestine. We urge all concerned
to demonstrate their commitment to the two-State
solution by immediately ceasing the construction of
settlements in the occupied Palestinian Territory. We
call on all States with influence over the contending
parties to encourage them to reengage in dialogue on
the basis of the relevant Security Council resolutions,
the Madrid principles, the Quartet road map, the Arab
Peace Initiative and the existing agreements between
them. We reaffirm our unwavering support for a two-
State solution with Israel and Palestine existing side by
side in peace and security.

