Mr. Kusljugie (Bosnia and Herzegovina):
Madam President, at the outset allow me to express my
compliments on your country's presidency for the
month of June. I would also like to express my
gratitude for being given the opportunity to take the
floor at today's meeting dedicated to the report of
Judge Theodore Meron, President, and Ms. Carla Del
Ponte, Chief Prosecutor, of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY).

I would like to express my gratitude for the
comprehensive and informative reports of Mr. Meron
and Ms. Del Ponte, as well as for the efforts that have
been made in South-Eastern Europe, and Bosnia and
Herzegovina in particular, in order to render justice for
the victims of crimes and to bring the indicted war
criminals to justice. Hopefully, all of those activities
will gradually lead to the re-establishment of trust
among the peoples, the strengthening of security in the
region, post-conflict reconciliation and a better future
for our children.

According to positive legislation, the cooperation
of Bosnia and Herzegovina with the ICTY has mainly
been under the jurisdiction of the entities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, namely, Republika Srpska and the
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, especially with
regard to the arrest of those indicted for war crimes and
access to documentation in archives and to witnesses.
The establishment of the State Investigation and
Protection Agency has recently resulted in transferring
the responsibility for locating and apprehending those
indicted for war crimes to the State level.

Both Bosnia and Herzegovina entities have laws
on cooperation with the ICTY, thus creating the legal
framework for better cooperation in the apprehension
and transfer of the accused to the Court and in
providing legal assistance, data collection, summoning
witnesses, etc.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has passed and adopted
the Criminal Code and the Criminal Procedure Code of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, providing definitions and
penalties for the criminal acts of war crimes. The
Office of the Prosecutor of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the State Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina were
established in 2003.

There is a tradition of good cooperation on the
part of the Office of the Prosecutor of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the State Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina with the ICTY, particularly when it comes
to serving the indictments and delegating cases to the
local courts with ICTY consent in order to avoid
impunity.

In addition, I would like to underline the
activities of the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities,
particularly of Republika Srpska, in the period from
lJanuary to 31 May 2005, aimed at identifying,
locating and arresting persons indicted for war crimes.
Investigations and negotiations for voluntary surrender
have been undertaken concerning persons indicted for
war crimes about whom information exists regarding
the fact that they are currently outside Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

Other measures and activities related to the
conduct of all investigations have been undertaken
regarding collecting and providing data on war crimes,
and the serving of court summonses for persons from
Republika Srpska and Bosnia and Herzegovina to
appear at the court as witnesses or suspects.

The most significant activities undertaken in the
aforementioned period with respect to finding and
arresting persons indicted for war crimes were as
follows. On 15 January 2005, Savo Todovic registered
at The Hague Tribunal for public indictment. With his
family's help, he had surrendered voluntarily to the
Ministry of Interior of the Republika Srpska. On
11 March 2005, based on his voluntary surrender, Mico
Stanisic, accompanied by officials from the Minister of
the Interior of Republika Srpska, was transferred from
Belgrade to The Hague for pre-trial confinement. On
14 March 2005, upon establishing contact in Moscow,
the Ministry of the Interior of Republika Srpska
organized the transfer to The Hague of Gojko J ankovic,
who also surrendered voluntarily. On 15 March 2005,
Dragon Nikolic was transferred from Belgrade, Serbia,
to The Hague; he too surrendered voluntarily. On
23 March 2005, Vinko Pandurevic surrendered
voluntarily; he was transferred from Belgrade to The
Hague for pre-trial confinement, escorted by the
Minister of the Interior of Republika Srpska. On
29 March 2005, Ljubomir Borovcanin agreed to
voluntarily surrender to the Republika Srpska
authorities; and, with the cooperation with Republika
Srpska and Republic of Serbia authorities, Milorad
Trbic and Vujadin Popovic surrendered to The Hague
on 7 April and 14 April respectively.

As far as providing data and evidence is
concerned, in the period from 1 January to 31 May
2005, the Republika Srpska Secretariat for Relations
with the International Criminal Tribunal in The Hague
and War Crimes Research received eight requests for
assistance. In cooperation with the republic's
administrative authorities and with the judicial organs,
the Republika Srpska Secretariat for Relations with the
ICTY fulfilled all eight requirements.
The ICTY sent two requests to the Republika
Srpska Secretariat for Relations with the ICTY
concerning the collection of contact data aiming at
securing the presence of six persons from Republika
Srpska on charges brought by the International
Criminal Tribunal at The Hague. In cooperation with
the Republika Srpska Ministries of the Interior and of
Defence and the Office of the District Attorney of
Banja Luka, as well as the Commission for Finding
Missing and Arrested Persons, the required data have
been delivered to the Office of the Prosecutor at the
Hague Tribunal.

With the establishment of the War Crimes
Chamber within the court of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
it is now possible for the International Criminal
Tribunal to delegate a certain number of cases to the
court of Bosnia and Herzegovina in order to enable the
ICTY to carry out its completion strategy. It is
anticipated that the War Crimes Chamber of the State
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina will process two
categories of delegated cases. These are, first, cases
under rule 11 bis of the Rules of Procedure and
Evidence of the ICTY for confirmed indictments, and,
secondly, cases in various stages of investigation. The
court of Bosnia and Herzegovina will also process
domestic cases of war crimes and "road map" cases,
which constitute a third category.

I would like to draw attention to the problem of
financing the work of the special War Crimes Chamber
of the State Court. Since the donor conference held last
year, a little less than half of the resources necessary
for the establishment of the Court have been collected.

Those funds were subsequently spent on arranging a
courtroom, a prison unit and the office of the Registrar.
However, in Bosnia and Herzegovina there is a general
problem regarding prison capacities for serving
sentences, especially for prisoners convicted of war
crimes and crimes against humanity. Therefore, I
would like to renew the plea to donor countries to
further commit the funds necessary for the work of the
War Crimes Chamber.

The authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina have
always been aware of the obligation to cooperate with
the International Criminal Tribunal, regarding the
implementation of both the Dayton Peace Accord and
the decisions of the Security Council. We are fully
aware that cooperation with the Tribunal is one of the
major conditions for Bosnia and Herzegovina to
become a member of the Partnership for Peace
programme and other Euro-Atlantic structures, and
especially for the conclusion of a stabilization and
association agreement with the European Union.

On our way towards membership of the
Partnership for Peace programme and towards
association with the Euro-Atlantic structures, a whole
range of conditions have been set for Bosnia and
Herzegovina which need to be fulfilled, along with a
range of standards to be met. Let me assure the Council
that the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina are
aware of the fact that meeting those requirements and
standards is primarily in our own interest. One day, the
international community will scale down its
engagement, the ICTY will close out its cases and
archive them for history, and we will have to carry on,
living our lives in a community that is built on a solid
foundation and that has shed the burdens of the past, in
a Europe without borders - a Europe to which we
want to belong not only geographically but also in
terms of our democratic and educational standards, our
culture of tolerance and all the values that characterize
the family of European nations.

Finally, I should like to speak in my personal
capacity. This is my last appearance before the
Council, since in mid-July my tenure as the Permanent
Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina will come
to an end. I have addressed this body many times in the
past four years on agenda items referring to reports of
the Secretary-General, the Special Representatives, the
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
the President and Chief Prosecutor of the ICTY.

In general, it is evident that some progress -
many will argue, substantial progress - has been
achieved in peacebuilding in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
However, it is also clear that Bosnia and Herzegovina
still has to become a sustainable State. It is my firm
conviction that the goal of a sustainable State of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as well as lasting peace and stability
in the region, cannot be achieved until the major
fugitives - above all, Karadzic and Mladic - are
apprehended and brought to justice before the ICTY.

Karadzic and Mladic are symbols of a political
project that led to genocide in Srebrenica. The fact that
they are still at large after 10 years encourages the
designers and followers of that project to pursue its
further realization, now using different, non-military
means, primarily obstructing cooperation with the
ICTY. The fact that Karadzic and Mladic are still at
large is also a major impediment to starting the process
of facing the truth about our past - a process which
should enable us to find a common narrative about the
events that took place in our country between 1992 and
1995.

I am convinced that, without the Council's
determination to support the ICTY's completion
strategy, the remaining fugitives will not be
apprehended. I agree with the Chief Prosecutor that, if
they are not arrested, the work of the ICTY, in spite of
the results already achieved, will be an unfinished job
in, I will add, an unfinished peace.

I would also ask the current representatives of the
States members of the Council to think about the
victims, the survivors and their families while
deliberating on their future activities in that regard. I
also ask them in particular to think, on 11 July, the
tenth anniversary of the Srebrenica genocide, about
their responsibilities regarding the ICTY's success.

