Mr. Mlynar (Slovakia): At the outset, let me
thank Under-Secretaries-General Guehenno and
Gambari for their very valuable briefings this morning.

Slovakia is deeply concerned about the recent
events in southern Lebanon and northern Israel. At the
same time, we are very concerned about the bombings
of the cities and suburbs of Beirut and Haifa, as well as
many other towns in the region.

We would like to emphasize that loss of civilian
life and attacks on civilian infrastructure are very
alarming.
According to the latest information, the Israel
Defense Forces are imposing a blockade against
Lebanon, violating its airspace and destroying its
infrastructure, including bridges, airports and power
stations. From the Hizbollah side, the rocket shelling of
the towns of Qiryat, Shemona, Nahariyya and Safed in
northern Israel is continuing as well.

The escalation of the situation is accelerating on a
dangerous course, with both parties suspicious of one
another and refusing to halt military action.

We are convinced that the international
community and the Security Council must react swiftly
and appeal to all parties to immediately cease all
actions that could provoke a further escalation of the
situation and lead to further deterioration of the already
extremely serious humanitarian situation. All parties
must agree to a ceasefire, end the blockade and return
to negotiate peaceful solutions to all the causes of the
escalation of the situation in southern Lebanon and
northern Israel.

We recognize and acknowledge the right of each
and every State to self-defence. But that right cannot,
and should not, be confused with counterattacks or acts
of military provocation. Both parties must refrain from
the disproportionate use of force. We call upon them to
exercise the utmost restraint.

We strongly condemn all terrorist attacks, in
particular those directed against civilians. We express
our deepest sympathies to the families of all the
victims, as well as to the Governments of Lebanon and
of Israel.

We would like to repeat what we said in the
Council yesterday, and have stated many times before,
namely that reaching a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East region will be possible only when all
parties cease their fire and refrain from any military or
Violent action. The only way to achieve a
comprehensive and lasting settlement to the conflict is
through peaceful negotiations. Previous commitments,
agreements and the Council's resolutions, in particular
resolution 1559 (2004), must be respected and fully
implemented. We would like to reiterate that all parties
must resume constructive dialogue and take concrete
actions aimed at building and strengthening mutual
confidence and trust.

The two Israeli soldiers should be released
immediately and unconditionally, rocket shelling
should be stopped and the Blue Line respected.

The international community, including the
Council, must remain actively engaged in the peace
process in the Middle East. However, both sides must
do more and demonstrate clear political will and a
commitment to ending this protracted conflict which
threatens international peace and security. Despite the
latest wave of violence and hostilities, we believe there
is still a window of opportunity for all parties to put the
peace process on the right track. That opportunity must
be seized through concrete and immediate action
leading from mutual recognition of the right to exist to
mutual peaceful coexistence.

In this context, Slovakia welcomes and fully
supports the role of the Secretary-General and his
senior-level team led by Mr. Nambiar, which has just
been dispatched to the region. We sincerely hope that
the team will achieve the results that we are all wishing
for. My Government has issued a statement today and,
for its part, is ready to contribute, if necessary, to the
humanitarian relief efforts in Lebanon.

