Mr. Feltman: A year ago, the Security Council
adopted resolution 2231 (2015), which endorsed
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA).
The resolution, including the historic agreement it
addresses, stands apart as a signal accomplishment
in the history of the Council. Through diplomacy and
negotiations, China, France, Germany, the Russian
Federation, the United Kingdom and the United States,
with the support of the European Union and the Islamic
Republic of Iran, addressed one of the most pressing
peace and security issues on the agenda of the Security
Council for the past decade.

Resolution 2231 (2015) heralded a new chapter
in Iran's relationship with the Security Council.
Fully implemented, the JCPOA will reinforce global
non-proliferation norms and assure the international
community of the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran's
nuclear programme. It will also, through the lifting of
sanctions, help to realize the long-awaited hopes and
aspirations of the Iranian people to be reconnected to
the global economy and the international community.

Six months after implementation day, the Secretary-
General commends the Islamic Republic of Iran for
implementing its nuclear-related commitments, as
verified by the International Atomic Energy Agency.
He also commends the European Union and the United
States for steps they have taken in accordance with
their sanctions-related commitments under the JCPOA.

As we consider today's report (S/2016/589) on
the implementation of the provisions of annex B of
resolution 2231 (2015), we do so against the backdrop
of progress in the implementation of the JCPOA and
the express commitment of all its participants to jointly
working through implementation challenges. As the
Secretary-General notes in his report, implementation
challenges exist for any agreement, let alone one as
comprehensive and complex as the JCPOA. He calls on
all participants to stay the course to fully implement all
aspects of that landmark agreement and work through
challenges in the spirit of cooperation, compromise,
good faith and reciprocity.

I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity to brief the
Security Council on the first report of the Secretary-
General on the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015). The report was circulated to the Council on
1 July, pursuant to annex B to resolution 2231 (2015) and
paragraph 7 of the note by the President of the Security
Council, issued on 16 January 2016 (S/2016/44). This
report, officially released today, strictly focuses on
the restrictive measures in annex B of resolution 2231
(2015, which came into force on 16 January. 
Our mandate is neither to report on all other aspects
of the resolution or annex A of the JCPOA, nor touch
upon the work of the Joint Commission established
in the agreement. These annex B provisions include
restrictions on nuclear-related transfers and activities,
ballistic missile-related transfers and activities, and
arms-related transfers, as well as an assets freeze and
a travel ban. The report informs the Security Council
that since 16 January, the Secretary-General has not
received any report, and is he aware ofno open source of
information regarding the supply, sale, transfer or export
to Iran of nuclear-related items undertaken contrary to
the provisions ofthe JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015).
As Council members are aware, the Secretariat
helped to establish the operational linkages between
the Security Council and the Procurement Working
Group of the Joint Commission for the processing of
nuclear-related proposals submitted by Member States
under the procurement channel. These have been
established with due regard for information security
and confidentiality. Optional forms in all six official
United Nations languages are also available for use by
Member States on the Council's 2231 web page.

I now turn to the restrictive measures on ballistic
missile-related transfers and activities.

Since 16 January, the Secretariat has received
no information regarding the supply, sale, transfer
or export to Iran of ballistic missile-related items
undertaken contrary to the provisions of resolution
2231 (2015). However, in early March 2016, during
military exercises, Iran launched a series of ballistic
missiles. The report includes details of those launches
from Iranian media sources and information provided
to the Secretary-General by France, Germany, the
United Kingdom and the United States. The report also
includes the views of Iran on the issue.

As Council members are aware, the Security
Council discussed those launches on 14 March and
1 April. There are clear differences in the Council
regarding whether those ballistic missile launches
are inconsistent with the resolution. Iran, too, has its
own interpretation of this provision. While it is for the
Security Council to interpret its own resolutions, the
Secretary-General has stressed that we must maintain
the momentum created by the conclusion of the JCPOA,
consistent with its constructive spirit. In that regard,
he calls upon Iran to avoid such ballistic missile
launches, which have the potential to increase tensions
in the region.

In terms of restrictions on arms transfers, the report
notes the seizure of an arms shipment by the United
States Navy in the Gulf of Oman in March. The United
States concluded that the arms had originated in Iran
and that this transfer was contrary to the provisions of
annex B to the resolution. Iran informed the Secretariat
that it had never engaged in such activity. The
Secretariat will continue reviewing the information
provided by both countries.

The report also provides information to the
Security Council on the participation of Iranian entities
in the Fifth Iraq Defence Exhibition, held from 5 to
8 March in Baghdad. It is our understanding that the
transfer of arms from Iran to Iraq should have required
the prior approval of the Security Council, pursuant to
paragraph 6 (b) of annex B of resolution 2231 (2015).
Iran considered that no prior approval was required
from the Council for that activity because Iran retained
ownership of the items exhibited. It also appears that the
Defence Industries Organisation, an entity currently on
the 2231 list, may have participated in the exhibition,
which may have implications for the implementation
of the assets freeze provisions in annex B. Finally, the
report also draws the attention of Council members to
the possible foreign travel undertaken by Maj or General
Qasem Soleimani contrary to the provisions of annex B
of the resolution.

In resolution 2231 (2015), the Council expressed
its desire to bring about a fundamental shift in its
relationship with Iran. I would like to share the fact
that we had regular and close interactions with Iran
throughout the process of drafting the report, including
sharing with its representatives relevant information
that the Secretariat was examining and providing them
with a right ofreply. The Secretariat intends to continue
its close interaction with Iran. The next report of the
Secretary-General will be submitted to the Council in
January 2017.

As we mark the first anniversary of the JCPOA and
the adoption of resolution 2231 (2015), the Secretary-
General wishes to reaffirm the enormous responsibility
that JCPOA participants carry for the full and effective
implementation of the agreement. Hope for a more
secure world, closer partnership to resolve common
challenges, and the delivery of tangible benefits to the
people of Iran rest in the Council's hands.

