Mr. Mantovani (Italy): First of all, I wish to
welcome the Permanent Representative of Israel,
Ambassador Shalev, and the Permanent Observer of
Palestine, Ambassador Mansour, and to thank them for
their interventions here with us in the Council.

We are convinced that the real issue and our top
priority is to improve the living conditions of the
people in Gaza and to respond swiftly to their urgent
basic needs. All countries that are willing to contribute
humanitarian assistance in response to the appeal
issued by the legitimate Palestinian Authority should
be encouraged to do so. We therefore share the
motivations that led the Libyan authorities to send
humanitarian aid to help the people of Gaza cope with
the difficult conditions in which they presently live.

At the same time, precisely because our priorities
should be to guarantee that this humanitarian assistance
is correctly and promptly delivered to those in need,
we must ensure that all assistance is channelled
correctly and effectively, taking into account the
situation on the ground. That is why we cannot agree
with the modalities chosen in using the Al-Marwa to
ship goods to the inhabitants of Gaza; there are
established procedures respected by all donor countries
that want to contribute humanitarian assistance to the
people in Gaza.

As we know, one way is to channel this assistance
through the United Nations agencies charged with such
responsibilities. The World Health Organization, the
International Red Cross and the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East constantly work together with Israel and the
Palestinian Authority to facilitate the import of
foodstuffs and medicine into Gaza. Otherwise, third
countries can be requested to undergo customs
procedures, involving both Israel and the Palestinian
Authority, required for those materials to be authorized
for entry into Gaza.

In conclusion, we believe that, as in several past
instances, including recently, the delivery of
humanitarian aid aimed at assisting those in need, such
as the young and the ill, whenever provided through
the established channels will not encounter any
obstacle from the Israeli authorities.
