Mr. Kerim (The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia): As we review the recent developments
regarding the situation in Iraq, the Security Council is
confronted with an issue that requires effective action
that is in full compliance with the principles of the
Charter. This issue is not important only for the
maintenance of international peace and security, but
also for preserving the unity of the Security Council
and of the international anti-terrorist coalition. That is
why the United Nations and the Security Council must
play a crucial role in this crisis. Only a united Council
could credibly adopt the appropriate decisions for
achieving the objective of the disarmament of the Iraqi
regime.

It is very important to note that the debate we are
having within the United Nations, in the Security
Council and elsewhere, does not mean that we disagree
on the purpose of full and unconditional compliance by
Iraq with resolution 1441 (2002), including the
provision that Iraq should face serious consequences if
continues with violations of its obligations. The latest
developments in this regard demonstrate the
seriousness of this crisis, which must be approached
comprehensively. At the same time, the Security
Council must act swiftly and decisively. We pledge our
full support to the Council in discharging its
responsibility to achieve the objective of the full and
effective disarmament of Iraq in accordance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 1441 (2002).

In a very short period of time we have been
provided with new information and evidence that shed
more light on the question of disarmament of the Iraqi
regime. The Council had two briefings by the chief
inspectors. Although they noted some progress, the
prevailing attitude of the Iraqi regime of delaying and
obstructing the inspections in substance revealed an
intention not to cooperate fully and has given yet
another warning about the presence of weapons of
mass destruction in Iraq. The Security Council is
asking not for progress, but Iraq's full and
unconditional compliance with resolution 1441 (2002).
In addition, on 5 February, the United States presented
compelling evidence to the Security Council, detailing
Iraq's weapons of mass destruction programmes, its
active efforts to deceive United Nations inspectors and
its links to international terrorism.

The position of the Republic of Macedonia in this
regard is very clear and transparent. My country
understands the dangers posed by tyranny and the
special responsibility of democracies to defend our
shared values. The international community must stand
together to face the threat posed by the nexus of
terrorism and dictators with weapons of mass
destruction. Saddam Hussain's regime must not be
allowed to posses any weapons of mass destruction,
and must disarm completely. We have supported
international efforts to achieve the peaceful
disarmament of Iraq. However, it has now become
clear that Iraq is in material breach of Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 1441 (2002), passed
unanimously on 8 November 2002.

Iraq must immediately, actively and fully
cooperate with the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
and comply unconditionally with the requirements of
the relevant resolutions. Maintaining pressure on Iraq
has proved to be the only mechanism capable of
bringing about certain changes in the behaviour of
Saddam's regime and respect for the decisions of the
Council. While we are fully dedicated to the objective
of this crisis being solved through peaceful means -
until all such possibilities are exhausted - we firmly
believe that the threat of force must be maintained.

The inspection process has produced valuable
results to date; its activities might need to be
continued, strengthened and expanded in order to carry
out resolution 1441 (2002). However, the seriousness
of the situation requires immediate and unconditional
responses from the Iraqi regime to the inspectors, and
time is running out. In other words, the situation
requires a change in Iraq's attitude towards disarming,
given that it has already been found guilty of material
breaches of its obligations concerning 16 previous
resolutions stretching back over the past 12 years.

We call upon the Security Council once again to
take the necessary and appropriate action in response to
Iraq's continuing threat to international peace and
security. The Republic of Macedonia will continue its
active contribution to the international coalition against
terrorism. Saddam Hussain's regime should disarm, as
requested by the United Nations, or face the
consequences. In that context, my country will support
action by the international community against this
common danger.

