Mr. Yafiez Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Spain has voted in favour of Security Council
resolution 1546 (2004), thus joining the consensus
expressed by the members of the Council. The Spanish
delegation has cooperated actively in the formation of
that consensus, offering ideas and contributions to the
process of drafting the text of the resolution together
with other delegations, particularly those of Brazil and
Chile.

For us, this is certainly not about the ideal
resolution. Actually, Spain would have wanted the
United Nations to have assumed guidance of the
political and military process in Iraq and that it would
have been possible to accelerate even more the political
transition in Iraq to a fully normalized situation.

In any case, today an opportunity has opened up,
one that we should all make use of. Thanks in great
measure to the efforts of the Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General, Mr. Brahimi, on 1 July 2004 the
interim Government of Iraq will regain the exercise of
sovereignty, which, in keeping with the text of the
resolution that we just adopted, should be understood
in the broadest way possible - full authority to take
all decisions considered relevant to all areas of
governance.

In that spirit, my Government declares its
willingness to cooperate with the new Iraqi
Government. As the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of Spain, Miguel Angel Moratinos,
recently stated, "Spain will not remain indifferent to
the present and future of Iraq, which will have our full
support to ensure a united, stable, secure, democratic
and prosperous Iraq". The Government will continue to
firmly support the stability, democratization, territorial
integrity and reconstruction of Iraq. In keeping with
that principle, it will support activities, be they of the
United Nations, the European Union or others, that
offer a framework for international cooperation that
contributes to the Iraqis recovering their full
sovereignty, enables them to organize their elections
freely and democratically and allow them to build their
own future in peace, independence and security.

Spain has been promoting a more ambitious role
for the United Nations in Iraq. The United Nations will
continue its performance, essentially in complementing
the political process, supporting preparations to hold a
national conference and assisting the Independent
Electoral Commission, as well as the interim and
transitional Governments, in the preparation of the
electoral processes. My Government believes that
United Nations activities in Iraq must effectively help
in the political transition process, which should include
recognition of a clear and defined temporary time
period to conclude its activities.
A fundamental aspect of the resolution that we
have just adopted is related to the security architecture,
referred to also in the letters addressed to the President
of the Security Council by the Prime Minister of Iraq,
Mr. Allawi, and by the Secretary of State of the United
States, Mr. Powell. I would like to make a few brief
comments in that regard.

My Government hopes that the agreements
concluded from now on in the area of security between
the interim Government and the multinational force
will fully respect Iraqi sovereignty and will faithfully
reflect the principle of authority that should govern the
relationship between that Government and its armed
forces and security forces. It also hopes that
agreements will be reached soon on an operation policy
that will enable the interim Government to affirm its
authority in sensitive cases, so that its due control over
the political process is maintained at all times. We also
hope that in that context of authority and the exercise

of sovereignty, the interim Government - with the
assistance that each instance might require, including
from the United Nations - will promote a national

reconciliation process in which today's dissident
elements will be gradually integrated and will be able
to contribute to Iraq's stability and thus to that of the
region.

Spain has always upheld the importance of the
role played by the countries of the region in the process
of fully reintegrating Iraq into the international
community. Because of that, it has supported that the
references made to the region in the text of the
resolution be balanced, so that its special responsibility
and the positive current and future contributions to the
Iraqi reconstruction process are recognized. Spain also
considers positive the idea of convening a future
international conference on Iraq when deemed
appropriate by the Iraqi Government.

In the economic field, my delegation believes that
the resolution appropriately notes that the funds in the
Development Fund for Iraq shall be disbursed at the
discretion of the interim Government. This is a
fundamental component of what we mean by full
exercise of sovereignty. Moreover, the resolution
extends the existence of the International Advisory and
Monitoring Board. This would involve maintaining a
structure that would shore up Iraq's economic
credibility, and in which the interim Government of
Iraq is appropriately represented.

With regard to humanitarian issues, Spain is
pleased that the preambular part of the resolution notes
the commitment of all forces to act in accordance with
international law, including humanitarian law, and to
cooperate with relevant international organizations.
Spain would have liked this provision, which appeals
to all parties to observe and ensure respect for such
humanitarian principles, to have been included in the
operative part of the resolution as well.

As members know, Spain has attached particular
importance to the Security Council receiving periodic
reports - quarterly if possible - from the
multinational force as well as the reports submitted to
the Council by the Secretary-General. We welcome the
fact that the resolution has reflected that proposal.

We also deem it to be of great importance that the
resolution, as requested by Spain and other members of
the Council, sets 31 December 2005 as the deadline for
the completion of the transitional political process and,
therefore, the end of the presence of the multinational
force. Spain considers that that force's presence in Iraq
should be for as limited a time as possible.

Finally, we would like to thank the sponsors for
the flexibility and willingness they demonstrated
throughout the process of negotiating the resolution.
We would also like to thank the other members of the
Council for their constructive contributions and you,
Mr. President, for having brought these difficult
negotiations to a successful conclusion within such a
short period of time.

