Mr. De Santa Clara Gomes (Portugal):
Mr. President, allow me to begin by saying that it is a
great pleasure to see you presiding over the Security
Council. I thank you for convening this open meeting
to examine the report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(S/2003/449), covering its activities since the last
report, dated 6 November 2002.

First, Portugal would like to extend its support to
the important efforts of the United Nations in Timor-
Leste under the already well-tested leadership of its
Special Representative, Mr. Kamalesh Sharma. This is
particularly noteworthy as political developments in
Timor-Leste during the reporting period have been
more complex than was initially foreseen.

Last month, the Council had to consider a special
report of the Secretary-General relating a change of
environment in Timor-Leste as a result of a disturbing
series of security-related incidents, some of them of a
terrorist nature, which took place in the last months of
2002 and the early months of 2003. At the time, the
Secretary-General asked the Council to reconsider the
proposed downsizing plan for UNMISET, while
keeping the envisioned handover date of May 2004.
Consequently, the Council approved resolution 1473
(2003), which endorsed proposals for the adjustment of
the downsizing of UNMISET's police component,
supported a revised schedule for the downsizing of the
Mission's military component and requested a detailed
military strategy for the revised schedule.

Portugal welcomes the most recent report of the
Secretary-General, and it is pleased to note that, in
spite of the problems to which I referred, much has
been achieved in the year that has elapsed since the
establishment of UNMISET and that the Timorese
public administration and police force are assuming
increasing levels of responsibility.

Also to be highly commended is the steady and
significant positive development in the relationship of
Timor-Leste and its neighbour Indonesia, particularly
regarding the determination of their joint border, as
well as the progress on agreements between Australia
and Timor-Leste concerning petroleum resources. One
must not understate the importance that both a stable
relationship with its neighbour States and prompt
access to such natural resources have in paving the way
for the solid and sustainable economic development of
the newborn country.

Portugal would also like to note UNMISET's
efforts and the progress achieved with regard to the
investigation and indictment of those responsible for
crimes that took place in 1999. However, it is with
concern that we note that the report expects the judicial
process dealing with serious crimes still to be
incomplete by June 2004 and that a strong political
commitment is essential, as the majority of those
accused remain outside Timor-Leste - including
nearly 90 per cent of those accused of crimes against
humanity. We support the Secretary-General in urging
the Governments of countries where those accused may
be located to make every effort to ensure that such
persons are brought to justice.

Finally, much remains to be done, and continued
assistance by the international community will be
crucial to enable Timor-Leste to face with success the
serious political, practical and security challenges that
lie ahead. Portugal will, as in the past, remain
committed to the consolidation and development of
Timor-Leste and to United Nations efforts to that
effect.

I am confident that the Security Council will not
hesitate to extend the mandate of UNMISET for a
further year, until 20 May 2004.

