Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Before making my statement, I wish to express my
condolences for the passing away of President Arafat.
The Chinese Government and its people are deeply
saddened by the passing away of President Arafat. The
President of China has already sent a message to the
people of Palestine and to the Palestinian leaders and
the bereaved families to express its condolences. China
Will also send a special envoy to attend the funeral of
President Arafat.

President Arafat was an outstanding leader of the
Palestinian people. He was also an outstanding
statesman. He devoted his entire life to the just cause
of the Palestinian people. He was not only held in high
esteem and loved by the Palestinian people, but also
had great prestige, in the eyes of the international
community.

The passing away of President Arafat is a
tremendous loss for the Palestinian people. I am
confident the Palestinian people will turn their grief
into strength and will carry on the wish of President
Arafat, in order to advance the cause he left unfinished.
We are confident that there will eventually be a
solution to the Middle East issue. We hope that all
countries and people, including the Palestinian people,
can live in peace, stability, cooperation and prosperity,
as soon as possible. The Chinese Government and
people will work together with the international
community and play their part in finding a peaceful
solution to the question of the Middle East.

I wish also to thank Lord Ashdown for his report
and for his additional briefing. We support the work he
is doing to promote the peace process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. I wish also to welcome the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Ivanie,
for his presence at this meeting and for his statement.
We appreciate the active efforts made by the authorities
of Bosnia and Herzegovina during the first half of this
year in strengthening State institutions, speeding up
institutional reforms, promoting national reconciliation
and consolidating the rule of law.

We hope that, on the basis of this work, the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina will continue to
take effective measures to strengthen the rule of law,
revitalize the economy and gradually enhance the
administrative capabilities of the Government.

We welcome the fact that there will soon be a
European Union-led force (EUFOR). We hope that
there will be a smooth transition from the Stabilization
Force (SFOR) to EUFOR and that the latter will play a
constructive role in helping Bosnia and Herzegovina to
maintain stability.

Over the past 10 years, since the signing of the
Dayton Agreement, through the joint efforts of the
various parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina and with the
help of the international community, Bosnia and
Herzegovina has made encouraging progress in all
areas of national reconstruction. We are confident that
the various parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina will
continue to strengthen their mutual confidence and
their unity, so that the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina can move gradually towards harmonious
coexistence and joint development and eventually
achieve the goal of their unification and their
integration into Europe.

Peace and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina is
vital to achieving lasting peace and development in the
region. China has been closely following developments
in the country and will continue to work with the
international community and to play its part to help
Bosnia and Herzegovina achieve lasting peace and
stability as well as economic development.

