Mr.Gonzalez deLinares (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Secretary-General for his statement and
Mr. Bordyuzha, Mr. Alimov and Mr. Ivanov for their
briefings. I am also grateful to the Russian presidency
for having organized a debate of such relavance, given
both the strategic importance of the Central Asia
region and the growing cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations.

Regional organizations are generally equipped
with mechanisms that are well-adapted to local realities
in terms of preventive diplomacy and, as appropriate,
peacekeeping. That is why their cooperation with the
United Nations harbours promising potential. In the case
of a few regional organizations, such cooperation has
developed to achieve a notable level of maturity, which
is the case of the European Union, the African Union
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, which have become the subjects of specific
meetings for the Security Council.

Conversely, in the case of other younger regional
organizations, cooperation with the United Nations is
less structured, as the concept paper (S/2016/867, annex)
circulated by Russia for this debate clearly indicates
is the case of the organizations we are discussing
today: the Collective Security Treaty Organization,
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the
Commonwealth of Independent States. Those three
organizations are the subject of a biennial resolution
of the General Assembly, and have for years been
promoting the development of their cooperation with
the United Nations with a view to better complying
with the objectives of the Organization, which is the
ultimate guarantor of intentional peace and security.
That cooperation encompasses a growing number of
aspects, including the fight against drug trafficking,
organized crime, terrorism, Violent radicalism and
other aspects that have been mentioned throughout
the debate.
The United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia is very active on all ofthose
fronts, and we believe that the Centre has a particularly
prominent role to play in promoting cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
present in Central Asia. The duties of that body of the
United Nations system are specifically focused on the
region in question, and we believe that it is already
playing its role in a most satisfactory manner.

The European Union cooperates intensively with
countries of the region and with the Centre itself,
especially in matters related to border management and
the fight against drug trafficking and terrorism - in the
latter case, within the framework of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. As a member of the
European Union, Spain greatly values the work of the
Centre. We believe that preventive diplomacy must be
one of our highest priorities, and we therefore welcome
the ongoing cooperation between the Centre and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization, the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization and the Commonwealth of
Independent States. That relationship has a particularly
important potential in early warning, conflict prevention
and the fight against radicalism and violent extremism.

