Mr. Biagini (Italy): At the outset, I would like to
thank the Russian presidency for organizing this debate.
A regular, comprehensive review of the situation in the
Middle East and North Africa - a region with truly
remarkable potential and a unique cultural heritage
that must be protected and preserved, but which is
marred by persistent instability - is a welcome and
necessary initiative.

As a Mediterranean country, Italy is directly
affected by such instability. For that reason, the security
challenge in the Mediterranean was a centrepiece of
our Security Council presidency last November.
We align ourselves with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

Our objective must be to chart a common way
forward that emphasizes the pressing need for stability
as a strategic imperative and that opens the door to
building a positive agenda of shared peace, pluralism
and prosperity and inclusion.

In Libya, our foremost priority is to assist and
support the advancement of the Libyan-owned political
and reconciliation process, with the goal of ending the
transition through the electoral process. In that context,
it is of the utmost importance that all the relevant
stakeholders remain fully aligned and unified in their
support to Special Representative Ghassan Salame' and
his action plan.

We strongly support the aspirations of the
Libyan people for stability, democracy and national
reconciliation. While there has been good progress
towards those goals, the road ahead is still challenging,
and it is clear that there are no shortcuts. The threat
of terrorism remains a key concern, as we saw from
the heinous attacks against the High National Electoral
Commission in Tripoli last month and, most recently, in
Benghazi, which we strongly condemn.

We are following with extreme concern the
evolution of the security environment on the ground in
Sebha, a crucial area in our collective effort to address
the issue of the trafficking in human beings, and in
the oil crescent, where clashes may put at risk many
important oil facilities. We are particularly worried
about the situation in Derna. We join the United
Nations in calling for an immediate ceasefire, in order
to provide humanitarian support to the population.

Preparations for elections should be advanced by
following a step-by-step and inclusive approach, first
and foremost by putting in place the necessary political,
technical and legislative measures for success. We
encourage all Libyan political actors to converge on
a shared vision for the future, based on a common
understanding of the constitutional framework,
electoral reform and a pledge to respect the legitimacy
of electoral outcomes.

We also continue to work in close partnership with
the Libyan authorities to tackle the scourge of illicit
human trafficking and disrupt its business model. Italy
has been largely alone, together with Libya, in bearing
the burden of those flows and saving countless lives
at sea. That is why we are tirelessly advocating for a
truly collective response to the security challenges in
the Mediterranean, starting with illegal migration. That
is not a temporary emergency or a matter for coastal
countries alone; it is a strategic imperative, first and
foremost for the European Union and its member States,
to finally join together, with true unity of purpose and a
sense of shared responsibility.

Advancing the collective fight against traffickers
also requires working together to strengthen the
capacity of Governments in countries of origin and
transit to control their territory and borders. The United
Nations system has a key role to play in that regard.
We have been consistently working in partnership with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the International Organization for
Migration to enhance their role on the ground, ensure
protection and direct assistance to migrants and
refugees, improve conditions in centres and increase
assisted voluntary returns and resettlements.

Turning to the greater Middle East, in Lebanon the
holding of parliamentary elections is an important step
to reinforcing Lebanese democratic institutions. But the
path towards stability is still long. In addition to our role
within the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, we
promote the International Support Group for Lebanon
road map to support the country's institutions and
security forces and, in that spirit, we hosted the second
Rome ministerial conference last March.

In neighbouring Syria, we continue to encourage
a genuine commitment by the Syrian partners and
international stakeholders to meaningfully engage in the
framework of the United Nations-led Geneva process.

We are also strongly committed to keeping the goal
of a fair and lasting peace in the Middle East high on
the international agenda, and we underline the pressing
need for direct negotiations between the parties, leading
to a two-State solution. The current situation in Gaza is
deeply alarming, both from a humanitarian perspective
and because of its detrimental impact on the prospects
for peace.

In Yemen, where the situation is rapidly and
alarmingly deteriorating, we remain diplomatically
engaged in promoting regional dialogue as a tool to
advance the prospects for de-escalation, and we support
the United Nations Special Envoy's efforts to revitalize
the political process.
Lastly, we reiterate our conviction that the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action represents an important
element of the global non-proliferation architecture and
a pillar of regional security. We remain committed to
the full and effective implementation of the agreement
and encourage Iran to do the same.

The challenges before us are daunting and complex,
but that should not deter us. Charting a successful path
towards enduring peace and security in the Middle
East and North Africa will have the potential to project
stability and prosperity across the three continents.

