Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): South Africa voted
for the draft resolution because we also agree that the
acts of piracy on the Somali coast have continued
unabated, and the Transitional Federal Government of
Somalia has also issued a call for the international
community to help in countering the problem. Because
the Transitional Federal Government has asked for
help, we thought that it was good for the international
community to respond, and we are pleased to have
voted for the draft resolution.

However, we would like to put it on record that
the threat to international peace and security in
Somalia originates in the conflict that has ravaged that
country for nearly two decades. In fact , the letter that
the Ambassador of Somalia, Mr. Duale, wrote to the
Security Council in support of the draft resolution, also
asked:

"Furthermore, and in this connection, the
Transitional Federal Government strongly urges
the Security Council seriously to consider the
issue of the United Nations peacekeeping forces,
in Somalia, to assist Somalia's transition to a
permanent Government that will pave the way for
democratic elections."
08-5384]

So while we are responding to the request of the

Transitional Federal Government of Somalia, we have

only responded to one request, which has to do with
piracy.

It is South Africa's view that the conflict in
Somalia cannot be countered solely through maritime
security actions. Piracy is part of the larger problem of
the lack of peace and stability within Somalia itself. As
long as there is violence and instability, piracy and
other acts of violence will continue.

We wish again to reiterate the call by the Peace
and Security Council of the African Union (AU) for the
deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping operation
and that the United Nations also provide support to the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). It is
worrying that there has been very little concrete
progress on the deployment of the United Nations force
since the AU made that call, and yet the situation is not
improving. We would not want the Council to be seen
only to respond when it is an issue of piracy that
threatens not only Somalia but the assistance from many
other countries, but this Council is slow when it comes
to the fundamental problems of Somalia.

The Council committed itself in resolution 1814
(2008), expressing its willingness to consider, at an
appropriate time, a peacekeeping operation to take over
from AMISOM, subject to progress in the political
process and the improvement of the security situation
on the ground. With the signing of the Djibouti
agreement, it seems to us that, despite the scenario of
60 to 70 per cent of the armed opposition groups
within the political process in Somalia having been
achieved, we are still nowhere near discussing any
concrete proposals on United Nations deployment.

There is a real danger of the Council being
perceived as selective when it acts only when the
interests of certain member States are threatened, while
ignoring those of the Somalis themselves and the
region at large. We remain committed to doing
whatever we can to make sure that the people of
Somalia are not allowed to suffer any more than they
have. We hope that the Council will also address the
second request that the Transitional Federal
Government of Somalia has placed before the Council
in support the resolution.

