Ms. Patterson (United States of America): I wish
to congratulate you, Sir, on your selection of the topic
for your presidency's thematic discussion.

The United States agrees that today's complex
emergencies and peace operations require the
international community to develop civilian as well as
military response capability. The United Nations and
its Member States play a critical role in lessening and
responding to such crises.

The post-cold-war experience teaches us that ad
hoc responses are not enough. Individually and
collectively, we must better organize ourselves to
identify resources that can be readily accessed and
rapidly deployed for reconstruction and stabilization.

There are several areas in which we want to work
together, including transitional security and law
enforcement, the rule of law, good governance and
democratic participation, economic reconstruction and
humanitarian responses.

We have often seen a sharp increase in social
unrest and criminal activity take place in the immediate
post-conflict period. While military peacekeepers can
help stabilize a post-conflict country, the establishment
of a competent, impartial and adequately resourced
civilian police mission is crucial to maintaining
security.

The United States is proud to be the second-
largest contributor of civilian police to peacekeeping
missions. The presence of civilian police enables
military peacekeepers to draw down earlier than might
otherwise be possible, leaving them available to be
deployed elsewhere as necessary. In addition, civilian
police are essential to re-establish local and national
public security institutions to stop vigilantism and
revenge-taking. That is our major component of crisis
management in post-conflict reconstruction.

Civilian police are, in fact, a crucial bridge
between a martial State and a functioning democracy.
The deployment of civilian police will also set an
example for the development of local police
institutions. Let me mention one example. Many
countries, but particularly the United States and Spain,
worked together to establish the national police of El
Salvador after that country's extended conflict. While
the new police force was not perfect, it was vastly
better than its predecessor and an essential element in
that country's reconciliation and democratic
transformation.

Several delegations here have outlined a number
of ways to improve the international community's
civilian police response, which we endorse. However,
policing alone is not the answer. We must take an
approach that incorporates the entire public security
and justice system and indeed the broader issue of
democracy-building and incorporating civil society
into the process.

As such, we believe that civilian police must be
linked with assistance to the judicial and penal
systems. Without that integrated approach, policing
becomes nothing more than a continuation of the
peacekeeping function rather than a vital precursor to
peace-building. To that end, and of paramount
importance in managing post-conflict societies, is the
rapid establishment of the rule of law in a post-conflict
State. That is essential in order to prevent the
emergence of political corruption, organized crime and
other criminal and terrorist elements that wish to
obstruct the peace process. We very much look forward
to exploring the rule of law issue in greater detail next
month during the United Kingdom presidency.

The role of international and regional
organizations in responding to crises must also be
further developed and improved. We appreciate the
ongoing efforts of the various United Nations
departments, agencies and programmes to address the
civilian dimensions of complex emergencies and peace
operations. Democracy and governance issues are
central to these responses, and President Bush
announced yesterday our support of a democracy fund
that would undertake the promotion of democracy and
engagement with civil society - both critical in post-
conflict environments. We look forward to hearing
recommendations on all these matters from the
Secretary-General's High-level Panel on Threats,
Challenges and Change.

Finally, we must continue to work with the
international financial institutions to develop improved
coordination and a shared understanding of
responsibilities.

The United States will continue to support
effective multilateral cooperation in confronting the
challenges of internal conflict and State collapse. As
the Spanish paper noted, civil and military planning,
coordination and cooperation are central to the success
of reconstruction and stabilization.

The United States Government is announcing
today the formation of a new office within the State
Department - the Office of the Special Coordinator
for Stabilization and Reconstruction - which will,
hopefully, improve our own domestic Government-
wide capacity to respond to post-conflict situations.

My delegation supports examining how to
improve the coordination of international civilian and
military cooperation, as well as efforts to adopt
supporting doctrines for reconstruction and
stabilization. In that spirit, the United States will
continue working to increase the efficiency and
effectiveness of its own national reconstruction and
stabilization capacities.

