Mr. Lauber (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Sir, for having organized this important
debate, which comes at a timely moment.

Within the framework of the ongoing reviews of
peacekeeping operations, peacebuilding and resolution
1325 (2000), a broad debate has been developing around
the potential of the United Nations and its various bodies
in terms ofconflict prevention. Ifwe take the cases ofthe
Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission,
we note that both have considerable potential to prevent
conflicts. Their respective potentials are very different,
obviously, but they are complementary. While the
Security Council has a broad range of instruments,
including coercive measures to prevent the imminent
outbreak or escalation of a conflict, the preventive
potential of peacebuilding resides in its long-term,
structural and inclusive nature.

Peacebuilding is intended primarily not to be an
instrument for conflict management or conciliation,
but rather an approach that addresses the root causes
of conflict in a society, in close cooperation with
national authorities. The goal of peacebuilding is to
combat socioeconomic inequalities and the lack of
inclusiveness, ideologies of division and post-conflict
trauma. It seeks to promote social changes that reduce
the risk of a conflict breaking out. Peacebuilding
assumes different forms depending on the context and
requires a long-term commitment and investment on the
part of national actors and regional and international
partners. It is to that specific end that Switzerland has
for many years supported the peacebuilding activities
conducted in the Great Lakes region.

As we all know, the Great Lakes remains a
region beset by troubles. The causes and effects of
the problems confronting the region are largely of a
transnational nature. The illicit exploitation of natural
resources, narrow political space and tensions among
different social and non-State armed groups are
factors that transcend borders and weigh on regional
security. A coherent response to the problems of the
region therefore requires a regional approach, and
we particularly welcome the ongoing commitment of
regional organizations and forums.

The regional dimension is at the heart of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
Switzerland supports the Framework, especially its
goals of peacemaking, the provision of its good offices
in Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and providing platforms for dialogue, as well as its own
expertise. We appreciate the work on implementation
carried out by the Framework and trust that we can build
on the momentum generated thus far. The Framework
is tailored to promote coordination among the various
national, regional and international actors. That is
why we encourage bilateral and multilateral actors to
maintain or appoint special envoys for the Framework,
and to provide close coordination and cooperation.

In order to help galvanize the Framework and to
encourage a coherent international response to the
problems of the region, Switzerland will propose the
organization this year of a series of consultations and
a public conference with the key actors in Geneva.
Coherence between the United Nations, the African
Union, the East African Community and other regional
and international actors is essential to the success of
preventive measures in the Great Lakes region. Our
peacebuilding efforts in the region must be coordinated
and cannot be confined to simply bringing to an
end the grievances of the past. They must also offer
a vision of hope to the inhabitants of the region and
help create the necessary conditions so that future
elections can take place in a democratic, pluralistic and
stable environment.

Allow me to conclude by stressing the importance
of prioritizing the resurgence of conflicts in the Great
Lakes Region. Recent developments show that decades-
old conflicts cannot be resolved in the space ofjust a
few years, despite the presence of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the largest and most onerous
peacekeeping operation in United Nations history. The
grievances of certain groups within the societies of the
region and the violations of human rights can easily
become drivers of conflict. We must avoid premature
disengagement while remaining watchful and ready to
react to any events likely to provoke or exacerbate a
conflict in the future.

