Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the holding of this meeting on
the report of the Secretary-General on developments in
Somalia during the period from 14 December 2018 to
4 May 2019 and the implementation of the respective
mandates of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia (UNSOM) and the United Nations Support
Office in Somalia (UNSOS).

We commend Mr. Raisedon Zenenga, Deputy
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Officer-in-Charge of UNSOM; Mr. Francisco Caetano
J ose Madeira, Special Representative of the Chairperson
ofthe African Union Commission for Somalia and Head
of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM);
and Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency
Relief Coordinator of the United Nations Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, for their
very informative briefings. Their briefings prompt
my delegation to comment on the political, economic,
security, humanitarian and human rights situations.

At the political level, cote d'Ivoire welcomes
the recent initiatives to relaunch the political and
reconciliation process between the Somali Federal
Government and the federal member states, which had
been interrupted for several months owing to deep
differences. My country calls on the parties concerned
to maintain this positive momentum and accelerate the
implementation of the road map, including through
the conclusion of agreements on sharing power
and resources, the constitutional review and the
establishment of Somalia's federal model. We also call
on both chambers of the Federal Parliament to resolve
their disagreements and establish sincere cooperation
to order to adopt urgent legislation, in particular the
electoral law.

With regard to the economic situation, Cote d'Ivoire
notes with satisfaction the outstanding progress made
by the Federal Government in implementing its fiscal
policy, particularly the significant improvement in tax
collection through the expansion of the tax base and the
strengthening of collection capacities. We encourage
the Federal Government to redouble its efforts in the
context of the implementation of the staff-monitored
programme of the International Monetary Fund to
consolidate economic growth and improve the living
conditions of the Somali people.

With regard to the security situation, my delegation
is concerned about the prevailing instability in Somalia
and the continuing serious threat posed by Al-Shabaab,
which is increasing its attacks and targeted killings,
despite its setbacks. My country categorically condemns
those attacks and calls on the Somali Government
to intensify, with the support of the international
community, its efforts to eradicate the threat posed by
Al-Shabaab.

With regard to human rights, Cote d'Ivoire
remains seriously concerned about the increase in the
number of civilian victims and kidnappings attributed
to Al-Shabaab, summary executions, violations of
freedom of expression, sexual violence and Violence
against children. It calls on all parties concerned to
respect, protect and promote human rights and calls
for those who are responsible for violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law to be held
accountable. In that regard, my country welcomes
the reaffirmation by the Prime Minister of Somalia,
on 4 March, of his country's willingness to fulfil its
human rights commitments as a newly elected member
of the Human Rights Council as of October 2018.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, cote
d'Ivoire notes with deep concern the growing need for
assistance and protection, which will affect 4.2 million
people in 2019. That situation, which is the result of the
ongoing conflict, food insecurity caused by a deficient
rainy season and the subsequent increase in the
number of displaced persons, calls on the international
community to act. It is therefore imperative to quickly
respond to the Secretary-General's appeal for funding
for the 2019 humanitarian response plan, whose needs
for the next six months are estimated at $674 million. Our
mobilization would not only provide Vital emergency
assistance to many Somalis in distress, but also support
them on the path to resilience and recovery.

In addition, my delegation is concerned about the
increasingly difficult operational context in which
humanitarian actors work, owing in particular to acts
of Violence committed against them and the growing
number of obstacles along the main supply routes. It
urges all stakeholders to protect humanitarian personnel
and to promote the safe and unrestricted free passage
of assistance.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire commends UNSOM
for its indispensable role in providing strategic
advice, good offices, capacity-building activities and
coordination of the support provided by international
partners. We also pay tribute to AMISOM. personnel
for the sacrifices made for security in Somalia. My
delegation also reiterates its support for UNSOS and
other international partners in Somalia. We encourage
them to strengthen their cooperation in order to
contribute to promoting reconciliation and peace in
that country.

