Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to extend to you, Sir, and the delegation of
the United Kingdom our congratulations and best
wishes for success during your presidency of the
Security Council. We also wish to thank Ambassador
Andrey Denisov and the delegation of the Russian
Federation for their excellent work in the presidency of
the Council during the month of November.

I take this opportunity, first, to thank the
Ambassador of France for his leadership in the
Security Council missions to Central Africa. In the
almost two years that Brazil has been on the Council.
we have been able to participate in those visits, and we
are pleased to note that during that period, there has
been tangible progress in the situation of the region.
We are also pleased to note the importance and the
usefulness of those missions for cultivating more
positive relations between the Council and the
Governments and political actors of the region,
including members of civil society. We believe that.
above all, it is essential to underline the advantages of
dialogue between the Council and the countries of the
region, now that the regional perspective has been
adopted as the most effective method for action taken
in Central Africa by the Council and the international
community.

The regional component was at the heart of the
peace agreements of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Burundi. It was the leaders of the region
who found the best balance leading to the ceasefire and
the subsequent peace negotiations. Therefore, regional
leaders must continue to provide counsel to the
Security Council, not only because they know the
problems of the region very well and because they are
most directly affected by the consequences of war and
the benefits of peace, but also because a great share of
the challenge of achieving a lasting peace in Burundi
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo continues to
depend on regional cooperation, for example, in
addressing the issues of the control of armed foreign
elements in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo and trafficking in arms and in illegally
exploited mineral resources.

Likewise, finding lasting solutions for the
problem of access to land and that of the high density
of the population of Burundi has to begin with
collective efforts in the interest of all neighbouring
countries.

I am very satisfied to note the progress made to
date on preparations for the International Conference
of the Great Lakes region. The Council's mission to the
region was able to inform itself of that progress, and
we congratulate the representatives of the countries
members of the Conference for their efforts to find
combined solutions in which not only the issues of
peace and security but also the issues of social and
economic development receive attention, because there
can be no lasting peace as long as the current economic
and social structures remain in place. We are all aware
that the pace of work must be kept up and that all
participants in the process, including the donor
community, must fulfil their commitments and work
for the early holding of the second summit conference.

To conclude, I underline my country's confidence
in the political authorities and the leaders of the entire
region and in their commitment to lasting peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The next six
months are very important, and we hope that the
Council can continue to extend its support in
constantly close coordination with regional leaders. I
am certain that the African representatives on the
Council, with the assistance of the Secretariat and in
collaboration with other Council members, can find the
best way for the United Nations to continue to play its
important role in achieving peace and stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and neighbouring
Burundi.

