The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Dominican Republic.

First, we thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General,
for his detailed and comprehensive briefing on the
current situation in the region. We would also like to
acknowledge the presence of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs ofthe Republic ofIndonesia, Ms. Retno Marsudi.

The Dominican Republic, guided by respect for
human rights and international law, is extremely
concerned about the recent increase in tensions in
the occupied Palestinian territory, and in the Gaza
Strip in particular. We are also very concerned about
the ongoing deterioration of the humanitarian and
socioeconomic situation. We therefore reaffirm our
support for a two-State solution, based on the pre-1967
borders and on what is determined by the parties in
the negotiation process. We understand that that is the
only way to obtain a just and lasting peace to resolve
a conflict that, for decades, has eclipsed international
peace and security.

To that end, the Dominican Republic believes that
it is vital to redouble efforts at reconciliation between
the parties, with the support of the international
community, in order to guarantee the inalienable right
of the Palestinian people to self-determination and
the right of Israel to live in peace within secure and
recognized borders. We consider those objectives to
be incompatible with the continued construction and
expansion of illegal settlements in occupied Palestinian
territory, violence against civilians, including acts
of terrorism, attacks against Israeli territory and
incitement and the use of inflammatory rhetoric.
We emphatically condemn all such acts, in line with
resolution 2334 (2016).

Our country was appalled by the escalation of
violence in Gaza and the West Bank in the last quarter
of 2018. The tragic deaths of Israeli and Palestinian
civilians and members of the military once again
brought us dangerously close to a conflagration of
greater proportions, which no one wants. Similarly, the
Dominican Republic is extremely concerned about the
serious deterioration in the humanitarian situation in
the Gaza Strip, which is reflected by the high levels
of food insecurity and very limited access to basic
services, including energy, water and health services.
We call on the international community to respond
effectively to the pressing needs of the inhabitants of
the Gaza Strip. At this juncture, we acknowledge the
efforts of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which requires
adequate funding for its critical work.

With regard to the Golan Heights, the Dominican
Republic believes that only genuine will on the part of
the parties to reach consensus, pursuant to resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973), can end the conflict.

With regard to Jerusalem, we recognize its special
status and reaffirm the need to protect and to preserve
the plurality of its cultural and religious dimension,
unique in the world.

As the international community, we must channel
our best efforts towards achieving a negotiated solution
between the parties on the basis ofthe General Assembly
and Security Council resolutions, the Quartet road map,
the Arab Peace Initiative and previous agreements.
We must not deviate from the goal of two democratic
States, living side by side in peace, security and mutual
recognition. That vision must continue to inspire us to
work tirelessly until all men, women and children of
the region can live with the hope and security that they
long for and deserve.
I new resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.

I also wish to inform all concerned that we will
continue this open debate through the lunch hour, since
there are a large number of speakers.

I now give the floor to the representative of Lebanon.

