Mr. Lacroix: I thank members of the Security
Council for providing me this opportunity to discuss
ways to strengthen, sharpen andre-energize our approach
to the triangular dialogue and cooperation among
the Security Council, troop- and police-contributing
countries (TCCs/PCCS) and the Secretariat.

We have come a long way since 2001, when the
Security Council, in the wake of the Brahimi report
of the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations (see S/2000/809), called for improving the relationship
among the Security Council, troop-contributing
countries and the Secretariat "to foster a spirit of
partnership, cooperation, confidence and mutual trust"
(S/PRST/2011/17).

Strong triangular cooperation is crucial to
enhancing peacekeeping operations. It is particularly
relevant today, as the Secretary-General's Action for
Peacekeeping (A4P) initiative is aimed at fostering
collective solutions to deal with the challenges that
peacekeepers face. The common work of the Security
Council, the troop- and police-contributing countries
and the Secretariat, along with other stakeholders, will
be key to ensuring continued progress.

That applies to many areas of peacekeeping.
Improving the safety and security of our peacekeepers
is one of them. As we are continuously working to
implement the action plan on the security of United
Nations peacekeepers, such strong cooperation enables
us to better identify gaps and define solutions to the
challenges our peacekeepers face on the ground.

Those benefits apply as well to our efforts on
performance, for which the mobilization of Council
members has been significant. As we are working as a
priority to implement resolution 2436 (2018), adopted
last September under the United States presidency,
continuous engagement from Council members, as
well as TCCs and PCCs, will be crucial to achieve
lasting progress. That is, for instance, the case with the
comprehensive performance assessment system. As we
continue to roll it out and implement it in an increasing
number of our missions, we need the feedback, support
and engagement of the Security Council and the troop-
and police-contributing countries, so that it can best
respond to the needs and be most efficient and useful
to all. In many areas critical to performance, such as
training, mindset and equipment, a triangular approach
can yield strong results. Mechanisms such as the light
coordination mechanism and the Triangular Partnership
Project are, to some extent, concrete manifestations of
the spirit of triangular cooperation.

Mandates can also strongly benefit from the
perspectives and experiences of troop and police
contributors present on the ground in order to make them
more focused, adapted and achievable. Those are only a
few areas among many where triangular cooperation is
essential to the effectiveness of peacekeeping.

A number of mechanisms exist today to facilitate
consultations among the Security Council, troop- and
police-contributing countries and the Secretariat. They
include the formal and informal consultations of the
Council with troop- and police-contributing countries,
the Security Council Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations and the Military Staff Committee. Outside
of the Council, the General Assembly's Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations is of course
an important forum of discussion involving Council
members and troop- and police-contributing countries.

The A4P Declaration of Shared Commitments, which
has been endorsed by every Security Council member,
calls on us all to implement existing intergovernmental
commitments on triangular cooperation. As Member
States decide to take up the role of A4P champions,
their diversity and common work will provide further
illustration of the relevance of triangular cooperation in
each of the thematic areas of A4P.

Today's meeting is therefore timely, not least
because the third Chiefs of Defence Conference, which
is being held at the United Nations tomorrow, represents
a further critical opportunity to realize triangular
cooperation, involving TCCs and PCCs at the most
senior levels of their uniformed forces to consult with
each other and with the Secretariat.

(spoke in French)

Given the relevance of triangular cooperation to
the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations, as I have
just described, I would like to share some thoughts on
how we can work together collaboratively to strengthen
triangular cooperation. By building on each other's
assets, strengths and contributions, we can work
together to ensure that cooperation can realize its
full potential.

In the first place, the Secretariat remains ready to
give its full support to a more institutionalized system
of formal and informal exchanges among the Security
Council, the Secretariat and troop-contributing
countries, of course in accordance with the mandate of
each. Such exchanges can be useful throughout the life
cycle of the mission: at the time of mandate renewals, of
course, but also at any time that the mission encounters
particular challenges or problems or following strategic
reviews. Such meetings should encourage frank, open
and interactive dialogue among the partners of this
triangular dialogue. The dialogue is most effective
when it combines both formal and informal encounters.
I am referring in that regard to the practice developed
by New Zealand during its tenure on the Security
Council, where a member of the Council organized
informal and interactive consultations with the troop-
and police-contributing countries, which proved useful
and appreciated. In order to contribute to the success
of such meetings, my Department will continue to
participate actively in those consultations, to work with
all interlocutors and to share its substantive expertise in
the preparation and conduct of the consultations.

I would also like to encourage Member States to
continue strengthening triangular cooperation through
the holding of Council meetings on cross-cutting
peacekeeping issues, such as this meeting. Such
meetings are useful because they help to refine our
common approach and understanding of the current
challenges and priority actions to be taken, thereby
helping to strengthen peacekeeping. I am referring, for
example, to the debate held last May by the Indonesian
presidency of the Security Council on training and
capacity-building (see S/PV.8521), which has deepened
our common analysis of this crucial issue for our
operations. I am also thinking of the Security Council
Visits to our missions, which provide significant
opportunities for exchanges with our peacekeepers
and our troop and police contributors. Such visits also
provide an opportunity to review and report on progress
in the implementation of the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative and its concrete impact on the ground.

I am also referring to the activities of the Council's
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations, and I
would like to pay tribute to the work of Cote d'Ivoire,
which has been at the head of the Working Group
for the past year and a half. Under that country's
leadership, the Working Group organized very useful
exchanges on such central issues as the place of women
in peacekeeping, the protection of civilians, and the
relationship with host States, to name just a few. As
a former host State itself, as a troop contributor and
as member of the Security Council, Cote d'Ivoire
brings a unique perspective to the Security Council.
More generally, I would like to emphasize the pivotal
role of Council members that are also troop and police
contributors. There are many here, including the
country you represent, Mr. President. Those Member
States are naturally at the crossroads and at the heart of
triangular cooperation. They can therefore play a vital
role in its organization through such meetings or visits.

(spoke in English)

I also encourage representatives to consider
expanding triangular cooperation on occasion, as
required, to ensure successful mandate implementation.
The A4P Declaration of Shared Commitments on
United Nations Peacekeeping Operations includes
commitments to

"enhance collaboration and planning between the
United Nations and relevant international, regional
and subregional organizations and arrangements",
as well as

"to consider options for further direct
engagement between host Governments and the
Security Council".

In many contexts, peacekeeping missions are likely to
benefit from more consistent and closer engagement
between the Security Council and the host Government.
And, as the Council is very aware, partnerships with
regional and subregional organizations are increasingly
key for the efficiency of peacekeeping.

For African Union (AU) operations authorized by
the Security Council, we are in fact already seeing
a form of quadrilateral cooperation - among the
Security Council, TCCs, the Secretariat and the African
Union, including its Peace and Security Council and
its Commission. Security Council meetings on the
cooperation with regional and subregional organizations
are of particular value by fostering common analysis of
situations and joint thinking on initiatives or actions to
be undertaken. The open debates organized recently on
cooperation between the United Nations and the African
Union - for instance, most recently in February 2019
by Equatorial Guinea on the AU Silencing the Guns in
Africa by 2020 initiative (see S/PV.8456) - have been
very useful to bring to light how this partnership can
help tackle current challenges.

Finally, on the Secretariat's part, we welcome
the substantive engagement from troop- and
police-contributing countries during our meetings, and
the value of more meaningful dialogue between the
Security Council and troop- and police-contributing
countries. We commit to continuing our efforts to
regularly brief TCCs and PCCs and provide information
in a timely manner, related to developments on the
ground and critical security incidents, for instance.
My Department also stands ready to provide useful
information, including on ongoing challenges, conflict
analyses and risk assessments, and to discuss mandate
options before an operation is authorized or renewed.

I look forward to hearing today from our Member
State partners about other ways that this cooperation,
including on the Secretariat's side, can be strengthened
further. We remain committed to working together
with everyone here, both Security Council members
and troop- and police-contributing countries, to ensure
that mechanisms for triangular cooperation are robust
and dynamic. In the spirit of Action for Peacekeeping,
we look forward to a strengthened triangular
cooperation that will contribute to the renewal of our
collective engagement.

