Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having organized
this debate, which is today more necessary than ever. I
would also like to thank the Deputy Secretary-General
for his statement as well as Ms. Pearl and Mr. Deloire
for their important testimony, which allows us better
to understand the challenges that journalists encounter
on the ground and to identify concrete actions to better
protect them. We will never forget Daniel Pearl or any
one of the journalists who paid with their life for their
commitment to the freedom of information. Their
tragedy represents an obligation for all of us. I wish to
say to Mariane Pearl that her commitment is a source of
inspiration for all of us, and I wish to welcome her son,
who will celebrate his birthday tomorrow.

I would also like to commend the tireless work
carried out for many years by Reporters Without
Borders to draw attention to the situation of journalists
under threat and to find concrete ways to improve the
situation.

On 7 January, in the heart of Paris, two terrorists
attacked the headquarters of Charlie Hebdo with heavy
weapons. They killed 12 people and wounded 11 others.
By attacking that newspaper, terrorists killed not
only individuals. When a journalist is killed, it is the
freedom of expression that is targeted. As emphasized
in resolution 2222 (2015), adopted by the Council today,
a free and independent press is one of the essential
foundations of our democratic societies. Even before
the murderous attack on Charlie Hebdo, journalists
everywhere have been the victims of violence and paid
with their lives for the freedom of expression.

In 2014, as has been noted, some 66 journalists, ll
assistants and 19 citizen journalists were killed. Over
350 of them were placed in detention. Thousands more
were the victims of harassment, arbitrary arrest and
freedom-destroying legislation. This trend continues in
2015; 25, including many localjournalists, have already
lost their lives this year. Everywhere journalists are
subject to persecution by authoritarian regimes that
attempt to silence them. Thus some 100 journalists,
professionals and non-professionals both, have been
killed in Syria since the beginning of the conflict there,
including four French citizens. They paid with their
lives for their determination to show to the world the
reality of the indiscriminate repression affecting the
Syrian people. In addition to persecution by the regime,
there is also the barbarity of Daesh. This terrorist group
does not hesitate to use the media to show the execution
of journalists, staged in a macabre way that deeply
shocks the human conscience.

The terrorists attack journalists because they
represent everything that Daesh hates and tries to
eradicate: freedom, pluralism, culture and democracy.
In Iraq as in Syria, they are trying to create a black
hole from which information cannot escape and where
obscurantism and darkness reign supreme. These
terrorists should know that their barbaric actions will
only strengthen our collective determination to fight
them.

Everyone agrees today that the challenge of
protecting journalists is still far from having been
taken up. It is first and foremost the responsibility of
Governments to protect journalists and to allow them
to carry out their duties independently and without
hindrance. That necessarily involves the fight against
impunity for those who commit acts of violence. States
must systematically investigate, apprehend and try the
perpetrators. Currently, 90 per cent of the murders of
journalists go unpunished, which promotes further
acts of violence. That situation is unacceptable. The
International Criminal Court can also play a role.
According to the Geneva Conventions, journalists are
civilians. Their murder can therefore constitute a war
crime under the Rome Statute. The texts exist. They
need to be applied.

It is up to the international community, in particular
the Security Council, to consider this situation and
to act to protect journalists. We should recognize the
vulnerability of journalists in conflict zones and should
more methodically and systematically ensure that
peacekeeping operations guarantee their protection as
civilians at risk. Peacekeeping operations should also
report to the Council on human rights violations that
target journalists.

As Mr. Deloire reminded us, violence against
journalists is not confined to situations of armed
conflict. Most attacks take place in countries at peace,
most often when journalists are investigating cases of
corruption or organized crime. In that regard, the United
Nations Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and
the Issue of Impunity, developed under the auspices of
UNESCO in 2012, is an excellent initiative. It should
now be fully implemented by the United Nations system
as a whole, in cooperation with Member States and
civil society. It would also be important, as Mr. Deloire
has urged, to consider ways to improve the coherence,
effectiveness and visibility of United Nations efforts on
the issue of the protection ofjournalists.

The freedom to provide information lies at the
heart of every democracy. It is in the DNA of France
and is one of our highest priorities, both internally and
outside our borders. Every day, journalists, bloggers,
war reporters and associated staff help us better
understand the world and its changes. We can all see
that the first reflex of the enemies of freedom is to gag
the press, and that the first defenders of democracy
are the independent media. Freedom of expression
should be respected everywhere. It is our collective
responsibility, including here in the Security Council,
to work to ensure the full exercise of that freedom. Let
us make that our shared fight.

