The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Uganda.

I thank Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
and Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace
and Security of the African Union, for their briefings. I
also welcome the participation in this meeting of the
Foreign Minister of Somalia, Mr. Omaar.

Uganda commends the efforts made by the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) of Somalia to
advance the political process in that country. We
condemn attacks on the TFG, the civilian population
and the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
by insurgent groups and foreign elements in an attempt
to undermine the political process and reconciliation
efforts. Any attempt to oust the TFG is totally
unacceptable; it would have a serious impact on peace
and stability within Somalia, in the region and beyond.
We therefore call on all armed groups and all
opposition elements to embrace the Djibouti agreement
as the best way to advance the political process. We
also call upon those, within and outside the region,
who are supporting the insurgents and fuelling
instability in Somalia to stop doing so.

We welcome the launch on 25 July of the Joint
Security Committee, which is one of the institutions
provided for in the Djibouti peace agreement. That is
significant because, once operationalized, the Joint
Security Committee will coordinate efforts in support
of the Somali transitional security sector institutions
and also facilitate the disbursement of pledges made to
that effect during the Brussels conference.

We welcome the support extended to the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and call upon
the United Nations and other partners to continue their
support to ensure that AMISOM. can effectively
implement its mandate. We also welcome the
additional pledges of troops for AMISOM, which will
further strengthen its capacity to carry out its mandate.
In addition, we are encouraged that AMISOM. has
initiated the deployment of its police component
following the arrival of its Police Commissioner in
Mogadishu on 18 June this year.
20

In order to build upon the achievements
registered so far, it is critical that, at this stage, the rest
of the entities supporting AMISOM, including the
civilian component, the United Nations Political Office
for Somalia and other agencies, relocate to Somalia.
That would not only help to strengthen the
Government, but also send a clear signal to all that the
international community is fully supportive of the
Transitional Federal Government and the people of
Somalia.

Members will recall that, at its meeting held on
9 July this year, the Security Council adopted a
presidential statement (S/PRST/2009/l9) in which it
took note of the decision of the African Union summit
in Sirte urging the Council to impose sanctions against
those providing support to groups engaged in
undermining peace and reconciliation in Somalia and
regional stability. Accordingly, the Council expressed
its readiness to expeditiously consider what action to
take against any party undermining the Djibouti peace
process. Uganda will support action by the Council in
that regard.

Finally, we thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah,
and his staff for the good work that they are doing to
support the people of Somalia so that they can live in
peace and security and rebuild their country.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.
09-43 003
