Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At our last meeting on this subject, on
28 August (see S/PV.8333), together with other members
of the Council, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea again
reaffirmed its profound concern for the hundreds of
thousands of Rohingya who, for fear of violence and
atrocities, have been forced to flee their homelands and
property in Myanmar to Bangladesh.

We applaud the solidarity of the Government and
the people of Bangladesh who, with the support of the
United Nations, its partners and non-governmental
organizations, continue to provide security,
accommodation, assistance and humanitarian aid to an
enormous number of refugees. We hope that this major
humanitarian effort can continue while the international
community works together with Myanmar and
Bangladesh to ensure the entire population's dignified
and sustainable return to their homeland.

Despite the well-known difficulties surrounding
this issue, our delegation certainly appreciates the
work that has been carried out by the United Nations
this year. Among other things, it includes the important
visit by members of the Council in the second quarter
of this year and the June visit of the Secretary-General,
in which he was joined, significantly, by the President
of the World Bank. We also highlight the Secretary-
General's April appointment of his Special Envoy on
Myanmar, who has made several trips to explore and
familiarize herself with the area since then. Nor should
we forget the direct and continued support supplied by
the various agencies of the United Nations system on
the ground.

During those visits, the delegations were able
to confirm the deplorable situation of the displaced
Rohingya in the settlements in Cox's Bazar, where
hearings and meetings were also arranged with the local
authorities in Myanmar and Bangladesh, with whom
they had important exchanges with a view to finding a
solution to the conflict. It will be impossible to ensure
a dignified and prosperous future for young refugees
with the very limited education prospects and ways to
earn a living available to them, so if they remain there
a long time an entire generation of a people will be
condemned to poverty. The international community
and Myanmar must understand that, but they must also
respect the generous hospitality of Bangladesh, and that
obliges us to redouble our efforts to advance the process
of ensuring the return of the Rohingya. We hope that the
Government of Myanmar has made progress with the
initiatives it laid out in a letter submitted to the Council
on 20 July through its representative in New York
(S/2018/726) on humanitarian access, accountability
for human rights abuses and the implementation of
the recommendations of the Advisory Commission
on Rakhine State, which were also the main areas
identified by the Council.

We welcome the fact that since the office of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on Myanmar
became operational, Myanmar and Bangladesh
have been receiving regular working visits from
Ms. Burgener and having in-depth exchanges with her
on the issue of Rakhine. We must all support her work
and give her time for a more thorough and appropriate
investigation that will better facilitate her dialogue
with local Governments.

We also welcome the ministerial meeting held in
August between Myanmar and Bangladesh, at which
they discussed the implementation of the bilateral
repatriation agreement and reached consensus on issues
such as forms of verification, displaced persons in the
border area and the establishment of a direct line of
communication between their Ministers. We encourage
the parties to continue working together constructively.
We also stress the importance of the joint working group
meetings held in recent months between Myanmar and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the United Nations Development
Programme, which in our view help to reinforce their
respective commitments. The meetings should be
frequent, productive and exemplary in order to build
more trust and pursue their shared goal, the creation of
a safe sociopolitical environment that can guarantee the
refugees' return to their homes.

Before concluding, Equatorial Guinea urges
all members of the Council and the international
community to support all initiatives based on peaceful
negotiations and the encouragement of contacts as the
only way to reach a sustainable and lasting solution
to this thorny situation. Lastly, we want to express
our sincere gratitude to the United Nations and all
its agencies on the ground, to Bangladesh and to all
international actors providing assistance of any kind
to the Rohingya refugees or working to facilitate their
return. We also commend the People's Republic of
China for its exemplary efforts as a liaison between the
various parties concerned and encourage it to continue
in order to ensure that Myanmar collaborates effectively
with Bangladesh for the return of the Rohingya to
their homes.

