Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I, too, would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his
detailed briefing, and we are grateful that we had the
chance to listen to Ambassadors Mansour and Shalev. I
wish to align myself with the statement to be delivered
by the representative of the Czech Republic on behalf
of the European Union. I will therefore focus on a few
aspects that are of particular importance to Austria.

The briefing by Under-Secretary-General
Mr. Pascoe once more underscored the urgency of
stabilizing the humanitarian situation of the population
of Gaza and the need to ensure an early recovery. The
results of the Sharm el-Sheikh conference have
demonstrated the international community's readiness
to help the people in Gaza to rebuild their lives, but,
beyond international support, that task requires
immediate and decisive action by the parties.

First and foremost, the populations of southern
Israel and Gaza need to see full respect for a permanent
ceasefire. We are gravely concerned about the fragility
of the current provisional ceasefire and we reiterate our
condemnation of indiscriminate rocket attacks. We
look to Israel to urgently provide full access for aid
workers and materials. We note Israel's commitment to
alleviating the humanitarian situation in Gaza. We also
note that logistical steps have already been taken to
improve the delivery of aid. Unfortunately, supplies
continue to be highly insufficient in terms of the
quantity and scope of goods allowed into the Gaza
Strip.

Recovery and reconstruction efforts can advance
only if all crossings are immediately and
unconditionally opened for the passage of humanitarian
aid and commercial flows, including construction
materials essential for the rehabilitation of vital
infrastructure, homes, clinics and schools. That and the
freedom of movement of people are indispensable for a
return of normal economic activity and for a dignified
future for the Palestinian people.

Progress towards sustainable peace can only
come hand in hand with the reconstruction of Gaza as
an integral part of a future Palestinian State and
prospects for positive economic and social
development for all Palestinians. Moving forward on
the path to peace also requires rebuilding trust,
including by strengthening respect by all for the rule of
law, human rights and international humanitarian law.
We also note the ongoing debate on that question in
Israel.

Austria reiterates that all allegations of violations
of international humanitarian law, by whomever they
may have been committed, must be thoroughly
investigated. In that context, we welcome the
establishment of the Board of Inquiry by the Secretary-
General and await its conclusions with interest.

Since the adoption of resolution 1850 (2008),
there have been serious setbacks and frustrations.
Israelis and Palestinians must steer back, and firmly
keep course, towards a just and comprehensive peace.
For the Palestinian side, that means speaking with one
voice and forming a Government committed to work
towards a settlement resulting in a two-State solution,
with a Palestinian State living side by side with Israel
in peace and security.

In conformity with the entire European Union,
Austria fully supports the Egyptian reconciliation
efforts.

As far as the current and any future leadership of
Israel is concerned, we hope to see a greater
commitment to peace negotiations as well as to the
two-State solution. We expect a halt to all activities
that jeopardize a negotiated settlement and the viability
of the two-State solution, such as the construction of
settlements in the West Bank and East Jerusalem and
the construction of the separation barrier on occupied
Palestinian land - acts that are contrary to
international law. An immediate freeze on all
settlement activities, including natural growth, and the
dismantlement of outposts built since 2001 would re-
establish confidence and strengthen the hand of those
committed to peace on the Palestinian side.

Looking beyond the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
Austria strongly encourages intensified efforts by the
parties on all tracks towards a just and comprehensive
regional peace, including the early resumption of the
Syrian-Israeli track. We welcome the progress achieved
in the exchange of ambassadors between Lebanon and
Syria. We wish to underline the continued importance
of the Arab Peace Initiative to advancing the vision of
security, stability and good-neighbourliness for all
countries in the region.

