Mr. Atiyanto (Indonesia): I would like to take
this opportunity to express our sincere appreciation for
the convening of this open meeting of the Security
Council to review the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) over the past three months. We
would like to express our appreciation to Ambassador
Konuzin, Chairman of the CTC, for his briefing on the
Committee's work programme. We would also like to
welcome and congratulate Ambassador Javier Ruperez
on his appointment as Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED).

We note the Committee's twelfth 90-day work
programme, which will run from July to September
2004. It is our belief that the work programme will
continue to enhance the effectiveness of our counter-
terrorism measures. In this connection, Indonesia
supports measures intended to enhance the counter-
terrorism capability of States requesting aid and
reiterates the importance of cooperation and
coordination by United Nations Member States in
capacity-building for those States that need assistance.

Allow me to provide an update on Indonesia's
continuing efforts in combating international terrorism,
especially in our region, since the previous CTC
meeting. On 3 July 2004, President Megawati
Soekarnoputri inaugurated the Jakarta Centre for Law
Enforcement Cooperation. The establishment of the
Centre was an important follow-up to the Bali Regional
Ministerial Meeting on Counter-Terrorism that was
held on 4 and 5 February 2004, under the
co-chairmanship of the Indonesian and Australian
Governments.

The key objective of the Centre is to enhance the
operational expertise of regional law-enforcement
personnel in dealing with transnational crime, with the
primary focus on enhancing counter-terrorism skills.
The Centre will seek to strengthen cooperation among
regional police forces, drawing upon the experience of
Indonesia and Australia in law-enforcement
cooperation. While it is conceived as a bilateral
initiative, we welcome participation and contributions
by other countries and international organizations
supportive of the goals of the Centre.

Another follow-up of the Bali Ministerial
Meeting was the establishment of two ad hoc working
groups of senior legal officials and law-enforcement
practitioners in the region. The working group of
senior legal officials will report back to ministers on
the adequacy of regional legal frameworks for counter-
terrorism cooperation and assistance. The working
group will hold its first meeting on 4 and 5 August
2004 in Canberra. The ad hoc working group of law-
enforcement practitioners will formulate best-practice
models for fighting terrorism, develop a more effective
information base and facilitate the more effective flow
of intelligence on criminal activity. The ad hoc working
group will have its first meeting on 12 and
13 August 2004 in Bali, Indonesia.

Finally, I would like to stress the conviction of
Indonesia that terrorism is the problem of every nation,
and that we can best fight and vanquish the menace
through multidimensional and multilateral approaches
on the basis of international cooperation, collaboration
and dialogue among all States. Indonesia is one such
party and we stand ready, as we have in the past, to
take the necessary measures and to work with other
States and organizations to ensure that terrorists run
out of room to hide and that terrorism is defeated.

