The Secretary-General: When I addressed the
General Assembly on 1 October, I applauded the
Council for acting so swiftly to enshrine in law the first
steps needed to carry the fight against terrorism
forward with new vigour and determination. I am
delighted to see today that this determination is
reflected at the most senior levels of Member
Governments.

Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) is a
broad resolution aimed at targeting terrorists and those
who harbour, aid or support them. The resolution
requires Member States to cooperate in a wide range of
areas, from suppressing the financing of terrorism to
providing early warning, cooperating in criminal
investigations and exchanging information on possible
terrorist acts.

The counter-terrorism Committee, chaired by
Ambassador Sir Jeremy Greenstock of the United
Kingdom, has produced a work programme which sets
out the focus of the Committee's work in the first 90-
day period and establishes mechanisms for States to
report progress on the implementation of the
resolution. These reports will play an indispensable
role in identifying and cataloguing existing policies
and instruments. They should provide the benchmark
for the international community as it assesses its ability
to combat international terrorism. I would like to take
this opportunity to encourage all States to ensure the
full implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and to
submit their replies by late December.

I have recently established a working group to
identify the longer-term implications and broad policy
dimensions of the issue of terrorism for the United
Nations. It will also formulate recommendations for me
on steps the United Nations system might take. It
brings together senior officials from the United Nations
system, as well as outside experts.

The United Nations is uniquely placed to
facilitate cooperation between Governments in the
fight against terrorism. The legitimacy that the United
Nations conveys can ensure that the greatest number of
States are able and willing to take the necessary and
difficult steps a diplomatic, legal and political a that
are needed to defeat terrorism.

The fight against terrorism must begin with
ensuring that the 12 legal instruments on international
terrorism already drafted and adopted under United
Nations auspices are signed, ratified and implemented
without delay by all States. It will also be important to
obtain agreement on a comprehensive convention on
international terrorism.

As I told the General Assembly on 1 October, I
understand and accept the need for legal precision in
defining terrorism. But there is also a need for moral
clarity. There can be no acceptance of those who seek
to justify the deliberate taking of innocent civilian life,
regardless of cause or grievance.

In addition to measures taken by individual
Member States, we must now strengthen the global
norms against the use or proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction. We must also strengthen controls
over other types of weapons that pose grave dangers
through terrorist use. This means doing more to ensure
a ban on the sale of small arms to non-State groups;
making progress in eliminating landmines; improving
the physical protection of sensitive industrial facilities,
including nuclear and chemical plants; and increased
vigilance against cyber-terrorist threats.

While the international community's resolve to
fight terrorism is a welcome development, it risks
treating terrorism as a single phenomenon. The reality
is that, like war, terrorism is an immensely complicated
phenomenon with multiple objectives and causes, a
multitude of weapons and agents and virtually limitless
manifestations. The only common denominator among
different variants of terrorism is the calculated use of
deadly violence against civilians for political purposes.

It is, however, this common denominator that
provides the United Nations with a common cause and
a common agenda. I salute the Council for making such
speedy progress on this vital issue. Ultimately, our
success will be measured in terrorist acts thwarted and
lives saved, but I am confident that the unity born of 11
September can be sustained in the months and years
ahead.

