Mr. Richardson (United States of America): In
approving this draft resolution to amend the statute the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, the
Council will again reaffirm its commitment to holding
accountable the perpetrators of the terrible ethnic crimes
witnessed during the conflict in the former Yugoslavia.
This is a commitment the United States has backed with
words and deeds since the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia was established over five years ago.

We would like to express our appreciation to the
Swedish delegation for their leadership in the
consideration of this draft resolution.

We are particularly pleased to support this draft
resolution because it is an affirmation of the important
work already completed by the Tribunal and of the still
daunting task at hand. Increasing the Tribunal's capacity
to try cases confirms its success thus far. In the past year,

 

the Tribunal has seen a dramatic increase in the number of
persons in custody. That many of these have recently
chosen to surrender voluntarily indicates the growing
realization that justice cannot be avoided.

But despite the efforts of the international community,
and particularly the efforts of the International Tribunal
itself, a number of the most notorious indictees of the
Tribunal remain at large. We call upon all States to enhance
their cooperation with the Tribunal to ensure that all
indictees are brought to justice as swiftly as possible. Those
indictees not yet in custody must understand that there is no
safe haven for them. That they will be held accountable is
a foregone conclusion. The only question is when.

The United States commends the work of the Tribunal
and its efforts to function as efficiently and effectively as
possible.
Having created a new trial chamber, the international
community cannot assume that all the needs of the
International Tribunal have been met. The Tribunal's
increased workload will intensify the demand for additional
resources beyond those available through the Tribunal's
budget. We strongly urge all States to make voluntary
contributions to the trust fund established for the Tribunal.
This Tribunal was established because we all believe in the
principle of accountability. We must now help the Tribunal
complete its mission.

Last month, the Council took an important step in the
quest for justice by expanding the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda. Today, we take another such step.
My Government hopes the Council will also, in that same
spirit, work constructively on the important issue of
establishing a tribunal to bring to justice senior Cambodian
Khmer Rouge leaders during the period 1975 through 1979.

