Mr. Cohen (United States of America): We thank
Special Representative La Lime for her briefing and
for being with us today. We appreciate the update on
the efforts of the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) and its preparation
for a successful drawdown of operations by October
2019. We also always appreciate the excellent handouts,
which give us a very good graphic representation of the
progress that is being made in the Mission.

Let me start by expressing our support to the people
of Haiti, who faced a volatile security situation over
the past several weeks. We extend our condolences to
the families and friends of the victims, including the
Haitian National Police (HNP) and customs officers
who perished in the line of duty. We support the rights of
individuals to freely express themselves and peacefully
protest, but we condemn acts of violence. The United
States encourages meaningful dialogue to address
points of disagreement and find lasting solutions
without violence. We urge all parties and leaders to
work together to move the political dialogue forward in
ways that advance the interests and aspirations of the
Haitian people.

The United States will continue to support the goal
of a safer, prosperous future for all Haitians. However,
change must come from the ballot box. We know that
Haiti is preparing for legislative and local elections next
year. Elections can take place only in a climate ofpeace,
tranquillity and transparency and in accordance With
Haitian law. Haiti must adhere to the electoral timetable,
or risk further instability. We also commend the
professionalism demonstrated by the Haitian National
Police in maintaining security and preserving public
order during the demonstrations on 18 and 23 November,
and in the days before and after. However, for the sake
of transparency and accountability, we call on the HNP
General Inspectorate to investigate all allegations of
human rights abuses. That will further strengthen the
HNP's ability to carry out its vital mission. The future of
Haiti's security depends on well-trained and adequately
resourced police. As such, since 2010, the United States
has invested more than $250 million to increase the
size and professionalism of the HNP through training,
equipment and infrastructure. As a direct result of

United States support, the HNP has grown from a force
of 6,000 in 2010 to more than 15,000 in 2018.

Twelve months into the projected two-year
lifespan of MINUJUSTH, the Mission - together
with international partners, including the United
States - has helped build Haiti's security and justice
sector capacities. Furthermore, the Haitian Government
has advanced key justice sector legislation, reinforced
Haitian National Police crowd-control capabilities
and made progress towards addressing international
human rights concerns. However, progress is not
even across all benchmarks and more needs to be
done, particularly on strengthening rule-of-law and
anti-corruption institutions. Other challenges include
renewing judicial mandates, filling vacant Supreme
Court seats, strengthening judicial oversight to combat
impunity and establishing a permanent electoral
council. We expect MINUJUSTH to continue its work
with Haiti to achieve the necessary progress that will
permit it to transition to a non-peacekeeping United
Nations presence by October 2019. We are optimistic
that benchmarks to complete a peacekeeping mission
can be achieved by the end of MINUJUSTH'S projected
lifespan. Work on other benchmarks may be continued
after its drawdown.

This is the time to start planning the transition. We
look forward to the strategic assessment report due by
1 March 2019. In order for MINUJUSTH's drawdown
to succeed, it will require fine-tuned coordination, the
full transition of responsibility to Haitian authorities
and the planning of legislative elections. The United
Nations will continue to play a role in Haiti, but a
peacekeeping operation under chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations will not be necessary
after October 2019. Until then, continued efforts from
MINUJUSTH and the Government of Haiti are essential
to achieve the Mission's benchmarks and the common
goal ofa safer, more secure and prosperous country for
all Haitians.

