The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Somalia, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Daale
(Somalia) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council condemns in the
strongest terms the terrorist attack in Mogadishu
on 3 December at a graduation ceremony for
Somali medical students at Benadir University,
which resulted in the death of innocent civilians
and the Somali Ministers of Health, Higher
Education and Education. This was a criminal
attack on people dedicated to building a peaceful,
stable and prosperous future for the people of
Somalia.

"The Security Council expresses its deepest
sympathy and condolences to the families of
those killed and to those injured in the attack, as
well as to the Transitional Federal Government
and the people of Somalia.
"The Security Council urges that a thorough
investigation be conducted and that the
perpetrators of this attack be brought swiftly to
justice.

"The Security Council underlines its
determination to continue to support the people of
Somalia in their quest for peace and
reconciliation, and the Transitional Federal
Government as the legitimate authority in
Somalia, and reiterates its full support for the
Djibouti Peace Process, which provides a
framework for reaching a lasting political
solution in Somalia.

"The Security Council reaffirms its demand
that all opposition groups immediately end
attacks, put down their arms, renounce Violence
and join reconciliation efforts. The Council
further calls on all parties to abide by their
obligations under international humanitarian law,
in particular to respect the security of civilians,
humanitarian workers and the personnel of the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).

"The Security Council welcomes the work
of AMISOM. in supporting the casualties of the
attack and their relatives. It reiterates its strong
support for AMISOM. and expresses its continued
appreciation for the commitment of troops by the
governments of Uganda and Burundi.

"The Security Council reaffirms that
Somalia's long-term security rests with the
effective development by the Transitional Federal
Government of the National Security Force and
the Somali Police Force, in the framework of the
Djibouti Agreement and in line with a national
security strategy. The Council urges the
international community to support the Somali
security institutions, in coordination with
AMISOM, including through training and
equipment."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2009/31.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.
09-63260

