The President: I thank the representative of the
Unites States for his kind words. I shall now address
the floor in my national capacity.

First, I would like to express my thanks and deep
appreciation to Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for his
very good briefing and his leadership on this question
of mine action.

I would also like to welcome Ambassador Martin
Dahinden and to thank him for his very encouraging
and comprehensive briefing on this important question,
which helps the Council to take the necessary measures
on mine action. Let me acknowledge our full support
for the United Nations approaches and initiatives in
raising awareness of mine-action problems, in
developing rapid-response plans and in the building of
capabilities at the national level in countries affected
by landmines. We also appreciate the positive role
played by the Geneva International Centre for
Humanitarian Demining and we thank Ambassador
Dahinden for his substantive remarks and the work
done by his organization, attesting to the importance of
greater interaction between relevant United Nations
agencies, including the United Nations Mine Action
Service, and non-governmental organizations acting in
this field.

Mines and unexploded ordinance place serious
constraints on the lives of millions of people and
constitute a heavy burden on the affected countries, all
of them recovering from war and struggling to rebuild
their societies. Landmines also prevent large numbers
of refugees from returning to their homes and severely
hamper post-conflict reconstruction, economic
recovery, social restoration and development.

We acknowledge that the primary responsibility
for dealing with landmines and unexploded ordinance
lies with national authorities. However, due to the
limited available technical and financial resources,
landmine clearance plans - particularly in developing
countries in conflict or post-conflict - tend to fall
short of implementation. In this regard, the United
Nations and its Mine Action Service can play a crucial
role by promoting an integrated approach based on
humanitarian assistance and development strategies, in
the understanding that effective mine action requires a
comprehensive and balanced approached combining
mine clearance, the destruction of stockpiles, assistance
to victims, capacity-building and mine-risk education.

Angola has experienced for too many years the
scourge of war, and the challenges posed by mine-
action policies under a peacekeeping operation and in
emerging from a conflict situation are clear. The end of
war made possible the first systematic national
assessment of the landmine issue. I should like to share
some figures with the Security Council.

Angola is one of the world's most affected
countries by mines and unexploded ordinance. The
initial set-up of a landmine impact survey began in
December 2002. In 2002 and the first quarter of 2003,
non-governmental organizations working in mine
action reported the clearing of about 2.8 million square
metres of land, the surveying of about 7.8 million
square metres of land and the destruction of more than
5,000 mines and 13,000 pieces of unexploded
ordinance. The Angolan National Institute for the
Removal of Explosive Devices and Obstacles reports
that, in 2002, around 600,000 people received mine-
risk education.

In 2002, several countries and the European
Commission made contributions to mine action in
Angola of approximately $21 million - an increase of
almost 100 per cent over mine-action funding in 2001.
This was a welcome development and an immediate
peace dividend, as it was made possible only by the
end of the war in my country. It is also the result of
Angola's accession to the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and
Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines and on Their
Destruction.

Emerging from a conflict situation and facing
enormous challenges in addressing its economic and
social recovery, the Angolan Government has allocated
an increasing share of the national budget to mine
action. This stands at around $15 million for the 2003
anti-mine programme, which reflects the fact that
Angola shares in a large measure the burden of the
country's demining effort. Although the donor
community continues to be an important provider of
support in mine action, the fact that the Angolan
Government is allocating a relatively important share
of the national budget to mine action shows its will to
comply with its commitments and its recognition of the
importance of integrating mine action into the overall
framework of emergency assistance, resettlement,
social and economic recovery, and development
strategies.

We are very grateful for the significant assistance
provided by the international community, which
includes bilateral and multilateral assistance through
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, relevant
United Nations agencies and the United Nations
Children's Fund. For the year 2004, we expect to
strengthen our cooperation with the United Nations
system and the non-governmental organizations
involved in mine action.

International assistance is a crucial element. For
that reason, we appeal to the international community
to continue providing adequate and sustained
assistance in support of mine action, including through
contributions to the Voluntary Trust Fund for
Assistance in Mine Action, for sustainable
development and long-term security.

In conclusion, I would like to underline the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General's
report on assistance in mine action with a View to
enhancing the quality of the United Nations mine-
action work. The report shows how United Nations
initiatives have provided valuable direction and
guidance to all entities involved in its implementation
and how it has fostered coordination and accountability
across the mine-action community. We share the views
outlined in the Secretary-General's report on the
objective of the United Nations strategy to effectively
integrate mine action into emergency assistance,
resettlement, socio-economic recovery and
development activities.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

A draft presidential statement on the theme of
today's meeting is being negotiated at the expert level
and we expect it to be ready for adoption by next week.

I call on Mr. Guehenno to respond to questions
and clarify points that have been raised.

