Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I want to
thank the delegations of the United States and the
United Kingdom for the valuable information that they
have provided to us. We listened attentively to the
account of the major efforts they are making in the face
of considerable difficulties - areas of shadow - to
which Ambassador Negroponte referred, including the
atrocious attacks endured by the Iraqi population
recently. But it is important that these efforts go on
intensely, so that the Iraqis can live in peace and so that
they can control their own destiny.

It is sometimes useful to review statements made
in the Council to see how the Views of members have
been followed up. I think that is a valuable exercise
and would be useful on this occasion. At several
meetings, particularly that held on 21 November 2003,
a number of Council members, not necessarily
members of the Coalition, spoke of the need to rebuild
consensus, both in Iraq and at the regional and
international levels. Several members mentioned the
elements that could be essential in recovering that
consensus. Let me review a few of them.

First of all, it was noted that the political process
needs to have broad support from Iraqi society. In the
last quarter, there have been many contacts between the
Coalition Provisional Authority (CPA) and Governing
Council in order to obtain the greatest possible political
and societal support for the needed transition process.
This led to the Agreement of 15 November, whose
basic objective, let us not forget, is to have the Iraqis
become, as soon as possible, masters of their own
destiny and thus to take a stand on it. Of course, this is
not easy; perhaps the best way to understand the work

under way in Iraq is to pose some questions. For
example, would it have been possible for the Iraqis
openly to express their opinions on the electoral
process just a few months ago? I do not think there is
any need for me to answer that question. In today's
Iraq the people enjoy freedom of expression, which had
been impossible for decades, and the Iraqi people can
state their preferences on a political model. There is no
better way than that to recover sovereignty.

The second point is the appropriateness of involving
all the States of the region in the process. It is obviously
necessary for Iraq, as soon as possible, to recover full
normalcy in its relationships with neighbouring
countries. The November 2003 Damascus meeting was a
fundamental step, and the February 2004 Kuwait meeting
was attended by an Iraqi delegation. Here in the United
Nations, we particularly welcomed the establishment of
the so-called core group and of the Group of Friends,
since these are an appropriate channel for participation
by neighbouring countries. But it is also important that
Iraq participate in such meetings. It would not make
much sense to recognize that it is necessary for Iraq to
be integrated in the region, but at the same time to
initiate a process behind its back.

The third point mentioned is that the United
Nations must play a vital role. Of course, I share that
View, and it is also reflected in resolutions of the
Security Council. My Government firmly supported the
sending of a mission to Iraq. We have now received its
report (S/2004/ 140), which contains important
recommendations and conclusions. For example, it
recognizes - and this is important - that it will be
impossible to have credible direct elections before 30
June and that it will be necessary to establish a
provisional Government before that date through some
mechanism other than direct elections.

In my view, there are two main issues regarding
this process. The first is that the date of 30 June should
be maintained; given the consensus among Iraqis on
the handover of sovereignty. The second very
important point is that the Iraqis must feel themselves
to be masters of their own process. A majority of the
people in Iraq want direct elections. That is why we
completely agree with the report's recommendation
that an autonomous and independent Iraqi electoral
commission should be established without further delay
to start preparing the process.

Lastly, it was mentioned that it is vital that the
provisional Government to be established be able fully
to exercise Iraqi sovereignty. The day-to-day
responsibilities of the Government of Iraq are carried
out by Iraqis, and Ministries are headed by Iraqis. We
completely support the process of Iraqization which is
under way; it must enable the provisional Government
to be established by 30 June to carry out its
responsibilities completely.

In summary, it is our hope that on 1 July the Iraqi
administration will be completely prepared and able to
confront the major responsibilities that lie ahead. No
effort must be spared to make that occur.

