Although the Council regularly meets to discuss the situation in Palestine, it is clear that our meeting today is far from a regular one. The fact that some Ministers and Deputy Ministers are participating in this meeting is clear evidence that the situation is very concerning. In his new report (S/2020/555), the Secretary-General warns us of the crucial situation at hand posed by the occupying Power and the threat of its annexation in Palestine. The Palestinian people have suffered injustice, grave violations of human rights and a deteriorating humanitarian situation for far too long. With the looming threat of annexation, the future of Palestine is at stake. It is now up to us whether we want to stand on the side of international law or to turn a blind eye, stand on the other side and allow acts against international law and principles to continue to take place. We must, and should, reject the plan of annexation based on the following points. First, the formal annexation would constitute a clear violation of international law. The de facto annexation, or the creeping annexation, has breached international law. If we allow de facto annexation to manifest as formal annexation, we are setting the dangerous precedent that somehow occupying the land of others by way of annexation can be lawful under international law. It is an impunity in itself and our silence signals approval. Let us all show our strong objection in all forums, by both words and action, that annexation is illegal. Secondly, the formal annexation is an open challenge to the Security Council. It tests the credibility and the legitimacy of the Council. The official declaration of annexation in May justified the Security Council to swiftly act under the Charter of the United Nations. My question now is: Why should the Council wait for the annexation to happen in order to assume its functions? In short, no matter who poses a threat to international peace and security, they should be held accountable before the Council. There should be no double standards. Thirdly, and most important, the formal annexation will destroy all prospects for peace. It will also create instability in the region and beyond. There is an urgent need for a credible peace process that allows all relevant parties to work on an equal footing. Hence, it is high time to start a credible multilateral peace process based on the internationally agreed parameters. For Indonesia, lasting peace can be achieved only on the basis of the two-State solution. My final point is the necessity to address the humanitarian needs in Palestine. The pandemic has worsened the hardship faced by the Palestinian people. It is crucial to enhance our support for international humanitarian agencies, particularly the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). Just yesterday, I announced Indonesia's increased contribution to Palestine, as well as UNRWA, during the pledging conference. Our support to Palestine will also be channelled through the Palestine Authority and humanitarian agencies. In conclusion, injustice prevails not because of the absence of justice, but because we allow it to do so. It is time to put a stop to it.
