Mr. Fonseca (Brazil): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this meeting and Mr. Annabi for his
presentation of the report.

We welcome the presence of Mr. Xanana Gusmao
and Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta here today. Indeed, I think
we are honoured to have them here today because they
are no longer only Timorese leaders; because of their
struggle for democracy and human rights they are
indeed real world statesmen.

Allow me to express our deep appreciation to Mr.
Sergio Vieira de Mello and his team for the impressive
achievements of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) in preparing
East Timor for its full independence.

The political Vision of the Timorese leadership so
well represented here has been instrumental in this
entire process. In this respect, we pay tribute to Mr.
Xanana Gusmao, while fully respecting his decision to
resign as President of the National Council.

The organization of the forthcoming election for
the Constituent Assembly will certainly be the first test
case for the embryonic democratic institutions of East
Timor, and the support of the international community
for the electoral process in all its phases, from the
registration of voters to the certification of elected
officials, is essential. We are confident that these
elections for the Constituent Assembly will create a
solid basis for sustainable democracy in East Timor.
We also agree that civic education and training are
essential components of this endeavour.

Political squabbling and dissent among opposing
currents of thought are part of the democratic life of
any State, and it cannot be different in East Timor. The
most important point is the need for all political parties
to remain committed to settling their differences
through dialogue and institutional channels and, at the
absolute grass-roots level, for East Timorese society to
clearly reject any form of political violence.

In this respect, we are encouraged by the
spontaneous drive of the East Timorese towards
reconciliation, as mentioned in paragraph 18 of the
report. The statements made today by Xanana Gusmao
and Jose Ramos-Horta are encouraging, especially
because of their insistence on the idea of tolerance as
the foundation for a truly democratic East Timor.
As we enter the crucial stages of the transition to
independence, the support of the international
community becomes even more important. For its part,
Brazil remains fully committed to the efforts to build a
democratic and stable East Timor. That was the main
thrust of the Visit of President Fernando Henrique
Cardoso to East Timor last January.

In order to underline the practical aspects of our
assistance to East Timor, President Cardoso personally
presided over the launching of Brazilian cooperation
projects in the fields of capacity-building, professional
training and education. As a follow-up to President
Cardoso's visit, a Brazilian technical mission is
currently visiting East Timor in order to identify
opportunities for cooperation in the area of agriculture.
We hope to build on our experience of South-South
cooperation with a view to strengthening cooperation
with East Timor and expanding the areas covered by
Brazilian projects.

In the security area, the report calls attention to
persistent militia activities in and around the refugee
camps of West Timor and in the border area. We
therefore recognize the importance of maintaining a
credible dissuasive capacity on the ground. The report
also highlights the need to reinforce the judicial
system. Accountability is the keyword for healing the
wounds of recent tragedies in East Timor.

The Indonesian Parliament's decision to establish
an ad hoc tribunal to deal with gross violations of
human rights in East Timor is a positive step. But the
limitation later imposed on the jurisdiction of this
tribunal would mean that massacres such as the ones
that occurred in Suai and Liquica could not be
prosecuted. We are also dismayed by the very light
sentences given to those responsible for the killings of
staff members of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees. In this case, justice has
yet to be done.

We were very much encouraged to learn about the
very advanced stage of planning for the United Nations
presence after independence in East Timor, referred to
in paragraphs 25 to 29 of the report. We note, however,
that besides a residual military presence, which might
be warranted, the bulk of United Nations and
international assistance to East Timor will be
concentrated in capacity-building. The future presence
will essentially be aimed at the far-reaching tasks of
nation-building - the establishment of effective
democratic institutions coupled with the creation of
economic opportunities for all.
Post-independence assistance to East Timor and
the main thrust of the United Nations presence in the
country, therefore, should preferably assume the form
of a massive technical assistance and capacity-building
project, stressing full ownership by the East Timorese
of their own future. As a matter of principle, planning
for the future United Nations presence should not be
reported to the Security Council only.

As future efforts in East Timor will concentrate
on post-conflict - or, rather, post-crisis - peace-
building, this is an area that certainly requires
enhanced interaction between the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council and the Security
Council. In this respect, we regret that, for reasons that
do not need to be discussed now, the planned meeting
between the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council to deal with precisely such questions
relating to post-conflict peace-building did not take
place.

We are glad, however, that that meeting has not
been ruled out. We believe that it would be helpful to
develop an operational model for coherent and system-
wide action in post-conflict situations. We all agree
that there is a need for a comprehensive approach,
including key aspects, such as democracy
consolidation, human rights and sustained economic
growth, to address the needs of countries emerging
from crises, and that a long-term development
programme must always be an essential part of any
post-conflict peace-building effort.

We now have to think about how to maintain a
strong stimulus for the international community to keep
its engagement and commitments for the development
of East Timor. The statements of Mr. Gusmao and Mr.
Ramos-Horta reassure us that the East Timorese
leadership is on the right track. The challenge before us
is to back their efforts by devising an appropriate
institutional basis for sustained help for the prosperity
of East Timor and its people.

