Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): I welcome the practical
recommendations offered in the Secretary-General's
report on ways to combat subregional and cross-border
problems in West Africa (S/2004/200). We too think it
important, as pointed out in the report, that
Governments in West Africa strengthen their
governance and exercise their ownership in the peace-
building process. It is particularly noteworthy that the
Secretary-General is emphasizing that the primary
responsibility for improving governance lies with each
national Government in West Africa. Japan shares this
view. Since the inception of the Tokyo International
Conference on African Development (TICAD) in 1993,
a collaboration achieved through ownership of African
countries and partnership of the international
community has been the cornerstone of Japan's policy
vis-a-vis Africa. It is also the basis of our efforts to
promote consolidation of peace in Africa. It is our
intention to continue to assist actively, in cooperation
with the international community, those countries and
organizations active in West Africa that are taking a
leadership role in resolving conflicts in the region.

Japan also considers that, in the process of peace-
building, an approach that focuses on the protection
and empowerment of individual people is extremely
important. This is the "human security" approach. I
sincerely hope that the international community will
take concrete action in order to ensure human security
in the West African region. Japan has promoted the
idea of human security in Sierra Leone by supporting
reintegration of ex-combatants through the Trust Fund
for Human Security.

The need for peacekeeping operations is
increasing in many parts of the world. It is important to
recognize, however, that there is inevitably a limit to
the resources available to respond to such needs.
Therefore, we believe that it is a good practical
suggestion, which deserves our serious consideration,
that the resources that will be saved by downsizing the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL)
be reallocated to the peacekeeping operations in
Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire. Japan is of the view that
further efforts should be pursued to increase synergy
among the missions in the region, including the
possibility of the regionalization of peacekeeping
operations in the longer perspective. It would also be
useful to agree on a division of labour between a
United Nations peacekeeping operation and a
multinational force, as has taken place in Cote d'Ivoire.

As mentioned in the Secretary-General's report,
the idea of implementing development projects for a
designated community in order to facilitate the
collection of small arms and light weapons deserves
serious consideration. Japan actually implemented this
idea in Cambodia under the "Weapons for
Development" project, and I am pleased to report that
it has been producing great success.

It is important to recognize that the reintegration
of ex-combatants and the reconstruction and
development of communities in the post-conflict phase
are essential in order to prevent the recurrence of
conflicts, as is emphasized in the Secretary-General's
report. In recognition of that, Japan has provided
assistance totalling approximately $6.5 million for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
projects in Sierra Leone. However, in West Africa it is
difficult to implement DDR activities effectively in one
country without paying attention to the regional
dimension, because combatants can easily cross
borders. For that reason, it is essential that DDR
activities also be implemented in neighbouring
countries such as Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire. I am
pleased to announce, in this connection, that on 19
March Japan decided to extend emergency grant
assistance of some $3.6 million to the United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF) for the disarmament,
demobilization, rehabilitation and reintegration
(DDRR) programme for child soldiers in Liberia. Japan
has also decided to provide a non-project grant aid
counterpart fund totalling about $2.3 million for DDR
projects in C6te d'Ivoire.

Japan recognizes the gravity of the problem of
child and women soldiers in West Africa, who are both
social victims and a factor in the escalation of
conflicts, and, as was recommended in the Secretary-
General's report, would like to appeal to Member
States to adopt policies against their recruitment and
use for military purposes.

It is the promotion of development that is most
needed in the countries of West Africa, and there
should be no place on their national agenda for
engaging in conflicts that consume valuable resources
and bring nothing but misery to the people. Even if
there is a serious difference of position between
groups, it is critically important to have dialogue so as
to build confidence and eventually try to solve
problems peacefully. We have already seen cases where
ownership is exercised by West African countries in the
field of peacekeeping under the auspices of ECOWAS.
We hope that the same strong sense of ownership will
also be demonstrated in the areas of the promotion of
governance and peace-building. Japan intends to
continue to provide assistance, together with the
international community, for such efforts.

