Mr. Ebner (Austria): Austria strongly welcomes
your initiative, Sir, to organize the present debate,
which allows the Council to interact directly with
United Nations force commanders.

I should like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Le Roy for his introduction. I should also like to take
this opportunity to welcome the Force Commanders
present here today and to thank them for their very
interesting presentations. Austria would like to thank
all force commanders of the United Nations for their
commitment and important work in the field. We also
appreciate the presence of Lieutenant General Obiakor.

In recent discussions in the Security Council on
United Nations peacekeeping, one of the key recurring
issues has been the need for the Council to provide
peacekeeping missions with clear, credible and
achievable mandates oriented to a desired outcome and
matched with adequate resources for the fulfilment of
all mandated tasks. Benchmarks and a clear
prioritization of tasks have proved useful for the
Council to better track progress made in the
implementation of peacekeeping mandates.

In order to be able to respond in a timely and
appropriate manner to developments on the ground, the
Council needs to have all relevant information at its
disposal. Briefings by force commanders and military
experts provide accurate information on the real-life
challenges peacekeeping missions are facing, and thus
are indispensable to the decision-making of the Council.
We also welcome the fact that troop- and police-
contributors are participating in today's discussion.

The success and credibility of United Nations
peacekeeping will also depend on how far missions can
effectively discharge their mandates and thus live up to
the expectations raised within the population. With the
growing complexity of tasks entrusted to peacekeeping
missions and the scarcity of resources, we are
confronted with serious capability gaps, including in
terms of civilian support capacities. These gaps may
jeopardize the success and reputation of United
Nations peacekeeping.

More consistent information on mission-specific
capability gaps and the impact of those gaps on the
implementation of the mandated tasks can help to
effectively utilize the gap lists of each peacekeeping
operation and to mobilize Member States' support to
address them. We therefore appreciate the efforts of
Japan as Chair of the Security Council Working Group
on Peacekeeping Operations in this regard. Equally, we
support the capability-driven approach outlined in the
New Horizon non-paper, which concentrates on skills,
capacity and equipment, with a special focus on
potential resource gaps. This is not only in the interests
of the effectiveness of missions, but is also essential to
the safety and security of peacekeepers.

Strengthening early warning and crisis prevention
capacity is another aspect that deserves more attention
in our work in the Council. Both mission leadership
and the Council need to receive all relevant
information and assessments on early warning, which
would allow for a response to emerging crisis
situations in a preventive manner. Missions have come
up with several inventive approaches, including the
joint protection teams in the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), designed not
only to provide information-gathering and analytical
support, but also to facilitate context-specific civil and

military measures to protect civilians and liaise with
local authorities. Such outreach activities foster
interaction with the local population and yield valuable
information for an accurate assessment of the
circumstances on the ground. We would be interested
in hearing more from the field about the potential to
strengthen missions' capacities in this regard.

We welcome the fact that protection mandates
increasingly include all activities aimed at ensuring the
safety and physical integrity of civilian populations,
securing humanitarian access and ensuring full respect
for the rights of individuals by all parties to conflict, in
accordance with international humanitarian and human
rights law.

The ultimate goal of any peacekeeping mission
with a protection mandate must be to help restore an
environment in which the host State is able to fully
exercise its primary responsibility to protect its own
population. Creating a favourable protection
environment goes beyond the protection of civilians
from physical violence and must be complemented by
activities in the fields of security sector reform;
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration; the
rule of law; transitional justice; human rights; and the
empowerment of local societies. This would also
facilitate the transition to sustainable peacebuilding
and State-building.

Early coordination of these activities and a
common strategy among all actors involved, including
civil society, will be crucial for success. The untimely
drawdown or premature downscaling of peacekeeping
missions can seriously endanger a country's stability
and the safety of the civilian population. Mandate-
adjustment or the drawdown of missions also needs to
be conditioned upon on the fulfilment of benchmarks
relating to the protection of civilians, and we
encourage the further development of such
benchmarks.

Armed groups attacking the civilian population,
in particular women and children, do not respect
international borders, which have become porous over
years of conflict and due to the lack of control. The
cross-border cooperation of United Nations
peacekeeping missions in adjoining of responsibility is
required in order to effectively tackle these threats. For
instance, we believe that the problem of the Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA) needs to be addressed further
by drawing up a comprehensive strategy that includes
Governments in the region and all relevant United
Nations missions, including MONUSCO, which is
mandated to ensure the protection of the civilian
population in the LRA-affected areas of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

We would appreciate hearing more about
synergies and potential further cooperation in this
regard. Equally, we would be grateful for suggestions
as to how missions can contribute to the fight against
the impunity for perpetrators of such violence.

