Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
At the outset, allow me to warmly thank Assistant
Secretary-General Bintou Keita for her informative
briefing. Belgium also welcomed the recent February
visit by Assistant Secretaries-General Keita, Fernandez-
Taranco and Wahba. We believe that the visit served
to underscore our obligation to identify and lay the
groundwork for the United Nations role and presence
on the ground following the withdrawal of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID).

The signs that progress has been made in Darfur
are clear, and Belgium reaffirms its support for the
transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding and
the development of Darfur. Complacency would,
however, be an inappropriate response. A cautious
approach to closely supporting the withdrawal is
required. In general, the establishment of the rule of
law and fundamental respect for human rights are key
elements to ensuring Darfur's future. The protection
of the civilian population and the improvement of
the humanitarian situation, as well as disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and reform of the
security sector, remain necessary for reaching a lasting
solution to the crisis.

Although a general improvement in the security
situation in Darfur is encouraging, Belgium remains
especially concerned about the situation in the Jebel
Marra area, given the armed incidents between the
Sudanese Government and the Sudan Liberation
Army/Abdul Wahid faction. In addition, human rights
abuses continue, primarily affecting children and
women, including sexual violence in an environment
of impunity. Belgium welcomes the signing in Berlin
in December 2018 of the pre-negotiation agreement
between the Government of the Sudan and two Darfur-
based groups. However, the delay in the launch of
negotiations among the parties is regrettable. The
non-inclusive nature of the national dialogue and the
inoperability of the various entities responsible for
implementing the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur
are also worrisome.

The situation in Darfur must be considered in its
specifically Sudanese context and cannot be separated
from it. Belgium expresses its concern about the current
situation in the Sudan, characterized by protests and
the authorities' violent response. On 22 February, the
President of the Sudan, Mr. Omar Al-Bashir, declared
a one-year state of emergency throughout the country,
as well as the dissolution of the Government at the
federal and state levels. As the country undergoes a
difficult situation, Belgium calls for restraint in the
use of force by the security services and the immediate
release of demonstrators who were arbitrarily detained.
The authorities must fully respect the right to
demonstrate peacefully, protect civilians and guarantee
strictly proportionate use of force. The current tense
environment risks negatively affecting the engagement
of the parties to the conflict in Darfur in the dialogue.

