Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): As others have
done, let me commend you, Mr. President, for
organizing this timely and central debate, a clear
indication that the Security Council and the
international community cannot, and will not, turn a
blind eye to Somalia at this critical juncture. I also
thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
briefing and for setting the framework for our
discussion. Allow me as well to express a word of
appreciation to Prime Minister Mohamed Abdullahi
Mohamed for his encouraging statement and his
personal commitment to furthering peace and
institution-building in Somalia. I also thank
Ambassador Diarra for his very useful comments. And
I welcome Ambassador Mahiga in Mogadishu, whom
we are very pleased to have with us here today.

In January, when we last discussed the situation
in Somalia (see S/PV.6473), the Council reaffirmed its
support for the Djibouti Agreement as the basis for the
resolution of the conflict in Somalia and reiterated its
full support to the Transitional Federal Government.
Today, we wish to stress the importance of capitalizing
on the progress that has been made. We believe that it
is crucial to improve Somali institutional capacity and
achieve political stability.

In that regard, it is important for the Transitional
Federal Government to undertake further concrete
measures towards transition, in particular the timely
conclusion of the constitution-making process and the
delivery of basic services to the population. As I have
said, it is essential that Somali institutions build on the
progress achieved so far. In that endeavour, one must
comprehensively address all the challenges Somalia
faces at the political, security, humanitarian, human
rights and socio-economic development levels. Also of
paramount importance is to ensure the strengthening of
civilian capacity-building and to engage Somalis in the
process, as well as in public life in general.

Portugal subscribes to the View expressed in the
very useful concept note (S/2011/1l4, annex) prepared
for this debate that an inclusive and strengthened
dialogue with all Somalis and key stakeholders will
help map the way forward for Somalia. We therefore
welcome and encourage the work of Ambassador
Mahiga in assisting the Somali people in reaching
agreement on post-transitional arrangements, in
consultation with the international community.

Portugal also recognizes the progress made by the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and
national security forces in consolidating security and
stability in Mogadishu. We encourage the
strengthening of the Somali Security Forces, as the
Transitional Federal Government bears the primary
responsibility for safeguarding peace and security in
Somalia. Nevertheless, AMISOM. continues to play a
vital role in Somalia. We therefore reiterate our support
to AMISOM. and encourage the full deployment of
4,000 additional troops.

Regrettably, those gains have been overshadowed
by the tragic losses of life suffered in recent fighting in
Mogadishu. We extend our deepest sympathy to the
Governments of Burundi and Uganda, the Transitional
Government and the Somali people.

The most serious impact of ongoing violence and
insecurity in Somalia is on the Somali people
themselves. We condemn in the strongest terms all
attacks on the Transitional Government, AMISOM. and
the civilian population. We are particularly concerned
about the situation of women and children, the most
vulnerable victims of violence. In that regard, we
welcome the commitment by the Transitional
Government to halt the recruitment of children, as well
as the appointment of a high-level focal point for child
protection and human rights, namely, State Minister
Zahra Ali Samantar. We wish her every success in her
endeavours. We also urge the parties to comply with
international humanitarian and human rights law and to
ensure full and unhindered access to all populations in
need by humanitarian workers.

Portugal echoes the concerns shared by other
members with regard to the threat posed by piracy,
including the increasing violence and their increasingly
sophisticated methods, which we strongly condemn.
We have been engaged with international partners and
allies in the fight against piracy. We took part in NATO
operations and currently participate in the European
Union's Operation Atalanta. Portugal will assume
command of that mission beginning in May.

11-2583]
We believe and strongly support a
multidimensional response to the problem of piracy off
the coast of Somalia that includes tackling the root
causes of the problem, improving the current responses
and embracing new economic, security and
jurisdictional/correctional solutions, including an
extra-territorial specialized court in the region, as
proposed in the recent report (S/2011/30, annex)
presented by Special Adviser to the Secretary-General
Jack Lang. As I have previously stated in the Council,
Portugal strongly supports the proposals contained in
that report.

We do not underestimate the difficulties in
Somalia. That is why we underline that the continuing
commitment, engagement and close cooperation of all
parties will be necessary to achieve peace in Somalia,
foster national cohesion and open the way for
economic and social development. We strongly support
the continuous engagement of the African Union, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
other regional organizations. In that context, we of
course share the position of the European Union, which
will be set out later.

But let me also stress that while the international
community must carry on showing its commitment and
acting in a concerted way, affording the Somali people
the support and encouragement they deserve, concrete
steps can only be achieved if there is real commitment
from Somali leaders and institutions in laying the
foundations for peace and stability in the country. I
hope that today's debate will help to achieve that goal.

