Mr. Hunter (United States of America): We agree
with EcoPeace Middle East that the road to stability in
the Middle East will be paved by regional cooperation
on many levels, and water and energy security are
certainly essential for peace in the region. It is indeed
heartening to hear that Israelis, Palestinians and
Jordanians are working together - sometimes even
making a splash, as Gidon said - to address the
shared challenges in energy and water. The EcoPeace
Water-Energy Nexus project is a great example of
this cooperation. It harnesses Jordan's potential as a
large-scale renewable energy provider and utilizes both
Israeli and Palestinian expertise in desalinization.

The success and sustainability of projects such as
this clearly demonstrates that Israelis and Palestinians
can and do work together at the community level every
day to improve their lives. A large part of why these
projects are so successful is because they focus on what
is best for the communities. And while we hear a lot
about Israel's responsibilities, the real culprit depriving
the communities of a better life is Hamas. The work of
non-governmental organizations like EcoPeace is all the
more challenging in Gaza because of Hamas' insistence
on placing its own interests ahead of those of Gaza's
residents. Would Hamas ever permit local communities
to band together to form energy-producing cooperatives
free of its control and profit-taking? Would Hamas ever
allow Israeli desalinization experts to work side by side
with people in Gaza? And, more broadly, will Hamas
ever cease the needless attacks on Israeli communities
and stop its morally bankrupt war at the expense of
the Palestinian people? It is a war that has succeeded
only in provoking conflict and leading to poverty
and hopelessness, while hampering the ability of the
international community to help.

I think we all know the answers to those questions.
The future of Gaza cannot be addressed and the people
of Gaza cannot be helped in any meaningful way
until Hamas is no longer in the picture, or makes the
necessary choices for stability and eventually peace.

The United States appreciates the work of EcoPeace,
which is dedicated to fostering a community approach
to water and energy security, despite a very challenging
environment. I think we can all agree that this model
of regional cooperation should be replicated to lay the
groundwork for peace.

