Mr. Spatafora (Italy): As I am taking the floor
for the first time this month in a public meeting, I
would like to wish you, Sir, every success in
discharging your responsibilities as President of the
Security Council. At the same time, I fully support
your comments about and share your feelings towards
your predecessor, Ambassador Churkin, regarding his
effective conduct of the Council's work during the
month of January.

This is also the first opportunity that I have had
to congratulate Mr. Khare on his appointment as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Timor-Leste. I thank him for his enlightening briefing
and his able leadership of the United Nations Mission
in a challenging environment. We have heard a lot of
good things about him here in New York.

This long list of greetings would be incomplete
without a salute to Prime Minister Ramos-Horta, who
honours us with his presence today. His wisdom and
vision have guided the young country through its first
years of existence, and are still needed in order to hold
the course. His statement was, on the whole,
encouraging, and offers to members of the Security
Council a very useful and - I would say - fresh take
on the situation. It was challenging because it was very
frank; we appreciate that.

Italy fully aligns itself with and supports the
statement to be delivered later by the Permanent
Representative of Germany on behalf of the European
Union. My remarks are meant to complement those of
the European Union.

The international community, and the Security
Council in particular, has a record in Timor-Leste that
is positive but not flawless. The tragic events of last
spring showed that the United Nations presence in the
country may have been downsized prematurely. Now it
is time to show commitment and generosity in order to
make up lost ground. The picture remains mixed at
best, as clearly illustrated in the Secretary-General's
most recent report, in Mr. Khare's briefing and in the
statement by the Prime Minister.

The situation is encouraging, but certainly fragile.
The security situation is, indeed, fragile and
precarious, as the Prime Minister said, owing to
persistent outbreaks of violence between youth gangs
and martial arts groups. The provision of protection
and assistance to the tens of thousands of internally
displaced persons will remain an issue for some time.
The electoral process is particularly complex, in terms
of both organizational requirements and security.

Against this background, the role of the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) is
vital, as is cooperation with the international security
forces. We welcome the formalization of that
cooperation by means of a technical arrangement, and
pay tribute to the efforts of the four countries
contributing to the international security forces. Now
the Security Council needs to respond promptly to
recommendations to prolong and strengthen the
mandate of the Mission. Too much is at stake. The
political and economic investments made by the
international community since 1999 could be gradually
lost if we do not sustain them now and in the future.

The events of the past 12 months have shown that
if we do not continue to make progress, we risk rolling
back. Stalemate is not an option. One year ago, as
Prime Minister Ramos-Horta recalled, Timor-Leste was
considered a success story for the United Nations and
the international community. I hope that in a few
months we will be able to confirm that, indeed, we
have a success stor. We are not oin to be
y
pessimistic.

Only free, fair and undisputed elections can truly
re-establish mutual respect and genuine dialogue
among the various political constituencies, building on
the encouraging steps already taken under UNMIT's
guidance. So important is this aspect that we hope that
the European Union will be able to overcome any
logistical difficulties and send an observation mission,
at least for the parliamentary elections. The United
Nations, for its part, will have to support the Timorese
authorities until the end of this process and beyond,
since - as we have learned from the report of the
Secretary-General before us - it could take up to five
years to rebuild the Timorese national police.

Those immediate needs should not divert our
attention from the long-term challenges that must be
addressed to ensure the sustainability of the
stabilization process. I have in mind the long-standing
issue of accountability for past and recent human rights
violations. I am also thinking of the broader challenges
of reform of the justice corrections sector.

We warmly welcome and are encouraged by what
the Special Representative, Mr. Khare, and the Prime
Minister have told us about the justice sector, impunity
and the security sector. We fully share the Special
Representative's view that "special attention" should
be paid to the strengthening of the justice sector; it is a
key sector. Unfortunately that sector and those who are
connected with it are once again lagging behind others
in a post-conflict scenario. The findings of the
Independent Special Commission of Inquiry are candid
in that respect. It will be worthwhile to reflect carefully
on these lessons when we hold the thematic debate on
Security sector reform a few days from now in the
Council on the initiative of the presidency of Slovakia.

Last but not least, we cannot overlook the
fundamental importance of boosting social and
economic development. It is always difficult to pursue
long-term development objectives while political
tensions and humanitarian emergencies are unfolding.
But we have no other choice: long-term stability can be
achieved only in an environment that is economically
sound and investment-friendly. As both the Special
Representative and the Prime Minister have said,
development is a crucial need for Timor-Leste, and it
must benefit the entire population. We praise the steps
taken through the mechanism of the "compact"

between Timor-Leste and the international community
to reinvigorate international efforts and coordinate
them with the policies and aspirations of the Timorese
authorities. Nor should we underestimate the role that
can be played by regional partners and organizations:
their contribution has increasingly proved to be
positive and constructive.

As my Foreign Minister had the opportunity to
indicate to Prime Minister Ramos-Horta during a very
successful visit last October, Italy stands ready, both
bilaterally and in the context of the European Union, to
continue to assist the people of Timor-Leste in their
quest to consolidate peace, democracy and
development.

