Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The situation with regard to the settlement
of the crises in the Middle East remains quite fragile.
That was confirmed yet again by the renewed tension
in early April when Palestinian fighters from Gaza
fired rockets at Israeli territory, and the Israeli Air
Force, in response, struck the Gaza Strip. In recent
days, the situation in the West Bank deteriorated quite
seriously when demonstrations, following the death
of a Palestinian detainee, led to clashes with Israeli
soldiers. Fortunately, that did not turn into yet another
large-scale wave of violence.

That fragile situation, of course, is grounds for
our deep concern. We affirm our condemnation of
all terrorist manifestations, including the firing of
rockets at the south of Israel. We agree that terrorism
should be fought mercilessly. However, the use of force
against civilians, the violation of human rights and the
violation of international humanitarian law are also
unacceptable. We restate our conviction of the principle
that active assistance is needed to get negotiations and
contacts between Israelis and Palestinians to resume.
Negotiations must be resumed without preconditions,
but on the well-known internationally recognized basis
that is spelled out, inter alia, in the statement of the
Quartet of international mediators dated 23 September
2011, which was reaffirmed in the statement following
the outcome of the Group of Eight Summit in London
on 11 April of this year.

Renewed armed confrontation and violence are
all deadly for any resumption of Israeli-Palestinian
negotiations. We urge all interested parties to abide
by the November 2012 ceasefire agreements between
the Israelis and the groups active in Gaza, and on
that basis, to move towards a complete lifting of the
blockade on the Gaza Strip. It is important to avoid
any steps impeding the search for ways to unblock the
Palestinian-Israeli settlement process as a whole. At the
same time, the parties must make efforts to restore and
strengthen mutual trust. Especially important in that
regard is, in our view, the halting of settlement activities
and the resolution of pressing humanitarian issues,
including those related to the violation of international
humanitarian law with regard to Palestinian detainees
and prisoners.

We welcome the agreements achieved leading to
the suspension of the hunger strike by a Palestinian
detainee. We note the substantial contribution of the
departing Prime Minister of the Palestinian Authority,
Mr. Salam Fayyad, who was working to establish
Palestinian statehood. The international community
must remember that economic progress simply is not
sustainable as a result of continuing occupation and
the dangerous impasse around the Middle Eastern
settlement.

In regard to the restoration of Palestinian unity,
based on the Palestine Liberation Organization
platform, that is not only an important factor for success
in the negotiations process, but it is also a guarantee
for the implementation of possible peace agreements.
We are convinced that the relaunch of the negotiations
process and transcending the accumulated mistrust
can be served by a ministerial meeting of the Quartet,
preferably with the involvement of Arab States and
with the participation of Israelis and Palestinians.

The events in the Syrian Arab Republic have been
unfolding according to a tragic scenario. We decisively
condemn the siege by armed opposition fighters of the
Aleppo metropolitan bishops of the Greek and Syrian
Orthodox Churches. That criminal provocation again
confirms the extremists' designs to fan the flames of
ethnic and religious division. That was done just two
days following the national coalitions in Istanbul, which
presented a declaration guaranteeing equal rights for
minorities, including religious minorities. That bears
witness to nothing more than the fact that either its
leaders are simply untrustworthy or they simply do not
control the situation. After all, the incident took place
along the Turkish border in the so-called liberated
territory, which have been receiving generous outside
assistance.

We are puzzled by the European Union's decision
to allow the import of oil and oil products from those
territories, regardless of how hard the authors of the
dangerous decision - disregarding the norms of
international law and the principle of international
sovereignty - try to present their actions as a gesture of
support for moderate opposition. There is no need to be
a prophet to understand that the money will invariably
flow to the strongest armed groups, and that those are the
radicals and extremists, including terrorists affiliated
with Al-Qaida, namely Jabhat Al-Nusra, which holds
a great many of the oil-rich areas outside Syrian
Government control. Also alarming is the readiness of
number of States to supply illegal groups in Syria with
arms, which, after all, risk ending up in the hands of
terrorists raging around the territory of the country. If
the idea of all-out war to the bitterest of ends, fueled by
an aggressive minority of the international community,
prevails, that will only further degrade the situation
and lead to the growth in terrorist activity, including in
neighbouring countries.

In contravention of the objective of initiating
political dialogue, a number of allies of the armed
opposition have been secretly pushing an extremely
harmful draft resolution on Syria in the General
Assembly. We also urge Members not to yield to
attempts to sidestep, on the basis of various pretexts,
the investigation requested by the Syrian authorities
regarding the alleged use of chemical weapons near
Aleppo on 19 March. Unfortunately, the Secretariat has
not shown the requisite consistency and transparency
here. The increasing confrontation reaffirms the need
for a rapid end to all violence, for the respect of human
rights, for restoring the humanitarian situation and for
assisting internally displaced persons and refugees in
neighbouring States. It is important to urge international
humanitarian organizations and the Syrian Government
to maintain the existing level of trust and constructive
cooperation, preventing any undermining of that trust
through artificial politicization of the humanitarian
problem.

The current priority is to force all warring sides to
cease all violence, to take a seat at the negotiating table
and to reach agreement on the creation of a transitional
governing body as provided by the 30 June 2012 Geneva
final communique of the Action Group for Syria
(S/2012/523, annex). There is a need to step up the joint
efforts to implement the agreements and to avoid being
drawn into the dubious campaign to legalize structures
that seek to replace the legitimate Government of Syria,
especially at the United Nations, the mission of which
is after all to be the guardian of international legality.

