I would like at the outset to congratulate Indonesia on having assumed the presidency of the Security Council for the month of August and on having organized this debate of pivotal importance. I am also grateful for the briefings by the Under-Secretary-General of the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, Vladimir Voronkov, and the Executive Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Ghada Fathi Waly. Terrorism poses a serious threat to international peace and security, human rights, democratic stability and the economic and social development of States and of the international community as a whole. The same is true of organized crime and organized transnational crime. We therefore strongly and unequivocally condemn all acts of terrorism, in all its forms and manifestations, regardless of their motivation, whenever and by whomsoever committed. We equally strongly condemn organized crime and reiterate that its links to terrorism must continue to be debated and countered. As no State is immune from terrorism, Ecuador is convinced that strengthening the international fight against terrorism is a task that must be undertaken cooperatively with the application of joint and concerted measures and actions in order to counter terrorism and its effects. The prevention of terrorism is as important as its repression. It is vital, therefore, to determine and eliminate the causes and factors that can promote acts of terrorism, including its financing; political, ethnic, religious and racial intolerance; and the social and economic gap among nations, the latter exacerbated by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and the accompanying health, economic and social crisis. In that respect, in Ecuador measures are being drawn up and implemented for the progressive application of resolution 1373 (2001) by classifying as a crime the financing of terrorism and the associated money-laundering, and through preventive measures and international judicial cooperation. I shall mention a few examples. The Ecuadorian Comprehensive Criminal Code, adopted in 2014, expressly classifies terrorism and its financing, recognizing the direct relationship between the crime of money-laundering and the financing of terrorism, and underlining the advances made in the control of money-laundering and the financing of terrorism. The Law on the Prevention, Detection and Eradication of the Crime of Money- Laundering and the Financing of Crimes aims to prevent, detect in a timely manner, punish and eradicate money-laundering and the financing of crimes in its various modalities. The Continuous Action Plan for the Prevention of Money Laundering and against the Financing of Terrorism, with the same objective, was also approved. In the area of public policy, an inter-institutional committee is being formed among State bodies to address the problem in the banking, aeronautical, immigration, police and security spheres. In early 2018, acts of violence were committed on Ecuador's northern border as aresult of the actions of irregular armed groups linked to transnational organized crime, which led to a dozen terrorist attacks; wounded, killed or displaced people; and affected State infrastructure. As an immediate response, the Government of Ecuador created the National Committee for Comprehensive Border Security as the entity responsible for the coordination and harmonization of policies, guidelines, procedures and actions in the field of comprehensive border security, and it implemented the Defence Security Plan for the Northern Border, which provides guidelines for strategic planning and comprehensive defence, security and development policies in order to address the complex transnational threat of terrorism in all its dimensions. It is also important to note the connection between terrorism and corruption. For that reason, Ecuador condemns acts of corruption committed by networks that seriously threaten the stability of States and entire regions, and it stresses the importance of achieving fluid cooperation through confidential information- exchange agreements, particularly in the financial area, to carry out effective investigations into the financing of terrorism and money-laundering. The United Nations is the global platform that is called on to lead the fight against terrorism and organized transnational crime. We therefore reiterate our commitment to work to strengthen the international fight against those scourges, which threaten peace and security worldwide.
