Mr. Sevilla Borja (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): The
Ecuadorian delegation thanks Malaysia, as President
of the Security Council for the month of August, for
convening this open debate on the challenges posed by
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

Articles 15 and 416, respectively of the Constitution
of Ecuador

"prohibits the development, production, possession,
sale, import, transport, storage and use of chemical,
biological and nuclear weapons" and "condemns
the development and use of weapons of mass
destruction".

Those firm constitutional principles apply both
nationally and internationally. That is why my country
has the legislative tools and appropriate regulations
in place to prevent proliferation and combat illicit
trafficking in nuclear, chemical and biological weapons
and their delivery systems, thereby fulfilling its
obligations under resolution 1540 (2004).

Ecuador is proud to be a part of the first
densely populated area - Latin America and the
Caribbean - to be declared free of nuclear weapons,
created by the Treaty of Tlatelolco, as well as part of
a region of peace, as solemnly declared by the Heads
of State and Government of the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States at the 2014 Summit in
Havana, as reiterated in Costa Rica in 2015 and in my
country's capital, Quito, in 2016.

However, we must point out that the danger of the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction is inherent
in their continued existence, particularly nuclear
weapons. As long as those weapons exist, the danger
of them falling into terrorists' hands will remain high.
As noted by the Secretary-General in 2013, "there are
no right hands for the wrong weapons". They are not
only wrong, but also a danger to the very existence of
humankind, as was shown by the nuclear bombings of
Hiroshima and Nagasaki, the seventy-first anniversary
of which was observed this very month of August.

We must therefore take great care that the
important debate on the non-proliferation of such
weapons, whether by State or non-State actors, does
not obscure the need to achieve nuclear disarmament,
especially as we are now more aware of the serious
humanitarian impact of any detonation of a nuclear
weapon, whether intentional or accidental. From that
perspective, the nuclear-weapon States have a special
responsibility to prevent the proliferation - whether
vertical or horizontal - of such weapons, as well as to
ensure their elimination. Ecuador of course rejects the
understanding that the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
ofNuclear Weapons gives a few States the monopolistic
right to possess such weapons indefinitely.

While my country does not aspire, and never
has, to possess nuclear weapons, it is aware of the
responsibility it shoulders as a party to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, in
particular under article VI, within the framework of the
Working Group on nuclear disarmament established
by the General Assembly in resolution 70/33. The
group met in Geneva this year and proposed, along
with other countries - including your own, Sir,
Malaysia - that in 2017 the General Assembly
launch the negotiation process for a treaty banning
nuclear weapons. Just a few days ago, on Friday, 19
August, the Working Group formally adopted that
recommendation, which will be submitted for
consideration by the Assembly through the First
Committee at the next session.

The delegation of Ecuador will continue to firmly
support that proposal, as we are convinced that just
as the international community has banned chemical
weapons and biological weapons through legally
binding instruments, nuclear weapons should also be
banned through a treaty as part ofa process that is open
to all and cannot be blocked by anyone. Ecuador is
therefore fulfilling its commitments on this matter, not
through speeches but through actions.

No one can be under the illusion that a treaty
banning nuclear weapons will lead immediately to their
elimination. But it is essential to make clear the legal
standard that such weapons are contrary to the law
regardless of who possesses them. The implementation
of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, the Chemical Weapons Convention and the
Biological Weapons Convention is important. The
provisions of resolution 1540 (2004) must be broadened
and implemented. However, from its perspective,
Ecuador insists that only the full elimination ofweapons
of mass destruction will ensure their non-proliferation.

