Mr. Brende (Norway): War and civil strife in the
Middle East and Africa are giving extremist groups
room to grow into a threat out of all proportion to
their relative strength. That much is clear, even if
the full picture of the exponential increase in violent
extremism and terrorism is much more complex. The
fall of large expanses of territory to a terrorist group
and the unspeakable atrocities of those brutal criminals
have to be countered with a wide range of instruments,
including military force.

That is why Norway is contributing to all five
lines of effort set out by the global coalition against
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). A
Norwegian military contingent is now fully deployed
in Iraq. We are helping to stem the flow of financial
resources and foreign terrorist fighters. We are working
to counter ISIL's propaganda. And we are supporting
efforts to stabilize areas at risk in Iraq. We are also
taking an active part in the international efforts to
fight radicalization and the perverted ideology of the
extremists.

Being unemployed is never an excuse to employ the
methods of terrorism. But if we want to cut off support
for extremists, we have to create jobs and opportunities
for the younger generations. In accordance with
humanitarian principles, we are also providing
considerable assistance in Iraq, Syria and the affected
neighbouring countries. The international community
must stand united in the fight against ISIL. All actors
share a responsibility not to create new complications
on the ground, or make any moves that could be
counterproductive.

The perception of ISIL as an imminent threat to
everyone in the region - and beyond - is widely
shared. We should grasp this opportunity to seek
solutions to the underlying conflicts. It was clear from
the start that, without an inclusive political process
in Iraq, ISIL could not effectively be dealt with. It
is equally clear that an effective response requires
credible progress towards conflict resolution in Syria.
Comprises are needed to reach a political solution.

Five days ago, the leaders ofthe world set themselves
ambitious goals for the next 15 years. Unfortunately, it
will be very hard for Syria, Libya, Yemen and other
conflict-torn countries to reach the global Goals. The
relation between security and prosperity is obvious.
Four years ago, Syria was a middle-income country
on its way to reaching almost all of the Millennium
Development Goals. Today it is a humanitarian
catastrophe. What four years of war have destroyed,
may take 40 years or more to rebuild.

Hardly any country in conflict has reached the
Millennium Development Goals. Ending the conflict
in Syria - and conflicts elsewhere - would be major
steps towards fulfilling the ambitions targets set last
Friday. And vice versa: fighting poverty is among the
most effective conflict-prevention tools. If we create
jobs and opportunities and let young people educate
themselves and have a say in how their countries
are governed, we also remove fundamental roots of
instability, extremism and conflict. But the people of
Syria cannot wait for 15 years. A political solution is
urgently needed.

We welcome the fact that members of the Council
are now engaged in conversations on what should be
done. But that is only the beginning of the beginning.
This conflict can be brought to an end only if all leaders
gathered here remain committed to finding solutions
even after they have left New York, and act quickly
upon it. We owe it to the people of Syria and to our own
security.

