Mr. Rivas (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Madam President, we wish to thank you for having
convened this debate, and we commend you on the way
in which you have been guiding the work of the
Security Council this month. Likewise, we wish to
thank Mr. Jan Egeland for his briefing. I wish in this
respect to mention the reference made by Mr. Egeland
to Colombia. We thank him and the United Nations
system in general for their continued concern about our
country and its people.

The Government of Colombia is very much aware
of the complex situation facing the Colombian people.
The displacement situation is caused by illegal armed
groups combined with the global problem of illicit
drugs. Colombia is firmly committed to tackling those
factors that give rise to violence and poverty and lead
to insecurity among the national population. The
Government is working tirelessly to find
comprehensive solutions in addition to the temporary
measures required by the affected population, which
we have been implementing.

The national Government does not believe that
the Colombian population can be divided into groups
or categories, just as it cannot be divided under
international humanitarian law. Thus we have created
programmes that benefit the entirety of the affected
population. In this context, we would like to reaffirm
that the valuable work being done by the International
Committee of the Red Cross should be the norm and
not the exception when it comes to humanitarian
assistance and humanitarian activities.

In recent years, Colombia has devoted significant
resources to devising solutions for the problems facing
its affected population. Moreover, we are working with
the international community and with the United
Nations system, which has a broad presence in our
country. We believe that the most important thing is for
the United Nations to work with the Government and
not in parallel with it, since its work must complement
national efforts aimed at putting an end to the situation
of the Colombian population affected by violence.

Furthermore, the Government faces the
tremendous challenge of reintegrating the more than
40,000 people demobilized from illegal armed groups
and who need opportunities to start a new life. We have
rehabilitation and reintegration programmes for former
combatants who are minors. We have been the
beneficiary of significant and valuable cooperation
from a number of Governments and from the
Organization of American States.

We are clear in our minds about the reality of our
situation and the challenges we face. We are working
day by day to find lasting solutions that will alleviate
the situation of the Colombian people affected by
violence. We would also like to reaffirm our resolve to
work through cooperation and in complementarity with
the United Nations system and with the international
community, as we have been doing in recent years.

