Mr. Mansour (Palestine): At the outset, I wish to
express our warm congratulations to you, Mr.
President, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of April. We are
confident that, under your able stewardship, the work
of the Council will be brought to a successful
conclusion. We would also like to thank your
predecessor, Ambassador Cesar Mayoral, for the
excellent manner in which he led the work of the
Council for the month of March.

Before I begin my statement, I would like to
recall that today the Palestinian people commemorated
Palestinian Prisoners' Day, in solidarity with
Palestinian prisoners and detainees in Israeli jails and
detention centres. Over 9,500 Palestinians are currently
being held as political prisoners by Israel, the
occupying Power, including around 350 Palestinian
children and 120 Palestinian women. Those prisoners
face forms of torture and mistreatment during their
arrest and detention, and are consistently denied visits
by their families and lawyers. Demonstrations are
being held throughout the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, demanding the
release of those prisoners. In that regard, we would like
to express our grave concern regarding the harsh
treatment and deplorable living conditions of the
Palestinian prisoners and detainees, and call upon the
occupying Power to release them in accordance with
the relevant provisions of international humanitarian
law.
The Security Council has a clear responsibility
vis-a-vis the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, and vis-a-vis the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Hence, irrespective of
developments on the ground - be they positive or
negative- the Security Council bears the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, for defending the Charter and
international law, and for defending and ensuring
compliance with its own relevant resolutions.

In that connection, the convening of this open
debate of the Council, given the deterioration of the
situation on the ground in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, is relevant and
important. We would like to express our appreciation
to the members of the Arab Group, the Non-Aligned
Movement and the Organization of the Islamic
Conference for their submitted requests to convene this
meeting, as well as to thank them for their constant and
unwavering support for the rights of the Palestinian
people, especially those living under Israeli
occupation. We would also like to thank the members
of the Security Council for demonstrating their
flexibility and understanding during last week's
negotiations on a draft presidential statement on the
latest violence in the region. We would especially like
to thank our brothers from Qatar for the role they
played in that regard. It is unfortunate, however, that
the Security Council failed to shoulder its
responsibility and to respond appropriately to this
latest dangerous situation.

Over the past week and throughout the period
since I last addressed the Security Council on the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, Israel, the occupying Power, has
continued and intensified its military campaign against
the Palestinian people. Flagrant and grave violations of
international law are being committed by the
occupying Power against the Palestinian civilian
population every single day, every hour, and even at
this very moment. In grave breach of the Fourth
Geneva Convention, which governs military
occupation, and in serious violation of other relevant
provisions of international law, Israel continues to use
excessive and indiscriminate force against Palestinian
civilians, killing men, women and children, and
causing vast destruction to Palestinian homes and

property.

The latest aggression and escalation of military
attacks by Israel, the occupying Power, against the
Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territory,
and especially in the Gaza Strip, began on Friday, 7
April 2006. Over the span of just three days, the
occupying Power killed at least 21 Palestinians, among
them two children. The occupying Power carried out
that latest crime against the Palestinian people using
military war planes, F-16s, helicopter gunships, tanks
and other heavy weaponry.

Beyond human devastation, those attacks, mostly
extrajudicial executions, also wounded scores of
innocent Palestinian bystanders, including children. It
has become common practice for the occupying Power
to carry out its open and declared illegal policy of
extrajudicial executions in densely populated civilian
areas, knowing full well that civilians will be
endangered. In fact, after the killing of a nine-year-old
Palestinian girl, Hadeel Ghebin, and wounding her
seven siblings and her pregnant mother on 10 April
2006, the Israeli Foreign Minister, as well as other
Israeli ministers and military generals, confirmed that
the Israeli Government would not ease its military
activities but would, rather, intensify them, including
the possibility of reinvading the Gaza Strip.

Those attacks came on the heels of an additional
Israeli attack that took place in the Gaza Strip on 5
April 2006. During that attack, Israeli occupying forces
fired missiles into the compound of the President of the
Palestinian Authority and the Chairman of the
Executive Committee of the Palestine Liberation
Organization, Mr. Mahmoud Abbas. The missiles
landed on the President's helicopter landing pad, about
100 meters from his office, leaving deep craters on the
ground. At that time, President Abbas stated that the
Israeli escalation was not justified and that the
occupying Power's real intent was only to

"sabotage the daily lives of the Palestinian people
and to fully destroy the institutions of the
Palestinian National Authority and its security
apparatus, after partially destroying them
throughout the past five years".
He went on to state that it was all aimed at "destruction
for the sake of destruction". The strikes also targeted
three other sites in densely populated civilian areas in
the Gaza Strip, killing one Palestinian and wounding
10 others, including a mother and her six-month-old
baby. Furthermore, the Israeli newspaper Ma'ariv
reported that, on 14 April, Israeli occupying forces
bombarded the northern Gaza Strip with over 300
shells.

The Government of Israel has continuously tried
to portray its latest military escalation simply as a
response to Violence emanating from the occupied
Palestinian territory. However, nothing could be further
from the truth. In fact, what the Israeli Government is
doing and what it has done throughout its nearly 39-
year military occupation is clearly intended to serve its
clear political objectives of inflicting maximum pain,
suffering and loss on the Palestinian people while it
entrenches its occupation and continues with its theft
and colonization of Palestinian land, especially through
its illegal settlement campaign and the construction of
its expansionist wall.

Nevertheless, I would like to reiterate that
President Mahmoud Abbas continues to condemn all
acts of Violence against civilians, including suicide
bombings. After today's suicide bombing in Tel Aviv,
President Abbas strongly condemned it and stated that
such acts are against the Palestinian national consensus
and harm the high national interests of the Palestinian
people. In that regard, we restate our condemnation of
the loss of innocent civilian life on both sides,
Palestinian and Israeli, and we continue to call upon
the occupying Power to do the same.

As I stated at the beginning of my intervention,
Israel, the occupying Power, has been relentless in its
grave breaches of international law, including the
willful killing and injury of civilians and the practice
of extrajudicial executions. The occupying Power has
continued and is thus committing those crimes against
the Palestinian people with complete impunity and on a
repeated basis. That must be condemned by the
international community and measures should be taken
to halt the latest escalation by the occupying Power of
its military attacks, as well as all of its illegal practices
and policies against the Palestinian civilian population.

Moreover, the international community needs to
show more resolve in dealing with the situation,
whether on the ground or concerning the political
aspect. Double standards concerning the situation in
the occupied Palestinian territory cannot be accepted.
This double standard can be seen as the international
community remains silent and sits idly by while the
occupying Power is indirectly permitted to kill
Palestinian civilians and continue its illegal policies
while the Palestinian people are being killed and
collectively punished through political and economic
isolation for democratically electing their Government.
In this regard, any calls on the Palestinian side will
only be viewed as hypocritical if they are not matched
by equal pressure on the occupying Power to put an
end to its harsh military measures, to end its
subjugation of the Palestinian people and accept their
right to live in freedom and security under the
protection of international law.

The international community through the
Security Council must act firmly to stop the latest
aggression and escalation of military attacks by the
occupying Power against the Palestinian people in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, and ensure that the occupying Power
complies with its obligations under international law,
including international humanitarian law. We continue
to hope that the Security Council will take the
necessary measures to stop this dangerous deterioration
and shoulder its responsibilities in this regard.

