The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.

I thank Special Envoy Ould Cheikh Ahmed, High
Commissioner Al Hussain and Assistant Secretary-
General Kang for their briefings on Yemen's dire
political, humanitarian and human rights challenges.
I want to particularly commend the Special Envoy for
traveling here straight from a week of political talks
in Switzerland. We are grateful to him. I also want to
thank all the Council members who have spoken before
me. This is a very opinionated group, as it should be,
and we do not always agree on everything. But listening
to the remarks here this morning, one thing is clear: the
Security Council is united on Yemen. We are united,
to begin with, in our support for the work undertaken
by the Special Envoy and his team over the past
week in Switzerland and well beyond. He negotiated
critical confidence-building measures, a mechanism
seeking to de-escalate military tensions and improved
humanitarian access to all governorates. Those are
important steps forward, and we commend him for his
work. As others have noted, after nearly nine months
of fighting and more than 2,700 civilian deaths, such
steps are long overdue. The United States stands ready
to work with the rest of the Council to hold all sides
to their commitments in advance of the resumption of
talks next month.

Today has also shown that the Council has a
common vision of what must happen next. As the
negotiators are returning home from Switzerland, let
me highlight three of the most important messages we
as the Council have sent today.

First, all sides must do more to facilitate access
for life-saving humanitarian assistance and shipments
of the most basic commercial goods. We heard to day
about Yemen's already devastating humanitarian crisis,
including the fact that more than 80 per cent of the
population needs humanitarian assistance. In some
governorates, including Aden and Sa'ada, but especially
Taiz, it is even worse. There, nearly every resident
requires aid. The suffering is being significantly
and unnecessarily compounded by restrictions and
impediments to access that are preventing assistance
from getting through, from reaching those who need
it most and thereby causing dramatic price increases
in the markets. That has to stop. Recent events have
shown that access can be improved even in the absence
of a lasting political agreement.

After the lifting of restrictions on commercial
vessels entering the country in October, food imports
finally returned to pre-crisis levels, as we heard from
Ms. Kang today. More ships are now reaching many of
Yemen's ports to deliver their cargo. Now we have to
find ways to increase the through-put of those ports by
shortening the time needed to unload critical supplies.

And - this is critical - the United Nations Verification
and Inspection Mechanism must become operational at
long last to help restore the confidence of the shipping
industry and further accelerate shipments of goods,
especially fuel. Fuel imports are still only half of what
they were before the crisis, and fuel drives so much of
what goes on in the country, including even the ability
to access clean water.

Meanwhile, more than 100 trucks were finally
allowed passage into Taiz last week to deliver drinking
water, food, medicine and other basic supplies. But
those supplies now need to actually reach the more
than 200,000 besieged civilians. With enormous needs
still unmet, progress like this is just the beginning. The
Houthis must allow access into Taiz. Similar efforts
should be made elsewhere to facilitate the transport of
staple goods.

Secondly, the Council today reaffirmed its
conviction that the crisis will be solved not through
military action but, as we have all heard again and
again, through political dialogue like the one that
the Special Envoy managed to restart in Switzerland.
That progress reinforces the message that the Council
previously sent through resolution 2216 (2015), which
called unequivocally for a consensus-based political
solution to the crisis based on dialogue. Such dialogue
will lead to peace only if all parties fully commit to
its success and are willing to make hard compromises.
The lack of trust among the parties after everything is
understandable, particularly after the Houthis violated
one agreement after another in their military push
southward - the event that precipitated the current
phase of the conflict. But for the sake of the Yemeni
people, the warring parties must now come together to
engage in good faith. They must be prepared to show
flexibility and adhere to compromises once the talks
conclude. Even when there may be provocations on the
ground, everyone must be resolute in the commitment
to return to a political transition based on the Gulf
Cooperation Council Initiative, the outcomes of the
National Dialogue and the relevant Security Council
resolutions. As the transition takes shape - and I
realize that we are not there yet - it will be critical
that it incorporate not only armed groups but also
Yemeni women and members of Yemeni civil society.
We commend the Special Envoy for his dedicated effort
to that end. Such representatives must have the freedom
to leave Yemen to take part in peace talks, and we
hope that they are also able to leave Yemen to provide
the Security Council with first-hand perspectives on

conditions on the ground.

Thirdly, and finally, the Council made clear today
that all sides must commit to a de-escalation of the
hostilities and a lasting ceasefire. The ceasefire that
began last week was imperfect, but it was a step. The
United States joins others in welcoming President
Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour's commitment to
extending it, and we urge forces on the ground to respect
this halt in attacks. To bolster the ceasefire, we hope
that all parties will send empowered representatives
to the United Nations-proposed coordination and
de-escalation committee without delay.

While urging all sides to respect the ceasefire, I
also want to reiterate that all parties must fully abide by
their obligations under international humanitarian law,
which, as High Commissioner Al Hussein reported,
has been violated repeatedly during this conflict, with
horrific consequences. Militias loyal to the Houthis and
former President Ali Abdullah Saleh must stop any and
all indiscriminate shelling of civilian areas, including in
Taiz, and they must halt their cross-border attacks. We
will also urge the Saudi-led coalition to ensure lawful
and discriminate targeting and to thoroughly investigate
all credible allegations of civilian casualties, and make
adjustments as needed to avoid such incidents.

Today's Council meeting has sent a single, unified
message about what must be done in Yemen. We stand
behind the Special Envoy's efforts and we urge all sides
to continue moving towards a political transition. In the
interim, we call on them to improve access, de-escalate
hostilities and commit to a lasting ceasefire. Our unity
on this issue stems from our shared conviction that too
many Yemenis have already suffered from this war. Let
me conclude with the story of just one of them.

In October, a 6-year-old boy named Fareed Shawki
was playing hide-and-seek in Taiz when a missile
struck nearby. He was hit by shrapnel and rushed to
a hospital along with at least six other boys who had
been injured. Having lived too long amid conflict, he
knew what could happen. "Don't bury me," he cried ,
as doctors worked and his father watched. "Don't bury
me." Fareed later succumbed to his injuries. He was
buried by his relatives, as his father could not bear to
do it himself.

In its profound tragedy, Fareed's story is the story
of this war. It is a story that should have had a different
ending very long ago. The parties have a chance to end

the conflict now, and the United States joins the other
members of the Security Council in urging them to do
so.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
