Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome your participation in presiding
over the Security Council at today's meeting, Sir,
thereby demonstrating the importance of the situation
in Haiti for the Latin American region. I would also like
to congratulate Ms. Sandra Honore on her appointment
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Haiti and to wish her every success in her work.

We have recently seen signs of stabilization in Haiti,
and the country's authorities have made significant
efforts, including in implementing the Government's
programmes for improving jobs, education, the
environment, energy and the rule of law, as well as
with projects for improving the country's investment
climate. We welcome the efforts of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) to
guarantee security and provide assistance inthe country's
reconstruction, in accordance with its mandate as laid
down by the Security Council. It would be difficult to
overestimate the Mission's long-term contribution to
improving the situation in Haiti. That said, in principle
we support the Secretary-General's proposal for the
need to gradually draw down MINUSTAH. At the
same time, any reconfiguration must be approached
carefully, as reaffirmed by the Secretary-General in his
most recent report (S/2013/493), with regard to the real
possibility of new security risks developing during the
electoral period. That must be taken into account.

In discussing the possible reconfiguration of the
Mission we must be primarily guided by the actual
situation in the country. It is unfortunate that the
political process in Haiti remains unsustainable and
that the ongoing high level of political rhetoric has
prevented the resolution of the conflicts between the
executive branch and the Parliament. The holding of
partial senatorial and local elections by the end of the
year remains an ongoing question, therefore a matter
of continuing concern. My delegation hopes that the
Government will continue its effort to establish a
national dialogue and to hold elections this year.

One of MINUSTAH's most important tasks is to
train the Haitian National Police. We are satisfied that
the effort is moving forward according to plan and that
the crime situation is gradually improving.

MINUSTAH must continue to provide support to
Haiti to improve governance and respect for the rule
of law, with the aim of Haiti's national forces finally
guaranteeing the country's security.

The socioeconomic and humanitarian situation
remains challenging. In that regard, the increased active
engagement of United Nations agencies, programmes
and peacekeeping architecture and coordination among
donors aimed at rebuilding the country is important.

It is of concern that, despite broad international
effort, cholera has not yet been eradicated and the
number of cases remains high. In that respect, we note
MINUSTAH's effort to combat the illness.

My country fully supports the proposals of the
Secretary-General to consolidate the Mission and its
transformation into a smaller mission with a narrower
mandate. In that context, we await with interest his
ideas in his next report.

Nevertheless, such a proposal must be approached
only in the presence of sufficiently stable country
conditions. To achieve that, all conflict among the
national authorities must cease. The establishment
of Viable and fully staffed Government and national
security entities must be completed and the situation
of internally displaced persons, and the humanitarian
situation in general, must be markedly improved.

The current situation in the country demonstrates
that the Haitian authorities and the international
community, led by the United Nations, still face many
complex tasks. A leading role in addressing those tasks
must be played by the Government of Haiti, which bears
the responsibility to use the international community's
assistance effectively and to participate in coordinating
the assistance.
