Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): I wish to begin by commending
the Secretary-General for his excellent report on the causes
of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa. The report deals with
some of the most important issues on the United Nations
agenda today. By analysing the entire range of factors
affecting peace and security in Africa, the report actually
addresses some of the basic aspects of the current and
future relevance of the United Nations.
In paragraph 7 of the report, the Secretary-General
explains the challenges of Africa as those of a vast and
varied continent. The Secretary-General succeeds in
developing a systematic approach which brings together
penetrating analysis and imaginative proposals for the
search for solutions. Moreover, the report builds on the
experiences of the United Nations in recent years, both
expertise gained in dealing with specific situations and
understanding resulting from consideration of broader
topics, such as the "Agenda for Peace" and the "Agenda for
Development".

One of the most powerful messages of the Secretary-
General's report is expressed in the title of chapter IV,
which emphasizes the intrinsic link between the
construction of durable peace and the promotion of
economic growth. We agree that such a link is essential.
Moreover, we believe that growth and development are
among the most effective guarantees to prevent conflict.
They must, as such, be accorded priority, and I therefore
wish to address them in some detail.

Fostering growth and development requires the
political will to implement certain basic and universally
valid principles of sound economics. It is these principles
that must guide the formulation of economic and social
policies and decision-making for development. As a country
in transition, Slovenia is fully aware of the difficulties
involved in structural adjustment to a highly competitive
and market-based world economic system. Our own
experience supports the view that all countries in transition
and development, including those in Africa, that wish to
participate fully in the global economy, must, as the
Secretary-General stresses in paragraph 81, carry out the
necessary political and economic reforms.

One of the lessons learned by Slovenia in the process
of general reform is the need for enhancing and improving
macroeconomic management. We therefore highly
appreciate the Secretary-General's specific
recommendation in paragraph 76 that a vital prerequisite
for stable economic performance is a strong central bank
capacity. An independent central bank not only ensures
low and stable rates of inflation, but through its autonomy
from governmental interference in monetary policy also
contributes to a healthy division of power in the economic
sphere. It thus acts as an important safeguard against
corruption and other ills which accompany development
and adjustment to the competitive international economic
environment.

The Slovenian experience also supports the View that
accelerated economic performance requires better use of
existing resources. Globalization of world markets
notwithstanding, a build-up of domestic savings and the
establishment of a savings culture should be one of the
priorities of any effective development policy. We also
agree with the Secretary-General that investment in
human capital, especially through education, must be
recognized as a driving force for economic growth. After
all, the people themselves are the first and foremost
resource of development.

On the other hand, it has to be recognized that while
mobilization of existing resources is crucial, the
international community has an indispensable role in
creating and maintaining an enabling environment for
investment in Africa. Despite recent progress, the
situation in many African countries is still characterized
by a lack of adequate basic infrastructure and by severe
fiscal problems. Such a setting can be detrimental to the
inflow of private capital and thus nullify efforts at
furthering the openness to trade, accountability and the
protection of property rights. International assistance is
therefore required. This involvement should also address
the need to remove unsustainable debt overhang. Action
in this area would contribute significantly to the
restoration of macroeconomic stability and investor
confidence.

Slovenia appreciates the clarity with which the
Secretary-General approaches the issue of good
governance. We share his view that what is needed is the
creation of an environment where individuals and their
human rights are protected, where civil society is able to
function freely and where governmental responsibilities
are carried out in a proper manner. We also agree with
him that such an environment needs to be supported by
adequate institutional mechanisms. The central concepts
here are respect for the rule of law and independence of

 

the judiciary. The autonomy, integrity and independence of
the courts must be respected. Indeed, good governance and
a society based on fair and impartial enforcement of the
law are essential both for the creation of a development-
friendly economic environment and for the implementation
of human rights.

It is common wisdom that an ounce of prevention is
worth a pound of cure. Prevention, however, is not always
possible. This applies to the entire range of efforts for the
maintenance of international peace and security. There is,
therefore, a Vital need to strengthen the mechanisms of
peacekeeping, peace enforcement and post-conflict peace-
building.

In his report, the Secretary-General offers a realistic
analysis of United Nations experiences in Africa. We would
like to express our regret over the fact that some of those
experiences have hobbled the capacity of the United
Nations to respond swiftly and decisively to crises. We
hope that experiences which cannot be described as positive
will not continue to dominate the international community' s
perception of peacekeeping. The lack of success in one of
the United Nations peacekeeping missions in Africa has had
a disproportionately negative effect. In order to ensure the
credibility of the United Nations, the international
community must be willing to act with a view to advancing
the objectives of peace and security in Africa.

We agree with the Secretary-General's statement that
United Nations peacekeeping will not always be the best
answer to every problem in Africa or elsewhere. At the
same time, it is our belief that the peacekeeping potential
of the United Nations should be strengthened. This potential
should be based on a credible deterrent capacity, backed by
sufficient political will on the part of the international
community and by cooperation on the ground. Each
situation has to be considered on its own merits by the
Security Council.

In addition, we are also in favour of cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization of African
Unity and other regional and subregional arrangements. We
believe that such cooperation should be based on the
framework established by Chapter VIII of the Charter.

Slovenia fully supports the principle that humanitarian
assistance should be treated not as a substitute for political
action, but as its supplement. The provision of assistance is
a moral obligation which addresses the symptoms of
conflicts. It does not deal with their causes, however, and
should not be used as an excuse for not taking proper
political action. In other words, humanitarian assistance
should not present a diversion from other critical priorities
of the host country and its people. Rational allocation of
resources between humanitarian relief and development
assistance is needed.

We fully agree with the Secretary-General's strong
insistence on the protection of civilians, especially
refugees and internally displaced persons. It is particularly
important that effective measures be taken to separate the
civilian population from combatants whenever necessary.
Slovenia also supports a further search for appropriate
methods, both at the international level and at the level of
countries which host the refugees, to maintain the security
and neutrality of refugee camps and settlements.

Peace is always fragile at the beginning. Peace-
building structures were therefore developed in all
situations in Africa where peace was established. When
a peacekeeping operation passes into the stage of peace-
building, it assumes a multifaceted character and acquires
new dimensions. Emergency assistance on the one hand,
and reconstruction and development on the other, are both
necessary and interrelated. A partnership between them is
needed so that the diverse expertise, capacity and
approaches to problem-solving are brought together in a
consistent and well-coordinated manner.

As the Secretary-General aptly pointed out in
paragraph 62 of his report, the passing of the baton from
relief to development assistance cannot lead to progress
or durable peace. We agree that there is a need for peace-
building elements to be identified with precision and
integrated into the mandates of peacekeeping operations
at an appropriately early stage. Priorities, including
national reconciliation, respect for human rights, the
resettlement of refugees and displaced persons, the
promotion of national unity, democratization, and
economic recovery, are sensitive, but are Vital for a
successful transition to lasting peace.

Some situations require specific approaches and
specific measures, including sanctions under Chapter VII
of the Charter. It is indicative of the tragedy of Africa
that the majority of sanctions imposed by the Security
Council so far have been targeted against Member States
or specific groups in Africa. This makes the Secretary-
General's recommendations regarding the improvement of
sanctions regimes in the context of the promotion of
durable peace in Africa all the more appropriate and
timely.

 

Sanctions, as the Secretary-General points out in
paragraph 25, have a way of inflicting costs on unintended
victims. We share his opinion that greater use should be
made of targeted sanctions and that more attention should
be paid to the adverse effects suffered by neighbouring
countries.

Moreover, a comprehensive and widely accepted
approach to managing humanitarian exceptions to sanctions
is needed. The contemporary practices of the imposition of
sanctions at the regional or subregional levels need careful
examination. The lessons learned have been diverse and not
always positive, and they must be borne in mind in any
future decision-making. At the same time, we agree with
the Secretary-General's emphasis on the need to ensure
more serious enforcement of sanctions by the international
community. We especially support his recommendations
regarding the strict implementation of arms embargoes.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that the range
and variety of issues addressed in the Secretary-General's
report on Africa require careful consideration. The wealth
of ideas and recommendations must be utilized. We
therefore support the suggestion that consideration of this
report be continued not only in the Security Council, but
also in the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council. This process should, most importantly, enable
United Nations organs to make the right decisions as the
consideration of the report proceeds.

