Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): Mr. President, I thank you
for organizing this open briefing. I want to take this
opportunity also to thank Mr. Annabi for the comprehensive
briefing on the situation in East Timor.

My delegation is gratified by the progress being made
with the establishment of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) and is pleased
that its deployment remains on schedule. We regard this as
important to ensure that the transition from the International
Force, East Timor (INTERFET) to a United Nations
peacekeeping operation takes place as soon as possible. In
this regard, we pay a special tribute to Mr. Vieira de Mello
and his staff for the efforts they are making under difficult
conditions.

With regard to the security situation, my delegation
is glad to note from the briefing and the latest INTERFET
report that there are no significant threats to peace and
security in East Timor. Thanks in particular to the clamp-
down on militia activities and the negotiation efforts, we
trust that situation will further improve. In this
connection, we commend the leadership provided by
Australia, and we thank all the countries that have
provided troops and contributed to the work of
INTERFET.

A less positive aspect is our concern about the
continuation of intimidation by militias in West Timor,
which hampers the repatriation of refugees. We welcome
the undertaking by Mr. Tavares to disband his militia
group and hope that the repatriation rate will now
increase. At the same time, we are convinced that the
prosecution of captured militia members under a new
judicial system could further serve as a deterrent for other
criminal militia activities.

I also want to take this opportunity to commend the
efforts of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to, inter alia,
inform the refugees about repatriation conditions in East
Timor. These methods are crucial in the process of
restoring refugee confidence and in order to counter
militia propaganda.

I would like to take this opportunity to commend my
colleague, Ambassador Holbrooke, who is not here with
us today, for the success achieved during his recent visit
to East Timor. Ambassador Holbrooke's visit had a very
positive impact on the plight of the refugees in West
Timor, as he managed to attract more attention to their
situation, which in turn resulted in more concrete steps
being taken with regard to them.

We also welcome the establishment of relations
between the leaders in East Timor and in Indonesia, and
the visit by Mr. Gusmao to Jakarta at the invitation of the
President of Indonesia is very much welcomed. These
efforts must be supported by the international community.

Last but not least, my delegation welcomes the
excellent response by the international aid donors in
Tokyo, who pledged more than the amount estimated by
the World Bank for East Timor' s reconstruction. We hope
that these pledges will turn into reality to fund
reconstruction and humanitarian efforts in that ravaged
country over the next few years.

 

I would also like to echo the sentiments expressed by
Ambassador Dejammet with regard to the need for
increased donor response to other situations in other parts
of the world.

