Mr. Holmes: I have listened carefully to all of
today's debate, and I welcome the clear commitment to
the protection of civilians agenda shown both by the
number of speakers and their obvious commitment in
their comments to this issue. I also welcome the
recognition by virtually all speakers of the need to do
much more to ensure that our words and actions make
a tangible difference on the ground for civilians
affected by armed conflict.

1 am heartened by the support expressed for many
of the recommendations in the Secretary-General's
report and for the continued activities of the informal
Expert Group, and by the comments on the value of the
revised aide-memoire and the importance of the future
report by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations on the protection of civilians
in peacekeeping mandates.

Given the lateness of the hour, I will not try to
respond to all the detailed points that have been made
by individual delegations, but let me comment on one
or two points of particular significance.

Some speakers raised concerns over the inclusion
of certain situations in the report of the Secretary-
General and therefore their characterization as
situations of armed conflict, explaining that they
should be seen rather as law enforcement or counter-
terrorism operations. Whether a situation constitutes an
armed conflict is in fact determined by the facts on the
ground on the basis of criteria developed in the
jurisprudence of international tribunals, notably the
involvement of organized parties fighting one another
and the intensity and duration of the violence.
Situations referred to in this report, in our view, meet
these criteria. They have been marked by prolonged
and intense military engagements, including by
Government armed forces as opposed to just by police,
by the use of heavy weapons and by the displacement
of thousands of civilians as well as significant civilian
casualties. The motive for an operation and how it is
referred to by the affected States themselves do not
alter this determination.

That being said - and I hope this will respond in
part to comments raised by the representative of
Sri Lanka - it is important to repeat and to reassure
Member States that such a determination or inclusion
in such a report should not be seen as judging or
condemning the conduct of the parties or in any way
questioning States' entitlement to take the measures to
put an end to terrorism, nor does it affect the legal
status of the parties involved or equate the parties in
any way. Again, in response to what was said by the
representative of Sri Lanka, in our considerations, we
do indeed try to take account of the ground realities,
civilian casualties from suicide bombings and other
indiscriminate attacks, which I mentioned specifically
this morning, and the need to both respect national
sovereignty and cooperate with national Governments
while, of course, at the same time, respecting the basic
humanitarian principles of independence, impartiality
and neutrality.

What that means is that once the response to
terrorism is such as to reach the threshold of an armed
conflict, it must comply with international
humanitarian law and, as I have emphasized before,
violations of this law by the parties the affected State is
fighting does not entitle it to ignore its own obligations
under international law.

I listened carefully to what the distinguished
representative of Israel said, and I of course take
seriously the points he made, while not necessarily
agreeing with him. I have one or two specific
comments to make in response. The brief factual
paragraph that was devoted to the conflict in Gaza at
the beginning of this year could not, of course, cover
all the points or all the nuances of a complex situation
in the same way that references to other situations did
not pretend to be comprehensive, while still aiming to
be balanced. The report did not mention on this
occasion the rocket attacks against southern Israel, but
the Secretary-General, I and many others from the
United Nations have strongly and systematically
condemned such intentional targeting of civilians in the
past, so there should be no question about our position
on this.

As to the manner in which the report refers to the
conduct of Hamas during the conflict, we are
unfortunately not in a position ourselves to verify
reports of improper use of civilian objects or civilians
themselves as shields - inter alia, for some of the
reasons given by Israel - and therefore cannot speak
with a greater degree of certainty. However, the
information we do have does raise extremely serious
concerns in this regard. The fact-finding commission
currently being conducted by Judge Goldstone under
the auspices of the Human Rights Council is aiming to
clarify this question, as well as others raised in this
context. It is a matter of regret that the Government of
Israel has not so far been willing to cooperate with the
inquiry.

Meanwhile - and I hope, again, that this will
respond to some extent to comments made by the
representative of Sri Lanka - we certainly are very
conscious of the general problem of non-State actors
not adhering to their protection of civilians obligations
and, more widely, the problems posed in this context
by asymmetric warfare, as the Secretary-General's
report and, indeed, my presentation this morning made
clear.

A number of States have, in fact, expressed
support for further discussion about engagement with
non-State armed groups in order to improve their
compliance with the law and the idea of an Arria
formula meeting. A number of States also noted the
sensitivities that surround such engagement and the
need to avoid political legitimization. I fully
acknowledge these sensitivities, but at the same time the
truth is that we do need to engage with such groups if
we are going to promote and seek improved protection
of civilians, if we are to have consistent access to those
in need, and if aid workers are to be able to carry out
their work in a safe and secure environment, which is
frequently not the case at the moment.

On the question of access, I am encouraged by
the positive response to the annex on access
constraints, and we intend to continue to provide
detailed information on this issue to the Security
Council, including through the Expert Group, with the
aim of improving access in practical terms on the
ground.

Finally, I have noted the numerous calls for
improving the quality of the reporting on protection of
civilians in the Secretary-General's country-specific
reports, and also calls for more assessments and
monitoring of the actual implementation of the
09-38414
Council's mandates to protect civilians. This is one
area we intend to take forward with Member States and
other relevant parts of the Secretariat between now and
our next debate in November.

My colleagues in the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs will also be consulting with
members of the Council and other Member States to
identify the most appropriate and effective means of
ensuring follow-up to the recommendations in the
report, in advance of the next open debate in
November. In this context, I welcome the intention of
the future Austrian presidency to give that debate
ministerial attention, and I hope that other Security
Council delegations will consider following this
example as a sign of the seriousness with which the
Council takes these issues and of its determination to
achieve practical results.

I thank you again, Sir, for organizing debate, and
I thank all delegations for their contributions and
attention.

