Mr. Mansour (Palestine): Mr. President, I express
warm congratulations to your country, Colombia, on its
presidency and skilled guidance of the Security Council
this month. We also express appreciation to the People's
Republic of China for its wise stewardship of the
Council last month.

I also thank Under-Secretary-General Lynne
Pascoe for his briefing, and renew our appreciation to
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his efforts to
uphold the Charter and the principles of United
Nations resolutions aimed at realizing a peaceful, just
solution to the question of Palestine.

We come before the Security Council at a most
historic time in our region, and for our world. The
dramatic developments taking place in the Middle East
are altering the geopolitical landscape and bringing to
the fore the universal aspirations of all peoples for
freedom, social and economic justice, democracy and
respect for human rights. Those are goals for which the
Palestinian people have struggled for decades in their
quest to realize their legitimate national aspirations,
foremost among them the aspiration to exercise their
inalienable right to self-determination in their
homeland of Palestine. Tragically, the Palestinian wish
to live as an independent, free and dignified people in
peace and security with all their neighbours -
developing, prospering and responsibly contributing as
full members of the region and the community of
nations - continues to be denied and obstructed.

In the twenty-first century - in spite of the calls
by all peace-loving nations and champions of human
rights for an end to the Israeli occupation of Palestinian
and other Arab lands; the realization of an independent
State of Palestine, living side by side with Israel in
peace and security on the basis of the 1967 borders;
and a just solution to the plight of Palestine refugees -
finding the political will to confront this injustice
remains elusive. Israel's military occupation and
oppression of the Palestinian people in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem,
continues in defiance of all legal, moral and political
norms and principles. It is an injustice being
systematically perpetrated in full view of the
international community, under distorted and illogical
pretexts intended to justify the unjustifiable, namely,
the subjugation of an entire nation of people.

Regrettably, the appeals to the Security Council
to resolve this prolonged conflict, which is the core of
the Arab-Israeli conflict, by applying to Israel the same
legal and moral yardstick applied to all other issues on
the global agenda remain unheeded. Consequently, the
occupying Power has continued to breach the law,
belittling and violating the resolutions of international
legitimacy adopted by the Council and other United
Nations organs, and to defy the international
community with total impunity.

The result has been continued conflict, loss of life
and turmoil - to the detriment of Palestinians and
Israelis, regional and global peace and security, the rule
of law, particularly humanitarian and human rights law
and the collective and individual obligations derived
therefrom, and the credibility of the international
system. The Palestinian people thus remain under
occupation, prisoners in their own homeland, besieged
and blockaded in the Gaza Strip and confined and
abused between settlements, walls and a matrix of
hundreds of military checkpoints and Israeli-only roads
in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, subject to
the mercy of the occupying Power and its destructive
acts of aggression, colonization and repression.

This is the present-day reality of the Palestinian
people. This is in spite of the fact that their right to
self-determination has been reaffirmed annually by the
General Assembly and recognized by the International
Court of Justice as a right erga omnes; in spite of the
reaffirmations of their right to independence and
statehood; and in spite of serious efforts by the
Palestinian leadership and all concerned regional and
international parties aimed at the realization of that
right and a just peace settlement based on relevant
United Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles,
including the principle of land for peace, the Arab
Peace Initiative and the Quartet Road Map.
We therefore return to the Security Council with
an appeal that it uphold its responsibility for the

maintenance of international peace and security vis-a-vis
the question of Palestine. The Council's resolutions
remain valid, and we call for all necessary efforts for the
implementation of those resolutions. The Council cannot
surrender in the face of continued Israeli defiance. It
must be unwavering in its calls for respect for the law
and its own resolutions and act with conviction to
compel Israel, the occupying Power, to cease its
obstruction of peace and stability in our region.

In a series of letters sent to the President of the
Council in the period since the last open debate in
January (see S/PV.6470), we have conveyed in detail
the gravity of the current situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. Israel's
intransigence and the lack of political will to confront
it have kept the political process frozen and allowed
for the continuation of Israeli violations that have
further destabilized the situation on the ground.

While the international community decries the
killing of civilians, invoking the responsibility to
protect and acting to protect civilians in armed conflict,
in the Gaza Strip we witness once again a resurgence
of the cycle of violence and an escalation of Israeli
military attacks, killing and wounding more Palestinian
civilians. The deliberate isolation and deprivation of
the civilians in Gaza also continues as a result of the
Israeli blockade, which is a massive form of collective
punishment that amounts to a war crime and a crime
against humanity.

We reiterate our call for the protection of the
Palestinian civilian population, as well as for the
immediate lifting of the Israeli blockade. The easing of
restrictions is insufficient. An end to the blockade must
mean the freedom of movement of persons and goods
into and out of Gaza; the reconstruction of homes,
infrastructure and the facilities of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East; commercial flows for the rehabilitation of
industry and the economy; and the restoration of the
link between the West Bank and Gaza. All of this is
essential for the revival of hope among our people.
Resolution 1860 (2009) must be fully implemented.
The Fourth Geneva Convention must be respected. And
the occupying Power must be held accountable for its
breaches.
In that regard, we reiterate our call for
accountability for all the crimes perpetrated by Israel
against the Palestinian civilian population, including in
particular in connection with its destructive and deadly
military aggression against the Gaza Strip during
December 2008. We will continue our efforts to follow-
up on the findings and recommendations of the United
Nations Fact Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict -
the so-called Goldstone report (A/HRC/112/48) - to
ensure that justice is served.

Today, I must also reaffirm the strong
condemnation by the Palestinian people and their
leadership of the killing of Italian peace activist
Vittorio Arrigoni by extremists in Gaza. We convey our
deepest condolences and sorrow to the victim's family
on their tragic loss. We reaffirm that this brutal act in
no way reflects the values and sentiments of the
Palestinian people, who are so deeply grateful for the
support and solidarity they receive from all over the
world for their just cause.

As detailed in our letters, Israel has also persisted
with its illegal settlement campaign in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, in a
most flagrant manner. Despite the veto regrettably cast
on 18 February (see S/PV.6484), we believe that the
international community sent a clear message to the
Israeli Government that it rejects this illegal practice
and demands the complete cessation of all settlement
activities, including in East Jerusalem. Yet, Israel
chooses to ignore that message, acting contrary to the
law and sabotaging the two-State solution, in spite the
international consensus and Israel's alleged
commitment to it.

Rather than rolling back and moving to ultimately
end the occupation, Israel continues to illegally
confiscate Palestinian land, expand settlements unit by
unit, build the wall, demolish homes and strip
Palestinians of their residency rights - practices that
are most intense in and around occupied East
Jerusalem - in an attempt to alter the territory's
demographic composition and physical contiguity in its
favour. The settlers, whose terrorism is increasing and
who constitute the core of the illegal colonizing force,
also continue to rampage against the indigenous
Palestinian population. Palestinian civilians peacefully
protesting that rabid Israeli colonization of their land
continue to be beaten, injured, killed, detained, jailed
and vilified, along with the Israeli and international
activists joining them in protests. These demonstrators
deserve the same protection as all other civilians
peacefully protesting abuse of their rights.

In recent weeks, Israel has also escalated military
raids in Palestinian towns and villages, and continues
to arbitrarily detain and imprison Palestinian civilians.
Most disturbingly, nearly the entire village of Awarta
has been detained in connection with the killing of a
settler family. This has included the violent forced
entry of homes, round-ups of civilians in the dead of
night, and the detention of more than 100 women,
including the elderly and infirm, who were forced into
a camp for interrogation and DNA testing by the
occupying forces. This incident underscores yet again
the sheer lack of respect for human rights and due
process of law by Israel, which continues to imprison
thousands of Palestinian civilians, and its total reliance
on force, intimidation, humiliation and collective
punishment vis-a-vis the Palestinian people under its
occupation.

We are at a critical crossroads and believe that no
further proof is needed to confirm that the situation
will worsen drastically if action is not taken to stem the
deterioration and revive the path to peace. What more
must we wait for * another Israeli attack against Gaza
that will bring more bloodshed, destruction and
suffering of innocents, or the further acceleration of the
colonization of the West Bank that will result in the
collapse of the two-State solution? We cannot allow
this to happen. The time for decisive action is now, and
we believe that the international community is in full
agreement on the matter.

Seizing the small window of opportunity before
us will require taking immediate steps to address this
volatile crisis and resume a credible peace process on
the basis of the internationally supported parameters
for a solution. We regret the loss of momentum,
including as a result of the repeated postponement of
Quartet meetings and a lack of action consistent with
the Quartet's target date of September 2011 for the
conclusion of a peace settlement, as well as ofa lack of
unanimity that has to date prevented the arrangement
of the long-overdue Security Council mission to the
Middle East region proposed by the Russian
Federation. The political will must be found to act
collectively on the basis of the relevant resolutions and
the well-known terms of reference of the peace
process. In this regard, we stress the importance of the
Arab Peace Initiative and the need to seize the
opportunity for peace, security and normalization that
this bold initiative presents.

We reiterate our call on the Security Council to
uphold its obligations and take the necessary measures
to bring an end to Israel's violations against the
Palestinian people. We also renew our appeals to all the
Quartet members, in the light of the clear commitments
they have undertaken in this regard, and call for bold
leadership, including on the part of the United States,
bearing in mind the role it has assumed in the peace
process. A clear endorsement of the parameters of the
solution, as reflected in the statement articulated in the
Council on 18 February by the United Kingdom,
France and Germany and supported by the rest of the
European Union and countless other countries, is long
overdue and would make a serious contribution to a
revival of the political process on a credible basis.

Israeli defiance must no longer be rewarded or
tolerated. Israel must be called on to demonstrate its
commitment to peace with actions, not just empty
words. It must be called on to cease its illegal
settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, and uphold its
obligations under international law, as well as the Road
Map obligation of a settlement freeze. It must be called
upon to cease all actions aimed at fragmenting and
altering the Palestinian-Arab character and identity of
the territory in order to advance its unlawful
annexation. Israel must also be called on to respect the
sensitivity and sanctity of Christian and Muslim holy
sites, with an immediate appeal not to obstruct the
celebrations of Christian pilgrims, including
Palestinians, this Easter in Bethlehem and Jerusalem.

Only respect for the law and responsible actions,
including ending incitement and provocation, can build
trust and demonstrate to the Palestinian people whether
or not Israel is a credible peace partner. This is
imperative to reviving negotiations on all final status
issues in order to achieve a resolution of the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict that will bring an end to the Israeli
occupation and realize the two-State solution on the
basis of the 1967 borders, with an independent State of
Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, living side
by side with Israel in peace and security, and a just,
agreed solution for the Palestine refugee question
based on General Assembly resolution 194 (III).

Despite recent serious disappointments, the
Palestinian people have not lost hope, and their
leadership remains committed to achieving by political
means a just peace settlement that will ensure the
resolution of all final status issues. We continue to
exert every effort in this regard, working proactively
and constructively to alleviate the suffering of our
people and to promote the ultimate fulfilment of their
legitimate national aspirations, including their right to
self-determination and freedom - an inalienable right
that is non-negotiable.

This has recently included renewed efforts to
promote Palestinian reconciliation and unity. Fully
recognizing the damage inflicted on our just cause by
internal division, President Mahmoud Abbas has
announced an initiative to go to Gaza as soon as
possible with the aim of ending the division and a dark
chapter in our history, and of restoring the unity of our
people and land. We believe that this is imperative in
order to heal and strengthen our people as they
continue on the journey towards realizing their noble
national goals, and we call on all concerned parties to
support this effort.

The leadership also continues to work non-stop to
implement the State-building plan launched nearly two
years ago by Prime Minister Salam Fayyad. This plan
is rapidly advancing to completion by August 2011,
with the only obstacle to the full realization of its
objectives being the ongoing Israeli occupation. We
welcome the endorsements of the United Nations, the
World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and the
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians regarding
Palestinian readiness for independence. We reiterate
our gratitude for the strong international support of this
important initiative, which is an integral part of our
national efforts to achieve independence. In that
connection, we also reiterate our gratitude to all
Member States that have extended recognition to
Palestine on the basis of the relevant United Nations
resolutions and the international consensus on the two-
State solution. We urge countries that have not yet
recognized the State of Palestine to do so at the earliest
possible time in order to contribute to making our
independence a reality soon.

I reaffirm our determination to achieve an end to
the Israeli occupation begun in 1967, and the
independence this year of the State of Palestine on the
basis of the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, by the target date of September 2011 set by the
Quartet, announced by United States President Obama,
and endorsed by the General Assembly. We remain
committed to the path of peace and call on the Security
Council and the entire international community to
redouble their efforts at this critical time to uphold the
principles for which the United Nations stands in order
to bring an end to this conflict, enable Palestine to take
its rightful place among the community of nations with
pride and dignity, and allow peace and security to
flourish in our region.

