The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.

I thank Ambassador Wittig for presenting the
annual report (S/20ll/4l) of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC). I appreciate the effective activities
carried out by the PBC under his leadership. I also
welcome the statement delivered by Ambassador
Gasana, Chairman of the PBC. I should like to make
four brief points.

First, the United Nations should formulate a
comprehensive, coordinated and integrated strategy for
conflict prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
United Nations peacekeeping operations can contribute
to the early stages of recovery, development and
reconstruction. China supports the PBC playing a full
role in helping post-conflict countries in the areas of
peace, reconstruction, financing and coordinating
international assistance. Peacekeeping and
peacebuilding operations should both include an exit
strategy to encourage post-conflict countries to stand
on their own at an early date.

Secondly, the countries concerned bear the
primary responsibility for peacebuilding. While
formulating peacebuilding strategies, the PBC should
respect the sovereignty and independence of the
countries concerned. China believes that, in providing
assistance to post-conflict countries, the international
community should give priority to national capacity-
building, youth employment and economic and social
development.
18

Thirdly, the United Nations and the relevant
international organizations should strengthen their
cooperation in the area of peacebuilding and use their
respective advantages. We support close cooperation
between the PBC, the Security Council, other major
organs of the United Nations, the Bretton Woods
institutions, other international agencies and regional
organizations. China welcomes the PBC's provision of
useful advice to the Security Council.

Fourthly, China supports continued efforts to
improve the working methods of the PBC. We hope
that the Commission will continue to improve its
efficiency and focus on results in the relevant activities
on the ground in the countries concerned.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 11.45 am.
l 1-27495
