Mr. Regis (Haiti) (spoke in French): Allow me at
the outset, on behalf of the Government of the Republic
of Haiti, to congratulate the New Zealand presidency
of the Security Council for its initiative to convene this
important debate on the specific challenges linked to
peace and security facing the small island developing
States (SIDS).

The Government of the Republic of Haiti welcomes
the fact that this meeting, which is taking place in
the wake of the International Year of Small Island
Developing States (2014) and of the Third International
Conference on Small Island Developing States, is being
held at a turning point, on the eve of the adoption of a
new United Nations post-2015 agenda for development
and just a few months before the International Climate
Change Conference in Paris.

Small island developing States are often presented as
a special case when it comes to sustainable development.
In many ways, their vulnerability is extreme. There
is justified concern that their economic situation has
progressed less than the majority of other groups, and
that is when it has not actually regressed, particularly
in terms of poverty reduction. Regardless of the
parameters used to measure sustainable development,
small island developing States are one of the areas of
the world in difficulty, according to the United Nations.
They suffer many structural handicaps, which are often
exacerbated by security-related problems.

The Republic of Haiti, like all small island
developing States, is grappling with multiple challenges
linked to inadequate resources, exposure to natural
disasters and to environmental crises, and vulnerability
to external economic shocks. This is coupled with
the rise in sea levels and the consequences of climate
change, which not only hamper the march of SIDS
towards sustainable development, but also pose an
acute risk to their survival and viability. The situation
of SIDS is therefore unquestionably an important issue
in the context of peace and international security.

Security has indeed a multidimensional character,
which now extends beyond traditional military issues to
encompass new threats to peace that are more diffuse,
more fragmented and often more social than military in
nature. These include the challenges linked to economic
and social development, stability and environmental
sustainability, but also, of course, natural disasters and
environmental crises.

To a great degree, the situation in Haiti
demonstrates the close relationship among security,
peace and development. In 2004, in the wake of a
serious political crisis that had severely tested the
stability of the country and its development prospects,
the Security Council decided to create the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
Today, 10 years later, the country has fortunately taken
its destiny back into its own hands. The establishment
of democracy, protection of human rights and the
full enjoyment of fundamental freedoms are today
indisputable achievements. Strengthened by its restored
stability and security, in recent years Haiti has seen a
significant recovery in its economy, characterized by
the creation of new businesses, dynamic investment,
a rebirth of its tourist industry and a general revival
of its development process. After several decades of
stagnation, the economy is enjoying growth again.

At the same time, on the political front, the country
is moving determinedly towards upcoming legislative,
municipal and presidential elections, credible
elections that must guarantee the proper functioning
of institutions, facilitate the changing of politicians at
all levels and allow for a peaceful, orderly transition of
power in 2016. The Haitian Government welcoms the
contribution of MINUSTAH in obtaining those results,
which have played a significant role in stability and
the maintenance of peace, and whose contribution to
development has been broadly recognized.

However, that progress, as tangible as it is, cannot
conceal the extent of the difficulties or the severity of
the challenges that the country still faces. For, as long
as the necessary public infrastructure remains lacking
and poverty is not eradicated or at least substantially
reduced, democracy will seem like a pipe dream to
the vast majority of the population that face harsh
everyday economic realities. That is why we must
welcome recent initiatives by the Security Council to

enhance the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations.
We can only welcome its growing concern to examine
the myriad sources of conflict, instability and threats,
which in particularly vulnerable situations such as that
of Haiti combine to fuel insecurity, prevent peace and
consequently impede growth and development.

Peace and development go hand in hand. There can
be no peace or genuine security without development.
Human security is one of the preconditions for peace
and development. The management of security, in
all of its facets, must therefore play a part in a global
approach that rejects unilateralism and is based on
the strength of interdependence. It requires increased
cooperation among States and coherent actions at all
levels - national, bilateral, regional and global levels.

To assist small island developing States in meeting
the challenges ofpeace and security is, first, to help them
deal with both internal and external threats, which have
a considerable impact on their development - political,
economic, social, environmental, cultural and
human - as well as on their stability and on the
sustainability of that development. Assisting them
amounts to helping them deal with environmental crises,
which threaten to entirely undermine their development
efforts and to compromise the hard-fought progress and
results achieved in the fields of health, agriculture and
environmental sustainability. Additionally, assisting
them especially helps them to better deal with their
specific vulnerabilities. Clearly, that is predicated on
strengthening existing partnerships in order to support
their work for sustainable development. Accordingly,
a new spirit of solidarity with small island developing
States, particularly with the least developed and most
vulnerable among them, is vital.

The commitments undertaken by the international
community within the framework of the 1994 Barbados
Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development
of Small Island Developing States, the 2005 Mauritius
Strategy for the Further Implementation of the
Programme of Action, and the 2014 SIDS Accelerated
Modalities of Action should not remain dead letters.
They must be followed by concrete actions, coordinated,
balanced and integrated, which in many cases are
urgently needed.

Regarding Haiti, allow me to stress the particular
importance that we attach to reinforcing partnerships
in various areas where intervention is urgently needed
- especially in education; adaptation to climate change;
food and energy security; investments in renewable
energy; the fight against desertification, soil degradation
and droughts; and the mitigation of disaster risks - not
to mention the often exorbitant budgetary impact of
natural disasters on small island developing States,
which is recognized by the international cooperation
programmes.

The Haitian Government hopes that this
meeting marks a new milestone in the quest for and
implementation of bold, effective and innovative
partnerships that we earnestly desire and that will
meet the particular challenges facing SIDS. We trust
that this enriching debate will lead to conclusions and
recommendations that will be used to advance the
dialogue on certain issues essential to our common
future, to international peace and security and to the
sustainable development of SIDS - whose viability
and very survival are at stake today.

