Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): Nigeria commends Costa
Rica's initiative in organizing this high-level debate on
strengthening collective security through general
regulation and reduction of armaments. We are
delighted that His Excellency Mr. Oscar Arias Senchez,
the President of Costa Rica, personally presided this
morning over this very important Security Council
debate. We are also grateful for the incisive concept
paper prepared by the Council presidency and
appreciate the illuminating statement of Mr. Sergio
Duarte, the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs.

The concept of collective security, as contained in
the United Nations Charter, was designed not only to
deter aggression, but also to offer a sense of security to
all nations, regardless of size or resources. However,
62 years later, both the promise and hope for collective
security have not been fully realized. While States have
espoused support for collective security, they have in
2

the same vein demonstrated considerable reluctance to
pursue common global security policies. Consequently,
we have continuously encountered scourges of civil
strife, inter-State and intra-State conflicts, particularly
on the African continent. A common characteristic of
these conflicts is the tangled nexus between conflicts
and the proliferation of small arms and light weapons.

In spite of these daunting challenges, the
Nigerian delegation is persuaded that the United
Nations remains the best platform for collective
security. Our inextricable interdependence makes it
imperative for States to act in concert to ensure that
international peace is preserved. We recognize,
however, that the collective security system to which
we all aspire must realistically take into account new
threats and challenges. Transboundary threats, such as
human trafficking, drug trafficking, genocide, human
rights violations, terrorism, and the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons and, indeed, activities of
international criminal syndicates, defy geographical
boundaries. They are dispersed, insidious and diffused,
and require collective action to tackle them.

Nigeria believes that a successful collective
security system must rest on committed and genuine
partnership between nation States and Member States.
It is only through such a commitment that we can
translate the dividends of collective security into a
tangible tool of conflict prevention. Indeed, Nigeria
believes that we can enhance collective security
through an effective armaments regulation policy.

On the African continent, illicit trade and the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons continue
to fuel new conflicts and render the old ones
intractable. It is also strengthening non-State actors and
reinforcing criminal networks. Hence, we consider
small arms and light weapons to be the biggest threat
to the consolidation of peace and development. Indeed,
their lethality and ready deployment make small arms
and light weapons Africa's weapons of mass
destruction. In some conflict zones in Africa,
particularly in the West African subregion, guns are
more readily accessible than food. Such a numbing
reality must compel us to be unflinching in our
concerted efforts to restore peace and security in war-
torn sections ofAfrica.

Indeed, it was this situation that propelled the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) into establishing a moratorium in October
08-60947

1998 on the import, export and manufacture of small
arms and light weapons. Nigeria reaffirms its
commitment to the United Nations Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects. We note with regret, however, that despite
efforts at various levels, the illicit circulation of small
arms has continued, and their devastating effects on
African States in particular seem to negate the political
will that we all exhibited at the time of the
Programme's adoption in 2001.

Nigeria is convinced that the most effective
strategy for preventing, combating and eradicating the
illicit small arms trade is through the elaboration of a
legally binding global instrument and the collective
political will to stem the uncontrolled proliferation of
small arms. We therefore call on Member States to
demonstrate the necessary political will to establish
international standards for the import, export and
transfer of conventional arms. We unequivocally
support a legally binding arms trade treaty, not only as
a tool for establishing a common, international
standard on the global arms trade, but also as a means
of regulating the accessibility of illicit small arms and
light weapons to non-State actors.

Beyond regulating small arms and light weapons
proliferation, Nigeria believes that an effective United
Nations collective security system requires the
strengthening of regional security mechanisms, in
consonance with Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter, which encourages regional organizations to
deal with conflicts in their regions. The African
Union's evolving Peace and Security Architecture and
other subregional security initiatives, including the
ECOWAS conflict resolution Mechanism, are designed
to rid the continent of conflicts and their debilitating
consequences.

We therefore join the quest for a new culture of
conflict prevention since it is evident that, in practice,
it costs less to prevent than to control conflicts.

