Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): Let me join others in
thanking Her Excellency Ms. Hina Rabbani Khar,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Pakistan, for organizing
this important debate and for her commendable
statement. I also welcome the statement made by the
Secretary-General.

Rwanda reiterates its strong condemnation of
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, as it
constitutes one of the most serious threats to international
peace, security and development. Terrorism violates
not only the Charter of the United Nations but also
the principles and values of the Constitutive Act of the
African Union.

My Government has ratified the 14 universal
instruments against international terrorism, as
elaborated within the framework of the United Nations
system, relating to specific terrorist activities and has
also embraced the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, together with its plan of action. My
country has also ratified the 1999 Convention on the
Prevention and Combating of Terrorism of the former
Organization of African Unity.

My delegation commends and encourages the
efforts and activities undertaken by the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Committee and its relevant bodies
and agencies in the framework of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy to address the
threats to international peace and security caused by
extremism, violence and terrorism.

We also commend the African Union, which, in
an effort to translate the commitment of its members
into concrete actions, established in 2004 the African
Centre for the Study and Research on Terrorism,
headquartered in Algiers. The main objective of the
Centre is to strengthen cooperation among African
countries, to prevent and combat terrorism and to assist
in the full implementation of international conventions
relating to terrorism. In that respect, Rwanda expresses
its continued engagement with international and
regional partners, both bilateral and multilateral, in
order to contribute to an enhanced coordination of
international efforts to prevent and combat terrorism.

Rwanda firmly believes that effective and
prevention-focused counter-terrorism measures require
adequate national legal and institutional frameworks,
including a strong criminaljustice element that is rooted
in the core principles of the rule of law, due process
and respect for human rights. In that respect, Rwanda
has implemented, through a legal and institutional
framework, the recommendations of resolution 1373
(2001), including the establishment of a national
counter-terrorism committee with a national focal
point, comprising members of the different national
security organs, and a functional counter-terrorism unit
within the Rwanda National Police.

Our country has also adopted legislation on the
prevention and penalization of money laundering and
the financing of terrorism. That led to the establishment
of the Financial Investigation Unit, as part of the
Rwanda National Police, which operates within the
National Bank of Rwanda. Rwanda is also a member
of the Eastern and Southern Africa Anti-Money
Laundering Group and the East African Police Chiefs
Cooperation Organization. Both those organizations
were inspired by the Organization of African Unity's
1999 Convention on the Prevention and Combating of
Terrorism and are in line with the spirit of resolution
1373 (2001).

In a Security Council open debate on counter-
terrorism such as today's, it is important for Rwanda
to condemn acts of terrorism around the world. We are
particularly concerned about the scourge of terrorism
in Africa, which could spread across the continent if we
do not combat it. We condemn Al- Shaabab in Somalia,
Ansar Dine and other Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb-
affiliated organizations in Mali and North Africa, Boko
Haram in Nigeria and other terrorist organizations on
the continent.

Terrorists are the enemy of peace and stability.
Unfortunately, the conflicts and situations of
statelessness in a number of countries in Africa
provide a fresh breeding ground for terrorism. It
is not a coincidence that terrorists regularly attack
peacekeepers and threaten countries that contribute
them. Therefore, resolving conflicts on the continent
is an absolute priority, not only to bring peace and
stability for the present but also to serve as a preventive
measure against widespread terrorism on the continent.

Another preventive measure against terrorism is of
course to address the root causes. Rwanda believes that
there can be no justification whatsoever for terrorism.
Nonetheless, we all know that poverty, unemployment,
bad governance and injustice feed terrorism around
the world. In that regard, terrorism in the Arab world
is also a reminder that there is an urgent need for the
international community to find a lasting solution to
the longest conflict on the Council's agenda, namely,
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

While regional and international efforts are making
progress in the combat against terrorism and in the
resolution of regional conflicts, attention should also
be paid to terrorist organizations that change names
and acronyms upon being classified as terrorists. They
later masquerade as political organizations, yet have
all the characteristics of terrorists. A case in point is
the Forces democratiques de libe'ration du Rwanda,
operating in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
They are the product of the Armee pour la liberation
du Rwanda, which, upon being blacklisted as a terrorist
movement, changed its name and acronym but retained
all its terrorist characteristics.
I will conclude by expressing our sympathy to
Pakistan, which, as Minister Hina Rabbani Khar said,
is "one of the biggest victims of terrorism". In that
connection, we particularly pay a symbolic tribute
to Malala Yousafzai for her extraordinary courage. I
also wish to pay tribute to those who continue to work
tirelessly for the well-being of the Victims and who
speak out against terrorism, extremism and violence.

