Mrs. Le Fraper du Hellen (France) (spoke in French): I would like to begin by thanking the
Presidents and Prosecutors of the International
Criminal Tribunals for their biannual reports.

This Council debate takes place, of course, at an
historic moment, as Ratko Mladie - one of those
allegedly responsible for the Srebrenica genocide -
has just made his initial appearance before the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. On
25 May, Mr. Alain Juppe, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of France, said of that arrest:

"My thoughts go first to the families of the
victims. This arrest brings to a close 16 years of
impunity. It will finally make it possible for
justice to be done and will contribute the
reconciliation of the Western Balkans, which
France continuously calls for."

The Security Council also expressed its
satisfaction in its statement to the press of 27 May. In
that statement, we highlighted the commitment of
President Tadie regarding the arrest of the fugitive
Goran Hadzic'.

We would also like to highlight the statements
made by the Prosecutor about cooperation of the States
of the region. The European Union and France closely
follow the Prosecutor's reports on the issue of
cooperation, which is a key element for accession to
the European Union.

When it comes to the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, I welcome the new President of
the Tribunal, Judge Khan, and wish her the greatest
success in her work and in the exercise of her mandate.
Together with Prosecutor Jallow, she has provided a
detailed picture of the Tribunal's current situation. Of
course, the arrest of Bernard Munyagishari in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is an important
event. The Security Council noted this in its remarks to
the press also on 27 May.

But nine accused remain at large, including three
high-ranking fugitives: Felicien Kabuga, Augustin
Bizimana and Protais Mpiranya. We hope there will be
swift progress in the case of Protais Mpiranya, whose
name is continuously mentioned, including in the
context of the current violence in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Zimbabwe. We note that the
Prosecutor is awaiting information from Kenya
regarding the case of Felicien Kabuga, and it is our
hope, as it is his, that the Kenyan authorities will be
able to demonstrate their diligence by promptly
arresting Felicien Kabuga.

I would also like to thank Prosecutor Hassan
J allow, who visited France last April, with regard to the
two cases transferred to France in 20 November 2007,
to which the French judicial authorities attach the
highest importance.

In resolution 1966 (2010), adopted in December,
the Security Council established a timeline for the
completion of the work of the two Tribunals and the
establishment of the Residual Mechanism to conclude
the proceedings. We would like to thank both the
representatives of the Tribunals and the Office for
Legal Affairs of the Secretariat for the efforts made to
follow this timeline.

But the Security Council, which established the
timeline, is also responsible for enabling the Tribunals
to carry out their mandate successfully. It must find
pragmatic solutions, in particular to the problems of
staff retention that were mentioned here today. That is
one of the objectives established by the Chair of the
Security Council Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals, the representative of Portugal,
and we will support him in his efforts.

Recent arrests have made it possible to send an
important message to all of those who today still try to
come to power - or stay in power - by ordering and
planning attacks against civilians, to all those who,
when faced with an international criminal justice arrest
warrant for war crimes, crimes against humanity or the
crime of genocide, think that they can count on
weariness or inaction on the part of the Council. They
are mistaken. The Council has demonstrated through
the years and again recently its determination to fight
impunity, and an arrest warrant has no expiration date.

