Mrs. Rodriguez Camejo (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): It is a pleasure to have you, Mr. President,
preside over this open debate and the Security Council
for this month.
Cuba fully supports the statement made by the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

We take note of the Secretary-General's statement
and the briefings delivered by the briefers, as well
the proposals set forth to improve United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

To improve the security of peacekeeping operations
staff, the Secretariat should implement those measures
that fall within its authority, in consultation with
the Member States and with due consideration of
the relevant organs. We recall the leading role of the
General Assembly in developing concepts, policies and
strategies for peacekeeping operations and its Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations - the only
United Nations forum mandated to consider the issue.
Ideas and approaches to peacekeeping operations
should be implemented only once agreed by Member
States in the appropriate organ.

In a context of increased risks to peacekeeping
operations due to the current environments in which
they are deployed, Cuba reaffirms that the basic
principles of such operations remain valid for guiding
the deployment of the Blue Helmets. The establishment
and deployment of peacekeeping operations must be
carried out in strict compliance with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
especially respect for the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of States and
non-intervention in their internal affairs. It is more
important than ever to respect those precepts, as well
as the basic principles established for the conduct of
peacekeeping operations, such as the consent of the
parties, impartiality and the non-use of force except in
self-defence.

Cuba deplores the loss of life of Blue Helmets and
expresses its concern about the increase in the number
of peacekeeping operations staff casualties over the
past year. Nevertheless, we are not convinced that the
Security Council's approval of operations involving the
use of force beyond the basic principles I mentioned
can contribute to improving the effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations and the security of their
military, police or civilian personnel. The use of force
by peacekeeping operations has political implications
and can lead to unforeseen circumstances, including
increased risk of threats and attacks against United
Nations personnel. We note that peacekeeping
operations, by composition and character, are not
intended or equipped for counter-terrorism operations.
We reiterate that efforts to protect civilians should
be designed to support, rather than replace, the efforts
of national authorities. The protection of civilians
cannot in any way become a pretext for disregarding
the principles of the United Nations Charter.

Cuba believes that, in order to eliminate the impact
of threats on the security of peacekeeping operations
personnel and in order to improve their effectiveness,
such operations must have viable and realistic
mandates, concrete and clearly defined objectives and
the necessary resources to carry them out.

We call on all parties involved to give greater
impetus, increase the number and even improve the
effectiveness of the triangular consultations among
the Security Council, the Secretariat and troop- and
police-contributing countries. It is an important tool
that can provide a better understanding of the situation
on the ground and assist in the design, development and
renewal of mandates, as well as staff security.

Although new technologies can increase knowledge
of the environment and staff safety, legitimate concerns
have been raised regarding the deployment and use
of certain resources in peacekeeping operations,
particularly those related to the management of
collected information. The use of such information
should be considered on a case-by-case basis and with
the consent of the host State.

In conclusion, we reiterate that peacekeeping
operations are not a substitute for addressing and
resolving the root causes of conflicts, and that they
should allow for the creation of a security framework
that makes it possible to implement a long-term strategy
for sustainable economic and social development.

