We are pleased that South Africa has organized today's debate. The Security Council receives an annual briefing from the President of the International Court of Justice and exchanges views about issues of common interest, but those meetings by custom are held in private. In this seventy-fifth anniversary year of the International Court of Justice, it is fitting that we have a second opportunity to highlight the crucial role of the Court and to do so at a public meeting. I would first like to extend our congratulations to those candidates recently elected or re-elected to the Court, as well as our deep gratitude to all of the candidates for their dedication to the field of international law. We appreciate the opportunity to address the relationship between the Court and the Security Council and the complementary role these principal organs play in the maintenance of international peace and security. The International Court of Justice plays a vital role in promoting and preserving the rule of law and in advancing international peace and security through the peaceful resolution of disputes. The increasing workload of the Court demonstrates a recognition by States Members of the United Nations that accept its jurisdiction that it is preferable to resolve disputes peacefully through the Court rather than to allow them to fester and possibly lead to conflict. That these disputes may, as a result, never reach this Chamber reinforces the effectiveness of the United Nations framework. As situations develop into matters requiring the Security Council's attention, we must, of course, remain mindful of where the Court might play a role while preserving the fundamental principle of State consent to judicial settlement of disputes enshrined in the Statute of the Court. We are also mindful that, in Article 33, the Charter of the United Nations, as we have heard, provides that parties to a dispute that is likely to endanger international security and peace shall first seek a solution through the peaceful means of their choice, which can run from negotiation, mediation, conciliation, arbitration or judicial settlement. Many disputes are successfully resolved through other means of dispute settlement, so that they never need to reach the Security Council or the International Court of Justice. And with the multiplicity of available dispute-settlement mechanisms, such as regional courts and international tribunals, parties to a dispute have a range of avenues to consider for the resolution of their disputes. And it is gratifying to know that for those Member States that accept its jurisdiction, the Court stands ready to adjudicate their disputes. We should not forget, on this seventy-fifth anniversary, that there once was a day when territorial disputes, and even trade matters, were resolved, almost routinely, through military means. We should not take for granted how transformative the United Nations Charter and the Statute of the International Court of Justice were when they were adopted, including in their advancement of the peaceful resolution of disputes in accordance with international law. On this seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations and of the Court, we celebrate their contribution to the promotion of the rule of law and the preservation of international peace and security. Finally, let me also add a few words about the trust fund to support participation in the International Court of Justice's Judicial Fellowship Programme. The programme was founded in 1999, through an initiative of a very prominent law school in our host city: the New York University School of Law. The programme has expanded over the years so that dozens of law school graduates have benefitedfrom this worthy, valuable opportunity to work with and learn from the Judges of the Court. We certainly agree that recent law school graduates from developing countries should also have an opportunity to participate in the Court's Judicial Fellowship Programme. Increasing opportunities for future practitioners of international law to learn about the Court and learn from its esteemed judges will itself serve to strengthen the rule of law and help to spread awareness of the valuable role the Court can play in the promotion of international peace and security. Accordingly, we were very pleased to co-sponsor and join consensus on resolution 75/129, establishing the trust fund, which the General Assembly adopted on Monday of this week (see A/75/PV.44).
