Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia): I
am pleased to have this opportunity to briefthe Security
Council on the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) in its task of
overseeing the implementation ofresolution 1540 (2004).

As we all recognize the importance of resolution
1540 (2004) as a key element in the global effort to
prevent the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons and their means of delivery to
non-State actors, including terrorists. I must stress
that we have a truly challenging task in overseeing the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Resolution
1540 (2004) is a platform for cooperation to prevent
non-State actors from gaining access to weapons of
mass destruction. We need to be clear that without
cooperation it would be impossible to address the
issue at the global level. In that context, I would like to
inform the Security Council about the main activities
of the 1540 Committee since my previous briefing to
the Council (see S/PV.7985) and to give an overview of
upcoming events and some prospects for this year.

In 2018, the Committee continues to build on the
momentum imparted to its work by the outcome of
the 2016 comprehensive review and the subsequent
resolution 2325 (2016), of 15 December 2016. Under
that resolution the Security Council directed the 1540
Committee to intensify its efforts to promote the full
implementation of all obligations under resolution 1540
(2004) by all States. To that end, detailed proposals
were incorporated into the programme of work for 2018,
which will shortly be submitted. The Committee, inter
alia, plans to hold discussions on enforcing appropriate
effective laws for the prohibition of activities under
paragraph 2 of resolution 1540 (2004); to take note
of the continually evolving nature of the risks of
proliferation; and to hold a closed expert-level meeting
of the Committee to consider other issues highlighted
in resolution 2325 (2016).

In addition, a report on the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) from all Member States remains
one of the highest priorities for the Committee. In that
regard, I am pleased to inform the Security Council that
we received two first reports in 2017, from Equatorial
Guinea and Zimbabwe. More recently, in early 2018,
we also received a first report from Timor-Leste.
That brings the number of States that have submitted
national reports to 180. However, we still have before
us the challenge of 13 non-reporting States. To achieve
universal reporting as soon as possible may include
issuing notes verbales to Member States that reiterate the
requirements on reporting on national implementation
and meeting country representatives on the margins of
the General Assembly.

States are also encouraged to inform the Committee
of their points of contact for the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). In 2017, Belize, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Costa Rica and Mauritania did that,
bringing the number of States that have now done so
to 101. To strengthen the capabilities of the points of
contact and of their network as a whole, in 2017 the
Committee organized one regional training course for
the Asia-Pacific region. The seminar was hosted for
the second time by China. Two more training courses
for national points of contact are planned in 2018:
one for the African region in Addis Ababa in June,
in cooperation with the African Union, and the other
for the region of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe in Russia in September.

Voluntary national action plans for the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) were another priority of
the Committee, which continued to work with the
support of regional and subregional organizations to
help Member States to develop and to implement such
voluntary action plans. The Committee received five
new national action plans during 2017, while Kyrgyzstan
and Uzbekistan already submitted their reviewed and
second voluntary national action plans. As of today,
31 national action plans have been received.

The Group ofExperts ofthe Committee participated

in round tables intended to develop new national action
plans in El Salvador, Guatemala, Guyana, Mongolia,

Suriname, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan.

The work on national action plans with other countries
will be continued at their request during the current year.

The Committee also continued to promote the
sharing of experience, including through peer reviews,
in order to evaluate and to reinforce effective practices
in the effective implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). The peer review meetings conducted in 2017
by Colombia and Chile and by Belarus, Kyrgyzstan and
Tajikistan, respectively, constitute very good examples
of that effective mechanism. The Committee will
continue to support States that wish to conduct peer
reviews and will actively encourage such meetings,
where appropriate.

To enhance its capacity to better monitor the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), the
Committee considered and approved a revised matrix
format last year. The changes made streamlined the
existing matrix by better reflecting the obligations
set out in resolution 1540 (2004). In accordance with
resolution 2325 (2016), the revised matrix also takes
into account the specificities of States with respect
to their ability to manufacture and to export related
materials. During 2018, the Group of Experts will
convert the existing matrices to the new format.

With the objective of better supporting States
in developing more detailed and effective assistance
requests and, in response to their requests, better
providing them with effective assistance that meets their
needs, the Committee revised its assistance template
in March 2017. That will, in effect, strengthen the
Committee's efforts as matchmaker. The new assistance
template is published on the Committee's website. The
Committee received new assistance requests from
Belize, Kenya and Tajikistan. The requests were sent
to potential assistance providers, and summaries were
published on the Committee homepage, as usual.

In 2017, the Committee also considered how to
improve the facilitation of technical assistance to States
and decided to task its Group of Experts, at a State's
invitation and subject to available resources, to actively
facilitate assistance. The Committee thereby seeks to
close the gap in assistance for those States and regions
that are committed to implementing their obligations
but have not been recipients of assistance offers so far.

In 2017, the Committee continued to exchange
information with the relevant international, regional
and subregional organizations, involved them in its
outreach activities, for example, the training courses
for national 1540 points of contact, and encouraged
them to highlight obligations pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) in their model legislation and/or guidelines
or training of States, as appropriate. In 2017, there was
a total of 53 outreach events by and with international,
regional or subregional organizations in which the
Chair, Committee members and experts participated.

The Committee also continued to develop its
website as a tool to raise public awareness and to serve
as a source of information and a resource on resolution
1540 (2004) for use by Member States, Committee
members, civil society and industry. The new design
of the website, finalized in 2016, provides enhanced
usability and appeal.

On 24 December 2017, after consultations with the
Committee, the Secretary-General appointed six new
experts to the Group of Experts, as during the year
the term of some previous experts had ended. Three
new experts have already joined the Group, while the
remaing new colleagues will join by the end of April.
In that regard, a process will be initiated to select a new
Coordinator for the Group of Experts in the near future.
The outgoing members of the Security Council, Japan
and Egypt, respectively, serve as the Coordinators of
the Committee's Working Group I, on monitoring and
national implementation, and Working Group III, on
cooperation with international organizations, including
the Security Council committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015),
concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities, and the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC), established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001). I would like to thank both
delegations for their vital contributions to the work of
the Committee. On behalf of the Committee, I would
like to welcome Mr. Enri Prieto of the delegation
of Peru, as Coordinator of Working Group I, and
Mr. Antonin Benjamin Bieke of the delegation of Cote
d'lvoire, as Coordinator of Working Group 111, both of
whom started working as Coordinators on 4 April.

I sincerely thank those States that have made
substantial contributions to the United Nations
Trust Fund for Global and Regional Disarmament
Activities, directly in support of the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). Without those contributions the
Committee would be severely hampered in fulfilling
its mandate in overseeing the implementation of the
resolution and in facilitating capacity-building where
it is needed most. In 2017 funds were used from grants
provided in previous years by Canada, Germany, Japan,
Kazakhstan, the Republic of Korea and the United
States, and from new donations made by Japan and the
European Union in 2017.
Before I conclude, I would like to make a few
additional points with regard to the Committee's
planned outreach activities in the near future.

My own country, Bolivia, plans to host a regional
conference for Latin American and Caribbean countries
on the implementation ofresolution 1540 (2004) in May.
The Government of the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
together with the 1540 Committee, will convene a
conference for the States of Latin America and the
Caribbean on the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) and its follow-up resolutions in La Paz from
9 to 10 May. The conference is geared towards actively
supporting the implementation of the resolution in the
Latin American and Caribbean region. It will provide
a platform for States to present existing laws and
regulations that serve to facilitate the implementation
of the resolution. It will also provide an opportunity to
exchange views and effective practices on the handling
of related materials, with a view to strengthening the
region's record on the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). The Committee is considering holding
another regional assistance conference at an appropriate
time in 2018. The Committee will continue to build on
the good collaboration already established with key
international organizations in order to facilitate the
delivery of assistance and support for related activities.

With regard to cooperation with international
and regional organizations and United Nations
entities, the tasks set out in resolution 2325 (2016)
are specific. The Committee's Group of Experts has
already held a meeting with the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate to plan country visits
to be conducted later this year and with the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force to discuss how
best to collaborate to support the activities of the 1540
Committee, in particular with regard to scientific
and technological trends and the risk of misuse by
non-State actors. With regard to the key international
organizations that support its work, the 1540 Committee
will take advantage of visits to New York by the heads
of those organizations to meet with the Committee in
order to encourage their support for the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004).

In continuation of the German initiative known
Wiesbaden process, which is synonymous with active
dialogue between States and industry on the effective
implementation of export controls, two more regional
events designed to engage the private sector are planned
for 2018. One is a regional meeting to be held on 16 and
17 April in New Delhi, and the other will take place
in September in the Republic of Korea. Such activities
are supported by a grant provided by Germany to the
Trust Fund. If members of the Committee would like
to receive additional information on the events, in
particular with regard to possible participation, I urge
them not to hesitate to contact the Group of Experts.

I would like to conclude by reiterating my
commitment to the full implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). The threat of the use of weapons of mass
destruction by non-State actors is a clear and evolving
reality. With the strong support of the States Members
of the United Nations and other international partners,
the 1540 Committee will continue its efforts to prevent
that risk. With the support of its Group of Experts and
the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs,
the Committee stands ready to cooperate with and, as
requested, provide assistance to States in their efforts
to implement resolution 1540 (2004) so as to contribute
to achieving our common objective of preventing the
catastrophic use of weapons of mass destruction by
non-State actors.

I would like to thank all delegations that participated
not only in our work but also in developing our
programme of work, which has just been distributed.
Without the continuous assistance of all delegations, it
would be impossible to achieve our goals.

