Mr. De Mistura: When I briefed the Security
Council in April (see S/PV.7921), we saw two paths
ahead - either international and internal escalation
and deeper intra-Syrian conflict, or international
dialogue, cooperation on de-escalating tensions and
moving forward on the political track, even if only in
small steps. So far, there are signs that together, we
have chosen the latter course. Our common job now is
to turn that into something more meaningful, both on
the ground and on the political track.

In the beginning of May, I attended the high-level
Astana meeting to stress that any attempt to de-escalate
violence is what the Syrians want and is indeed vital,
in and of itself, and can support Geneva, just as Geneva
mutually supports Astana. In Astana, my team provided
technical support to ceasefire guarantors - Russia,
Turkey and Iran - and I was active in political
consultations with all of them and with the Syrian
parties. Jordan and the United States were represented
as observers.

In my modest opinion, Astana produced a
promising step - a memorandum between the three
guarantors on the creation of de-escalation zones. The
reports I have received so far indicate a significant drop
in violence, including in aerial bombing in most of the
areas identified by the memorandum. United Nations
contacts on the ground have described tangible change,
clear skies and areas quickly coming back to life.
That is typical of the Syrian reality. Whenever there
is a moment of peace or at least a halt in the fighting,
they take their future and their present into their
own hands. Markets have started functioning anew in
those locations. We welcome this, and the efforts of the
Astana guarantors should be praised because we want
them to succeed. I thank the Kazakh Government for
ably hosting the Astana meeting. That is the good news.

There is also not-so-good news. Despite the
nationwide ceasefire that was announced last December
and the de-escalation zones now being created to
deepen that effort, we have received reports of
ongoing hostilities and even bombardment between the
Government and armed opposition groups in areas such
as Hama, Horns and Damascus. Some of these areas
appear to be outside of the current de-escalation zones.
However, as Council members know, their precise areas
and ambit will become clear only when the guarantors
complete the extremely important so-called mapping
process. These clashes resulted in another evacuation
of armed opposition fighters and civilians from areas
of eastern Damascus city, which are called Barzeh and
Al-Qaboun. Separately, following the memorandum,
we saw some Government attacks on armed opposition
groups that are otherwise engaged in fighting Da'esh in
the desert near Horns and Al-Suwaydah.

While we have registered that the Government
of Syria has made some significant advances against
Da'esh, we also note with great concern the continued
activities of Security Council-listed terrorist groups.
We condemn in particular the attack last week by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) on civilians in
rural Salamiya, a very important and small community
that has been there for hundreds of years, and the ISIL
assault on Deir ez-Zor city, which is still ongoing
today. These incidents show that, despite losing further
territory this month, ISIL/Da'esh still has the capacity
to cause great harm.

We are also aware of the reports that the anti-ISIL
coalition has carried out strikes on an armed convouy,
which allegedly was composed of forces of the Syrian
Government and its allies in the desert east of Horns.
I am also encouraged by the recent Government of
Syria's agreements with armed opposition groups,
which are resulting in the release of some detainees and
abducted people.

All these facts remind us that there are still important
details to clarify to ensure the full implementation
of the Astana memorandum by all parties. We should
therefore urge together the ceasefire guarantors to
address those details quickly, diligently and fairly
within the time frame they themselves stipulated in
the memorandum. All relevant international actors,
specifically regional ones and the co-chairs of the
International Syria Support Group, have a particular
interest in this regard.

The United Nations remains ready to provide its
technical expertise. Our goal is not just de-escalation
but - at least on the military side - the realization of
the nationwide ceasefire. Therefore, in order to make
sure that the memorandum can be implemented fully,
we have a common interest in ensuring that no party
to the conflict takes advantage of any ambiguity on the
ground or in the memorandum.

We urge all the parties, the Astana guarantors and
those who have an influence on the parties to take steps
to ensure rapid, safe and unhindered humanitarian
access to the more than 4.5 million people in need in
areas that are hard to reach and besieged. When there
is a reduction of violence, that should be the first
consequence - the first secondary positive effect. We
have not seen enough of that. The United Nations stands
ready to respond to any opportunity for increased
humanitarian access based on the needs of the people
and in line with international humanitarian law.

Finally, regarding Astana, we were encouraged to
note that the guarantors seriously engaged in discussions
on two additional subjects of importance to us and to
the Syrians: detainees, abductees and missing people,
and humanitarian demining. Indeed, on detainees,
they finalized at the technical level an agreement on
a process for addressing the issue in which the United
Nations would be closely involved, and we are ready
and willing to be so. I have therefore urged the Astana
guarantors in writing to formally confirm that technical
agreement as soon as possible. Meanwhile, the United
Nations Mine Action Service, which is based in New
York and was part of the United Nations team in Astana,
is ready to do its part to advance an effective approach
to humanitarian demining in Syria.

In the immediate aftermath of Astana, I invited
the parties to the intra-Syrian talks to a sixth round in
Geneva. They all came and met in a proximity format.
The round was kept brief so as to proceed in a focused
manner. It lasted four intense days, including one case
of night/evening discussions. In the previous round,
the parties had already begun to engage in substance
across all four baskets of the agenda that the Security
Council approved after the fourth round. They also had,
in the previous case, showed that the process is now
facing fewer obstacles related to possible walk-outs,
procedural objections or long statements attacking each
other or even questioning the other side's legitimacy.
We strongly insisted on that, and we got it.

I do not deny that there are, of course, still major
gaps between the parties, but we have also seen a
deepening ofthe process across the baskets and a greater
understanding of what is required if the parties are to
succeed in negotiating a framework for a transitional
political agreement that safeguards the sovereignty,
unity, territorial integrity and independence of Syria,
based on the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254 (2015), adopted by all
Council members.

I assessed that the parties needed to be ready to roll
up their sleeves. We had only four days and needed to
make good use of them to go even deeper. Specifically,
I saw an opportunity and a need to increase focus and
work on the constitutional and legal dimensions of
the talks as the talks proceed. Everything is touched
by that; every question that comes up has either a
constitutional or a legal aspect. Why not go in deeper?
Why not prepare in advance of that? I think we can all
agree that no stakeholder - be it Syrian, regional or
international - will accept any constitutional, legal or
institutional vacuum in Syria before, during or after any
negotiated transitional political process. I believe that
on that, at least, we all agreed. Most importantly, the
process needed and needs to be owned by the Syrians.
They are the ones who should be drafting their own
constitution, but we can help in preparing the ground
for it.

Therefore, to that end, I informed the parties that I
intended to establish a technical consultative process to
move forward and examine in greater depth the relevant
constitutional and legal issues raised within the formal
sessions. The sessions remain formal, but can we not
go a little bit deeper, especially when the subject may
have common ground? Can we not prepare better for
the time when there will be a peace conference and
many of those issues could be at least more or less, if
not sorted out, at least prepared?

I therefore shared initial ideas with the participants
in the talks, while sketching out a possible vision for that
type of approach. That stimulated a very intense and, in
my opinion, valuable discussion and many constructive

oral and written observations from the parties. We met
the sides during the day and in the evening to answer
their queries and urge them to indicate the basis of their
own participation in the expert consultative process.
That enabled us to move beyond the paper and the initial
set of ideas that we had prepared, and to focus on the
real deliverable, which was establishing a consultative
process at the technical level as an additional, effective
new tool and piece of architecture in the intra-Syrian
talks process.

Participants wasted no time and on 19 May agreed
on two separate technical meetings with experts from
my own team. The first would be with experts from
the Government, which until then had hesitated with
respect to entering into any kind of expert group, and
the second with experts from the delegation of the
Syrian opposition that was announced on 11 February.
Two additional technical aspect meetings were also held
under the consultative process on 19 May with the Cairo
and the Moscow platforms, respectively. The meetings
were businesslike, constructive and informative. We
can now say that the process is up and running, and it
has already shown its own potential.

We also had constructive discussions on trying to
find a formula through which experts from the Cairo
and the Moscow platforms mightjoin, at least, the expert
meetings of the delegation of the Syrian opposition
announced with its own composition on ll February.
Intensive conversations on that took place within the
main opposition and between it and all the platforms,
and we should encourage them to make that a reality
during the next round, That would send an important
new message of the opposition's unity.

As members of the Security Council know and
have mentioned, the opposition has indicated that I
should invite the High Negotiations Committee and the
Cairo and the Moscow platforms. We have all thought
and hoped that, one day - at least, with regard to
some technical areas - that could be the beginning
of their sharing a common pool of ideas. That might
be an initial step towards a common understanding
concerning some of the issues, and international and
regional actors, such as the members of the Security
Council, in my opinion, should do everything that
they can to support it so that we might enjoy a unified
opposition as soon as possible. Although we realize that
it is not an immediate prospect - as borne out by the
fact that we cannot see it happening immediately - we
hope that it would bring us closer to the possibility
of direct negotiations between the Government and
the opposition.

I would like to thank once again the Women's
Advisory Board, which has been providing valuable
feedback on the United Nations proposal with regard
to a technical consultation process. In fact, it came up
with many valid ideas that we were able to use, as well
as timely and constructive suggestions concerning the
process, in general, with a view to making it as inclusive
as possible for all Syrian men and women. Furthermore,
today, in two hours, I will begin engagement in a series
of in-depth consultations with representatives of Syrian
civil society. They are important, particularly at the
point at which we have arrived. Such consultations
have already provided us with much insightful and
practical advice.

Finally, I would like to acknowledge and express
appreciation for the support of the members of the
Council, who actively participated in Geneva, the
International Syrian Support Group and the other
countries that have dispatched their own senior
officials or envoys for Syria to the Geneva talks.
Their close involvement and efforts in consulting with
me and engaging the sides so as to bring them closer
to a possible formula remain an invaluable tool of
diplomatic leverage for my own mediation efforts. I
also welcome the fact that, regardless of what side of the
conflict the groups were closer to, they all welcomed
and supported some of the United Nations proactive,
concrete proposals to the parties.

Before concluding, I should like to add a few
important points of clarification concerning the
meetings of experts so as to be clear about what they
are and What they are not, and, importantly, what the
link with the four baskets is and what it could be.

First, the meetings of experts are not intended to
replace formal negotiations. That process is intended to
support the four baskets and the principle ofparallelism,
which remain the focus of the talks' agenda. We agreed
on that. The work of the experts remain fully framed
within the terms of reference, which we all know as the
intra- Syrian talks. We were unable to enter into in-depth
discussions on the four baskets during that round, but
we spoke of important issues concerning both parties.
We hope to address those more substantially during the
next round of talks.

Secondly, our focus on constitutional, legal issues
does not in any way take away the Syrian people's right
to draft and determine their own constitutional future.
We do not seek to draft a new Syrian constitution in
Geneva, Astana or anywhere else. Instead, we are
laying the foundations for when the Syrians are able
to do so. Nevertheless, in Geneva the United Nations is
ready to help prepare the ground for that because much
homework remains to be done.

Thirdly, any legally and constitutionally solid
framework agreement will require an important
underlying technical structure and details. We hope
that the experts can work continuously through those
details together or separately. In that regard, I have
also strongly encouraged the experts to hold meetings
between the rounds of the Geneva talks, not just during
them. However, if anyone wants to meet only during
the talks, they are welcome. The experts will not make
any decisions, but rather propose options - solid, well
thought out and thoroughly discussed options - to the
official participants in the formal talks.

Naturally a great deal of work remains to be done.
We are aware that important gaps remain among
the parties with regard to major issues, but we have
established an agenda, gone into substance on all
baskets and taken a new, further step towards preparing
the ground for real negotiations, which, I hope, will be
possible in the near future. For the first time, we have
received the consent of all parties to engage with us
on an expert, solid and concrete level. Furthermore, I
am pleased that all parties were receptive to the United
Nations convening a seventh round that we intend to
schedule some time in June.

The United Nations in Geneva has begun to help
the Syrian parties to put the building blocks in place
for real negotiations on a real political solution, while
we hope that Astana will contribute to ensuring that
the de-escalation works. During the past few weeks,
several important meetings of key international and
regional leaders that are taking place as we speak and
will take place in various capitals have all produced
important statements on the need to find a political
solution in Syria. With the help of the Council and the
Secretary-General's guidance, we are doing our part
to incrementally find a political agreed framework in
accordance with resolution 2254 (2015).

