Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing today.

This is the fifth Security Council meeting in the
past week in which we have addressed the situation in
Syria. A week has gone by in which we have talked. We
have talked about the victims in Douma. We have talked
about the Al-Assad regime and its patrons, Russia and
Iran. We have spent a week talking about the unique
horror of chemical weapons. The time for talk ended
last night. We are here today because three permanent
members of the Security Council acted. The United
Kingdom, France, and the United States acted not in
revenge, not in punishment and not in a symbolic show
of force. We acted to deter the future use of chemical
weapons by holding the Syrian regime responsible for
its crimes against humanity.

We can all see that a Russian disinformation
campaign is in full force this morning, but Russia's
desperate attempts at deflection cannot change the
facts. A large body of information indicates that the
Syrian regime used chemical weapons in Douma on
7 April. There is clear information demonstrating
Al-Assad's culpability. The pictures of dead children
were not fake news; they were the result of the Syrian
regime's barbaric inhumanity. And they were the result
of the regime's and Russia's failure to live up to their
international commitments to remove all chemical
weapons from Syria. The United States, France and the
United Kingdom acted after careful evaluation of those
facts. The targets we selected were at the heart of the
Syrian regime's illegal chemical-weapon programme.
The strikes were carefully planned to minimize civilian
casualties. The responses were justified, legitimate
and proportionate. The United States and its allies did
everything they could to use the tools of diplomacy to
get rid of Al-Assad's arsenal of chemical weapons.

We did not give diplomacy just one chance. We
gave it chance after chance. Six times. That is how
many times Russia vetoed Security Council resolutions
to address chemical weapons in Syria. Our efforts
go back even further. In 2013, the Security Council
adopted resolution 2118 (2013), requiring the Al-Assad
regime to destroy its stockpile of chemical weapons.
Syria committed to abiding by the Chemical Weapons
Convention, meaning that it could no longer have
chemical weapons on its soil. President Putin said that
Russia would guarantee that Syria complied. We hoped
that this diplomacy would succeed in putting an end to
the horror of chemical attacks in Syria, but as we have
seen from the past year, that did not happen.

While Russia was busy protecting the regime,
Al-Assad took notice. The regime knew that it could
act with impunity, and it did. In November, Russia used
its veto to kill the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism, the main tool we had to figure out who
used chemical weapons in Syria. Just as Russia was
using its veto (see S/PV.8107), the Al-Assad regime
used sarin, leading to dozens of injuries and deaths.
Russia's veto was the green light for the Al-Assad
regime to use these most barbaric weapons against the
Syrian people, in complete violation of international
law. The United States and our allies were not going to
let that stand. Chemical weapons are a threat to us all.
They are a unique threat - a type of weapon so evil
that the international community agreed that they must
be banned.

We cannot stand by and let Russia trash every
international norm that we stand for, and allow the
use of chemical weapons to go unanswered. Just as the
Syrian regime's use of chemical weapons last weekend
was not an isolated incident, our response is part of
a new course charted last year to deter future use of
chemical weapons. Our Syrian strategy has not changed.
However, the Syrian regime has forced us to take action
based on its repeated use of chemical weapons.

Since the April 2017 chemical attack at Khan
Shaykhoun, the United States has imposed hundreds
of sanctions on individuals and entities involved in
chemical-weapons use in Syria and North Korea.
We have designated entities in Asia, the Middle East
and Africa that have facilitated chemical-weapons
proliferation. We have revoked the visas of Russian
intelligence officers in response to the chemical attack
in Salisbury. We will continue to seek out and call out
anyone who uses and anyone who aids in the use of
chemical weapons.
With yesterday's military action, our message was
crystal clear. The United States of America will not
allow the Al-Assad regime to continue to use chemical
weapons. Last night, we obliterated the major research
facility that it used to assemble weapons of mass
murder. I spoke to the President this morning, and he
said that ifthe Syrian regime should use this poison gas
again, the United States is locked and loaded. When
our President draws a red line, our President enforces
the red line.

The United States is deeply grateful to the United
Kingdom and France for their part in the coalition
to defend the prohibition of chemical weapons. We
worked in lock step; we were in complete agreement.
Last night, our great friends and indispensable allies
shouldered a burden that benefits all ofus. The civilized
world owes them its thanks. In the weeks and months to
come, the Security Council should take time to reflect
on its role in defending the international rule of law.
The Security Council has failed in its duty to hold those
who use chemical weapons to account. That failure is
largely due to Russian obstruction. We call on Russia to
take a hard look at the company it keeps, live up to its
responsibilities as a permanent member of the Council,
and defend the actual principles the United Nations was
meant to promote.

Last night, we successfully hit the heart of Syria's
chemical weapons enterprise, and because of these
actions we are confident that we have crippled Syria's
chemical weapons programme. We are prepared to
sustain this pressure if the Syrian regime is foolish
enough to test our will.

