Mr. Johansen (Norway): Norway welcomes the
Security Council's second mission to Afghanistan. The
mission was indeed a timely one, as the situation in the
country is still cause for grave concern. The report
contains important recommendations. I would like to
commend Ambassador Oshima and other members of
the delegation for the initiative to map the terrain at
this crucial moment. Let me initially also commend
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Koenigs and his United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) team for their efforts and
dedication in spite of difficult circumstances.

Norway supports the views expressed by the
European Union (EU) and appreciates the constructive
role of, and the close cooperation with, EU Special
Representative Vendrell.

As it stated during the recent deliberations of the
General Assembly on Afghanistan, Norway believes
that the situation calls for a broad and comprehensive
strategy. Three challenges are facing us: first, a need
for improved coordination of international assistance;
secondly, a need for capacity-building within
Government institutions, the police, the judiciary and
the army; and, thirdly, more concerted efforts to
support the Afghan Government's outreach beyond the
capital and to help it improve its own institutions.
These challenges are closely interlinked. Norway
stands ready to contribute to developing and
implementing a strategy that addresses these issues.

In 2007, Norway intends to increase its financial
assistance to Afghanistan to at least 450 million
Norwegian krone, or approximately $72 million. That
is an increase of more than $16 million. We will
continue to contribute in accordance with national
priorities and the Afghanistan Compact and to channel
substantial resources to the Afghan budget through the
Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund (ARTF). A key
to success would be rapid progress on the development
of the Afghan National Development Strategy. The
plan should be focused and uncomplicated. It is crucial
that it be developed on the basis of consultations that
are truly national.

The International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) continues to play a key role in providing
security. Norway is committed to continuing its
participation in that respect.

Turning to the mission report, Norway would
particularly emphasize the importance of enhancing the
coordinating role of UNAMA. Norway is currently
looking at ways to assist UNAMA in strengthening its
capacity in the area of humanitarian coordination, both
in Kabul and in the field. It is imperative that UNAMA
be present in the provinces. Civil-military coordination
should be strengthened, while a clear division of roles
and tasks should be maintained. Humanitarian
assistance must be based on humanitarian principles.
Norway strongly supports the mission's appeal to the
Secretary-General to make specific recommendations
on how to promote UNAMA's coordinating role.

Norway agrees that it is important to strengthen
the Afghan National Police. Norway will increase its
efforts to achieve that goal and is looking forward to
continuing its close cooperation with Afghan
authorities, the EU and other stakeholders. UNAMA
has an important role to play in that arena as well, not
least in assisting the Afghan authorities in speeding up
reforms. Reform within the Ministry of Interior is vital.
In particular, I would like to point out the importance
of improving procedures for appointments and
respecting them.

The Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board
(JCMB), of which Norway is now a member, has a
significant role to play. Norway welcomes its recent
report, which contained a balanced description of
challenges and achievements. We welcome the
proposal to hold a meeting of the JCMB with senior
officials. Further strengthening of headquarters
coordination is required. The Norwegian proposal to
appoint a special envoy is aimed at strengthening the
dialogue between capitals and international
organizations, in support of the Afghan Government
and UNAMA.

Norway also welcomes recent efforts to
strengthen regional cooperation. A political dialogue
and facilitation of economic cooperation within the
region would be helpful in endeavours to stabilize the
situation in Afghanistan.

The Governments of Afghanistan and of Pakistan
should be encouraged to continue their cooperation on
security matters in the border areas. The involvement
of local leaders in this dialogue will, hopefully, prove
to be useful in that respect.

Finally, Norway would like to stress the
importance of making the empowerment of women a
cross-cutting priority, in line with the recommendations
of resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace and
security. Women's rights and women's needs should be
given particular attention in Afghanistan as well.

