Mr. Laram (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by thanking Malaysia for focusing
its presidency of the Council on the suffering of the
millions of children affected by conflict, and for its
efforts as Chair of the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict. I would like to thank the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Malaysia for presiding over today's
debate and participating in it. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General, his Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, the Deputy Executive
Director of UNICEF and the Director of the Facilitation
for Peace and Development organization for their
valuable participation. We align ourselves with the
statements delivered on behalf of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation and the Group of Arab States. We
commend the Council's adoption of resolution 2225
(2015) on children and armed conflict, of which Qatar
was a sponsor.

Despite all relevant Council initiatives and
resolutions, the Secretary-General's recent annual
report on children and armed conflict (S/2015/409)
highlights the fact that 2014 witnessed unprecedented
challenges with regard to the protection of tens of
millions ofchildren who are growing up in areas affected
by conflict and where mass abductions of children have
become a prominent feature. The documentation of
human rights violations during conflicts is important.
However, such documentation will not be as beneficial
as it should be if it is not complemented by the
enforcement of laws and by intensive, comprehensive
and coordinated efforts to prevent future violations and
to achieve accountability.

My country believes in the importance of
education, which can have a positive impact on
children's sound upbringing, free from extremism or
violence. For that reason, during times of crisis, we
have placed the utmost importance on the education of
children, an interest that has been materialized in the
establishment of our Education Above All foundation,
which is Qatar's global initiative to provide educational
opportunities to societies that suffer from poverty and
conflict. The foundation's programmes include an
international initiative, Educate a Child, implemented
in cooperation with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, which aims to provide
high-quality primary-school education to children all
over the world and to empower children in conflict
areas. We actively participated in the Oslo Conference
on Safe Schools: Protecting Education from Attack,
held in May. We also supported the Oslo Declaration on
Safe Schools, out of our belief that education is of the
utmost importance, in accordance with the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, which stipulates that
everyone has the right to education.

We reiterate the call to continue to prevent attacks
against schools and to put an end to their use for
military purposes, in accordance with the provisions
of international humanitarian law, human rights law
and the relevant Council resolutions. We commend
the important role of the Global Coalition to Protect
Education from Attack in its efforts to develop
guidelines for protecting schools and universities
from being used for military purposes during armed
conflicts.

The Secretary-General's annual report highlights
the grave violations against children in various parts of
the world resulting from attacks by warring parties. We
are especially concerned about the violations against
children in the occupied Palestinian Arab territories and
in Syria, which are detailed in the report. Children will
continue to suffer and be victimized if the international
community does not resolve those conflicts. In that
regard, all parties that perpetrate such violations must
be held accountable, so that we can end the loss of
children's lives and provide reparations to victims.

In conclusion, the world has realized that building
safe and stable societies and achieving security and
civility in the world must begin with protecting and
providing children with a sound and safe environment.
Hence, we are facing a test of our ability to honour
and implement the international conventions and
instruments adopted by the international community if
we really want to maintain international security.

