Mr. Ruiz Blanco (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Madam President, we are grateful to your country for
convening this open debate, which focuses our attention
and that of the world on the situation facing journalists
in the practice of their profession in times of serious
crisis on the international scene.

Multiple reports on this issue persistently show
a serious deterioration in the conditions in which
journalists work and the dangers they have faced over
the past few years. I believe that these conditions
signal serious concerns within a much broader context.
They reflect the deterioration in international security
and serve as indicators of the tenuous humanitarian
situation confronting many countries.

For Colombia, the freedoms of thought, opinion
and expression, as well as the ability of all parties and
opposition movements to freely express themselves
without restriction, are not only values recognized
and defended legally, but are fundamental, core
legal principles of our societies and values of our
Governments, which have confronted harsh and violent
wars and forces, including those that have sought
unsuccessfully to silence and destroy Colombian
democracy. Colombia has learned many lessons based
on past events that undermined our democracy. Those
lessons have served as a route to understanding the
fundamental importance of journalism in providing not
only visibility for those conflicts that occur globally
and locally, but also a way to confront and expose those
that threaten the lives of our citizens, institutions and
democratic values.

In the 1980s and early 1990s, while our central
Government was directly fighting the transnational
network of drug trafficking mafias, it was courageous
journalists who dared to denounce the criminal
activities of those mafias and to publish them on the
front page ofnewspapers like El Espectador, a daily that
has suffered, without changing its editorial position,
the devastating consequences of the assassination
of its director, Don Guillermo Cano, and some of its
journalists, including the almost total destruction of
its facilities by a car bomb. UNESCO has recognized
the courage of this exceptional journalist by attaching
his name to the Guillermo Cano World Press Freedom
Prize.

The Government of Colombia promotes and
protects the freedom of the press. As President Juan
Manuel Santos Calderon, a journalist by profession,
has stated on several occasions, journalists in Colombia
can be assured that the Colombian State has all the
means available to promote and protect, come what
may, their freedom and independence and their self-
sacrificing work, without exceptions of any kind. That
is why I want to highlight some measures that we have
developed for specific targeted actions that will have an
impact on the promotion of freedom of expression and
the security ofjournalists.

First, we have established a public policy whereby,
beginning in 2012, we have integrated all national
security agencies, under the coordination ofthe Ministry
of Interior, together with civil society organizations,
to strengthen, guarantee and defend the right to the
freedom of expression in the practice of journalism.
The process has involved more than 20 State agencies,
23 civil society organizations, 8 universities and media
outlets.

Our second measure was to establish a national
protection unit, to which United States Ambassador
Samantha Power referred this morning. The national
protection unit has provided protection to more than
137 journalists who were subject to threats, providing
them with the necessary means for their protection,
including armoured vehicles and escorts for the most
serious cases, on behalf of the Colombian Federation
of Journalists.

Our third measure was to establish, through the
national Attorney General's office, an action plan to
strengthen investigations into serious violations of
journalists' rights, as well as institutional capacities and
the results of judicial inquiries so as to deliver effective
justice in such cases. The work enjoys the support of
the Foundation for Press Freedom and INTERPOL.

I can therefore state with firm conviction that
defending and effectively protecting those who have
chosen to work as journalists in Colombia is the task
of the Government of President Santos Calderon, in
accordance with our Constitution, which in its article 20

"guarantees to all persons the freedom to express
and disseminate their thoughts and opinions, to
receive true and impartial information and to
establish mass media organizations. The mass
media are free and have a social responsibility".

In closing, I should like to quote once again a
journalist who was also our Nobel Prize laureate, Gabriel
Garcia Marquez, who, in speaking ofjournalism, said:
"It can only be digested and humanized by its brutal
confrontation with reality".

