Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): My delegation wishes to congratulate the new
members of the Security Council: Colombia, Germany,
India, Portugal and South Africa. I would also like to
express my thanks to you, Madame President, for
organizing this open debate to address the deteriorating
situation in the occupied Arab territories under the
agenda item, "The situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question". This item is
concerned exclusively with the Israeli-Arab conflict
and the Palestinian question, and not with any other
urgent matter beyond that political or geographical area
and outside the item's historic definition, regardless of
its possible importance.

In this Chamber and beyond its walls, the
unanimous view is that tension in the Middle East is
greater than anywhere else in the world. The situation
is extremely grave and could well have dramatic
consequences for international peace and security. The
achievement of a comprehensive and just peace is an
urgent matter of relevance to all concerned parties in
the region and throughout the world.

But talking of the need for peace is one thing; the
ability to act and achieve it is another. While everyone
reiterates the importance of achieving a peace to which
we all aspire, Israel continues to repudiate it and to
defy the entire international community, including
Powers that are considered to be its closest friends and
allies. This extremely serious situation jeopardizes
peace and security in the region, while the Security
Council is unable to honour its obligations and
commitments or to maintain international peace and
security in accordance with the principles and purposes
of the Charter.

The situation reveals Israel's methodical attempt
to violate rights that runs counter to the basic tenets of
international and international humanitarian law.
Israel's aggressive behaviour and unrestrained
settlement efforts in occupied Arab territories are
condemned by the international community and violate
such international principles and agreements as the
Charter of the United Nations and the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949. They also constitute a violation of
hundreds of Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions. In addition to this are the annexation of
territory, deportations, evictions and the transfer of
settlers to Arab lands. There is also the problem of the
racist wall on Palestinian territory and the Judaization
of Jerusalem. These racist practices are carried out
under the willing gaze of the occupying army and a
deafening international silence denoting more than
complicity.

As we talk of settlements in the Palestinian
territories, it is appropriate for us to remind Council
members that Israeli settlements have been an essential
element of plans by the leaders of the Zionist
movement ever since the partition of Palestine in 1947.
The first Israeli Prime Minister, David Ben-Gurion,
established this movement, told a Zionist meeting that

"after we become a strong force, as a result of the
creation of a state, we shall abolish partition and
expand into the whole of Palestine."

Ben-Gurion said this in 1949. A year later, he wrote to
his son:

"We are going to create an extremely
sophisticated defense force, an elite corps. There
will be no gainsaying that our army will be one of
the best in the world and nobody, my son, will
then prevent us from colonizing the whole of
Palestine. There is no doubt about it."

Moshe Dayan, the Israeli Defense Minister
during the aggression of 1967, who was a witness to
the beginning of settlement activity, stated on 4 April
1969 to Ha'aretz, the Israeli newspaper:

"We came to this country, which was
already populated by Arabs and we are
establishing a Hebrew, that is, a Jewish state here.
Jewish villages were built in the place of Arab
villages. You do not even know the names of
these Arab villages, and I do not blame you
because geography books no longer exist. Not
only do the books not exist, the Arab villages are
not there either. Nahlal arose in the place of
Mahlul; Kibbutz Gvat in the place of Jibta;
Kibbutz Sarid in the place of Hanifieh; and Kefar
Yehushua in the place of Ta] al-Shuman. There is
not a single place built in this country that did not
have a former Arab population."

Today's meeting coincides with the second
anniversary of the Israeli aggression against Gaza,
which cost the lives of over 1,000 people and left
thousands of innocent civilians wounded. This was
very clearly noted in the Goldstone report
(A/HRC/12/48), which unambiguously stated that
Israel deliberately targeted civilians. The report
described Israeli practices during this attack as war
crimes and serious violations of international
humanitarian law, which could be deemed crimes
against humanity.

The perpetrators of these crimes remain
unpunished. This encourages Israel to continue its
unfair and inhumane blockade against the population
of Gaza, defying the will of the international
community, which has called for the lifting of the
blockade. Israel did not stop there. Its response to
international appeals to lift the blockade was the attack
on the freedom flotilla, which was on its way to Gaza
on a purely humanitarian mission. Nine peace activists
were killed in international waters and dozens
wounded.

We recall that the General Assembly recently
adopted two resolutions supporting the calls of the
Human Rights Commission to the United Nations, the
entire United Nations system, including the Security
Council, to implement the proposals in the Goldstone
report.

The Security Council must therefore bear its
responsibilities. It must prosecute the Israeli
perpetrators and punish them for the crimes they have
committed in Gaza if it wishes to establish justice and
to prevent impunity, two objectives of the Organization
itself.

The Israeli occupation of the Syrian Golan is a
part of this bleak picture. Israel still refuses to return
the occupied Syrian Golan to its motherland, Syria. It
still refuses to accept international resolutions,
particularly resolution 497 (1981), which considers the
annexation of the Syrian Golan to be null and void.
Israel continues to terrorize citizens there.

In provocation, escalation and defiance of the
will of the international community, the Knesset
recently adopted a law to organize a general
referendum before any withdrawal from the occupied
Syrian Golan and occupied East Jerusalem. This is the
way in which Israel deals with issues that are not in its
purview to address. It represents a flagrant disregard
for international law and the position and will of the
entire international community regarding the occupied
Syrian Golan and East Jerusalem. Israel must
implement resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), the
principle of land for peace and the Arab Peace
Initiative.

We assert here that this recent Israeli initiative
and all others stand totally rejected and do not alter the
fact that the Golan is an occupied Syrian territory. It
cannot be the subject of negotiations. The return of the
Golan in its entirety to the 4 June 1967 border
constitutes the basis for peace. Once again, we reiterate
that Israel should not consider Syria's demands to be
painful concessions. These are lands and rights that
have been usurped and that must be returned and
restored.

We had hoped to see the Secretary-General and
the Council implement their minimum prerogatives
regarding resolution 497 (1981) by discussing this
provocative Israeli behaviour and taking measures
demonstrating their rejection of this serious Israeli
action regarding the occupied Syrian Golan. We have
made a very detailed presentation to the Security
Council regarding this serious violation of international
law and legitimacy. It is unacceptable and irrational for
us to be asked to bring forward new proof of our desire
for peace while Israel continues to occupy our land, to
attack our people and to threaten peace and security.

The important question here that demands
answers is: How long shall Israel remain above the
law? How long shall Israel enjoy impunity as it pursues
its policy of aggression? How long shall the Security
Council be incapable of taking concrete measures to
deal with the horrors perpetuated by Israel in the
occupied Arab territories? How long shall the silence
regarding Israeli policy, which is pushing the region to
an explosion, be maintained?

