Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): Allow me to begin
by expressing my condolences to the representative of
the Russian Federation for the terrorist attack in Saint

Petersburg yesterday that caused such senseless loss
of life.

I should also like to wish you, Madam President, all
the very best for your month in the hot seat, and thank
you for your kind words about last month.

I would also like to warmly welcome and
congratulate the Joint Special Representative on his
appointment. I thank him for the briefing that he has
just given us.

Darfur is at a crossroads. Down one path lies the
continuation of 14 years of conflict, bloodshed and
impunity. It is a path that has forced 2.6 million people
from their homes. It is a path littered with persistent
violations of international humanitarian law, human
rights violations and abuses, and persistent sexual
and gender-based violence. It is a path that Darfur has
simply been on for too long.

But there is another road to take, and in recent months
we have seen a welcome absence of Violence between
the Government of the Sudan and opposition groups.
We have seen the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) being granted access
to areas that were previously cut. Vital humanitarian
assessments are now under way.

Today, therefore, we need to send a clear message
to the Government of the Sudan: choose the right path.
Choose the path that will improve the lives of the
people of Darfur. Choose the path to sustainable peace.
Thats means tackling the culture of criminality and the
banditry in Darfur. It means ending the abundance of
small arms and light weapons, which are only adding
fuel to the fire. And it means bringing to justice,
domestically and through the International Criminal
Court, all those who have carried out Violence and who
have failed to respect international humanitarian law
and human rights - no matter their allegiance or their
links to the Government.

In truth, Darfur will remain unstable and
unpredictable so long as the root causes of conflict
remain unaddressed. Let us therefore all encourage the
Government of the Sudan to use the current cessation
in the violence to shift its effortrs away from counter-
insurgency and towards building sustainable peace.
They will need the support of the Security Council and
of the international community as a whole as they do so.

The first step has to be political. A political
agreement between the parties to the armed conflict
would not only secure a permanent cessation of
hostilities, it would also be a significant step in
addressing the drivers of intercommunal Violence. We
therefore call upon all parties to the armed conflict to
engage meaningfully with the African Union High-
level Implementation Panel for the peace process in
order to secure a political agreement.

The second step towards a long-term solution is
long-term access to Darfur. In order for UNAMID to
fulfil its mandated duty to protect civilians, the mission
requires unfettered access throughout Darfur - not
just for a few days, or even for a few weeks, but on a
sustained basis. The recent access is welcome, but it will
count for little if it is not maintained. We are concerned
that security agents of the Government of the Sudan
continue to impose unnecessary access restrictions
on UNAMID. That is particularly troubling when
the mission is prevented from accessing vulnerable
populations of internally displaced persons and those
most in need. Let us insist today that UNAMID be
given unrestricted access throughout Darfur, in order
to enable the mission to fulfil its mandate effectively.

That brings me to my final point. As penholder on
UNAMID here in New York, we believe that, ifthere is
to be sustainable peace in Darfur, UNAMID must evolve
with the security situation. The strategic review will be
crucial in that respect, and we welcome the help of the
Government of the Sudan for the Visit by the strategic
review team to Darfur. We are encouraged that they
could Visit all five states, including areas previously
denied, such as Golo and Nertiti in Jebel Marra.

However, ifUNAMID is to be adapted, as we hope,
we all need to be confident that the Government of the
Sudan is willing and able to protect its civilians in areas
where UNAMID's presence is altered. That requires
more than just unfettered and reliable access; it requires
the Government of the Sudan to commit to the principle
of operational flexibility for UNAMID and to commit
to improving its own ability to protect civilians.

In conclusion, until the Government and the parties
to the conflict take those steps, Darfur will remain at
that crossroads. The people of Darfur cannot afford
a wrong turn. They have suffered for too long. It is
incumbent upon us all to ensure that the path chosen is
the right one, and the one that will improve the lives of
civilians and lead to sustainable peace.

