Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to thank our colleague, Ambassador
Gary Francis Quinlan, for his exhaustive quarterly
briefing on the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). I would also like to
thank the Panel ofExperts established in accordance with
paragraph 29 of resolution 1929 (2010), and encourage
it to continue, under the auspices of the Committee, to
participate in various activities concerning the mandate
of the Committee and, above all, pursue the dialogue
that has been established with Member States during
the visits it has made to relevant countries.

The briefing that we have received today shows
that the Committee still reviews all cases referred to it,
and in particular the report of the Panel of Experts (see S/2013/331, annex) concerning events that undermine
the implementation of Security Council resolutions
and regional peace and security. We hope that the
Committee will continue to enjoy the cooperation of
Member States and to benefit from the professionalism
and impartiality of the Panel of Experts in its fulfilment
of the mandate conferred upon it by the Council. We
call on the Committee to continue to provide to Member
States all the information and clarifications they need
to implement the relevant Council resolutions. We note
in this regard the publication of the fact sheet on the
1737 Committee and its Panel of Experts, as well as
the information note describing the implementation by
States of resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007), 1803
(2008) and (1929 (2010).

I congratulate the Panel of Experts on the quality
of its final report and call for further consideration
of that report, and in particular the recommendations
contained therein, in order to achieve agreement on
their implementation.

In the summary of its 22 May 2013 report
(GOV/2013/27), the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) indicates that, despite the enhanced
dialogue with the Islamic Republic of Iran that began
in January 2012, it has not been possible to reach
agreement on the structured approach document so as
to resolve pending issues regarding possible military
dimensions of the Iranian nuclear programme. We hope
that, in the light of the most recent developments in the
Islamic Republic of Iran, that country and the IAEA
will soon reach an agreement to begin in-depth work
on these questions. As the only institution responsible
for guarantees, the IAEA must receive full cooperation
in order to make concrete progress on the pending
questions.

We continue to believe in the use of dialogue and
negotiations for the peaceful resolution of conflicts,
whatever their nature, complexity or sensitivity. On
that basis, we welcome the ongoing talks between
Iran and the five permanent members of the Security
Council and Germany, in the hope that, as soon as
dialogue begins, it will allow for progress to be made
towards a solution that is acceptable to the parties. It
is of crucial importance to prevent any weakening of
the non-proliferation regime and to work to ensure that
all States fulfil their obligations under the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) in
terms of guarantees. The strength and impact of the
NPT and the pursuit of the strategic objective of nuclear
disarmament remain dependent on the respect of all
States for the obligations arising from that foundational
instrument.

My country continues to support the global
objective of nuclear disarmamen and to recognize the
right of all States to use nuclear energy for exclusively
peaceful ends. The non-proliferation regime is based on
a delicate balance between States' rights and obligations
that must be protected, preserved and strengthened
through full respect for those provisions.

