Ms. Amos: Since my first briefing to the Council
on Syria some three years ago (see S/PV.6790), we
have sat in this Chamber many times and borne
witness to the spiraling violence and growing despair
in the country. Each time, I speak of atrocity after
atrocity, violation after violation, misery after misery.
And despite the Council's unity on the appalling
humanitarian consequences of the conflict and three
resolutions demanding protection for civilians and full
humanitarian access, the Government and armed and
terrorist groups continue to kill, maim, rape, torture
and take Syria to new lows that seemed unimaginable
a few years ago.

People have become numb to figures that should,
every day, shock our collective conscience and spur
urgent action. More than 220,000 people have been
killed and over 1 million injured. More than 7.6 million
people are displaced within Syria and nearly 4 million
have sought refuge in neighbouring countries. People
risk their lives if they stay and some when they leave,
as we have seen with those who have drowned in the
Mediterranean.

We need the numbness to the senseless Violence
and the apparent apathy to end. Violence has continued
to escalate in a number of areas of the country. In the
past weeks alone, well over 100,000 people have been
displaced by fighting in Idlib - many of them for the
second time. More than 1,500 people have been injured,
but none of the three hospitals that were operating less
than a month ago is functioning. There is nowhere for
those seeking medical help to go.

And despite the Council's concerted action on the
removal and destruction of chemical weapons, there
are fresh allegations that chemical weapons have been
used again in Idlib, killing and injuring civilians.
Civilians in Aleppo also continue to be subjected to
indiscriminate fire from the air and from underground,
with barrel bombs dropped on opposition-controlled
parts of Aleppo city and tunnel bombs exploding under
Government-controlled districts. And it is civilians
who are paying the heaviest price.

The Council has been briefed on the situation in
Yarmouk, once a symbol of Syrian hospitality with
refugees and host communities living side by side.
Today, people have reached new levels of despair.
Hundreds of thousands of people elsewhere in the
country also remain besieged. Theirs is a daily struggle
for survival as they remain trapped and out of our
reach, subjected to collective punishment. Full and
unimpeded humanitarian access remains a priority.

Humanitarian workers, often at great risk to
themselves, are responding as best they can throughout
the country including through cross border operations.
On 26 March, a team of United Nations humanitarian
workers and Syrian Arab Red Crescent volunteers
delivering humanitarian supplies in Ar-Rastan was
briefly detained by a non-State armed group. The
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant has continued to
inhibit the delivery of aid, and this month has even
prevented polio vaccines from reaching hundreds of
thousands of children under five years old.

The Government has finally approved a number
of interagency convoys and critical food and education
assessments, but there continue to be restrictions in aid
delivery that limit our capacity to deliver. Last month,
I called on the Council to remind Government security
forces that all aid - particularly medical and surgical
supplies - must be allowed on convoys. Despite
these calls and the approval of civilian authorities,
Government security forces again removed all surgical
supplies from the trucks destined for Ar-Rastan in
Homs governorate, depriving people of urgently needed
treatments.

In resolution 2139 (2014), the Council expressed its
intent to take further steps in the case ofnon-compliance
with the resolution. Fourteen months later, there
continues to be a shocking lack of respect for the most
basic rules of international humanitarian law and a
total absence of accountability. The failure to stop the
violence has undermined the credibility of the Council
and eroded confidence in the international community
to take its responsibilities seriously. Billions of dollars
have been pledged for humanitarian assistance, which
we welcome, but the people of Syria, rightly, want
more. They want an end to the war that has ravaged
their country and destroyed lives and livelihoods.

I am appealing to the Council to look seriously at
all the options at its disposal that could help to bring
an end to the violence in Syria, stop the violations
of international law, protect civilians and ensure
humanitarian access. Some are practically difficult and
others contentious but, given the conditions ordinary
Syrians have to face, I ask the Council to consider the
following.

First, it should demand that attacks on education
and health facilities cease and that schools and hospitals
become zones of peace. This is in line with resolution
2139 (2014), in paragraph 10 of which the Council

"demands that all parties demilitarize medical
facilities, schools and other civilian facilities and
avoid establishing military positions in populated
areas and desist from attacks directed against
civilian objects".

Secondly, the Security Council should give a
specific mandate to the International Independent
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic,
looking specifically at the situation in besieged
communities and the militarization and responsibility
for attacks on medical and educational facilities. This
should be done through the conduct of a fact-finding
mission.

Thirdly, the Council should mandate the negotiation
of humanitarian pauses and days of tranquillity.

Fourthly, it should send perpetrators a clear
message that their crimes will not go unpunished and
demonstrate to the Syrian people that there will be
justice for the crimes committed against them. The
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
has called for the situation in Syria to be referred to the
International Criminal Court.

Fifthly, it should enforce an arms embargo and
targeted sanctions for violations of international
humanitarian law and non-respect of humanitarian
imperatives.

The Council has paid great attention to the
humanitarian situation in Syria, but try as we may there
is no humanitarian solution. The only solution is through
political dialogue that reduces and ultimately ends the
Violence. Time is, however, running out for Syria and
for the neighbouring countries that have taken on such a
heavy burden on behalf of the international community.
This is a crisis with potential global repercussions. I
ask the Council to match its scale with an equally bold
and courageous response.

