Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank our two
briefers today, Mark Lowcock and Susannah Sirkin.

I think we all feel that it is deeply frustrating that
we come here month after month, but it is better that we
come than we do not come. However harrowing it is, it
is better that we hear what is happening in Idlib, than
we do not hear what is happening there, and however
difficult it is, it is better that than we let denial take
hold. Indeed, we would like to act, but the responsibility
for the fact that we do not act lies with just three States
Members of the United Nations, one of them a member
of the permanent five of the Security Council. What
is happening in Idlib makes a mockery of permanent-
five responsibilities.

Ahead of Astana, on 1 to 2 August, and with
last week's political session cancelled, there is an
opportunity today to get at the facts and ensure that
crimes do not go unrecorded. We have heard from the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) and from Physicians for Human Rights
about carnage on the ground, communities turned to
rubble, children saving children and then dying in the
attempt - all breaches of international humanitarian
law - and High Commissioner for Human Rights
Bachelet has made clear that those criminally
responsible will be held accountable.

The Syrian and Russian units bombing Idlib ought
to pause at that prospect. It might not come today, but
justice will come. IfI may borrow a very famous phrase
and use it in a different context, the arc of the moral
universe may be long, but it bends towards justice. The
units taking part in military action against hospitals
and medical facilities and personnel need to heed
that warning.

I have the number of questions today. I am used
to the questions not being answered, but I am going
to keep on asking them, because I think they go to the
heart of what is happening. I would like to know what
is being done by the protagonists, Syria and Russia,
to protect civilians on the ground, notably, children. I
would like to know how they know or claim to know
where the terrorists are, given that we heard from
OCHA that there are 100 civilians for every terrorist
fighter. And I would like to know how their forces go
about distinguishing between terrorists and civilians,
given the overwhelming number of civilians.

I would also like to know what part of international
humanitarian law they believe allows terrorists to
be attacked with no regard to those civilians. I have
read all the Geneva Conventions at the weekend and
I cannot find a single line in the Conventions or the
Protocol Additional thereto - by the way, Syria has
not ratified the Additional Protocol - that justifies
attacking civilians on the scale we are seeing in
Idlib to get at terrorists. I would like to know in
particular - you know, Mr. President, we had a
briefing from a Russian military general at the other
day (see S/PV.8561) - what the Russian and Syrian
military doctrines and rules of engagement have to say
about international humanitarian law and the principles
of proportionality, distinction and neutrality in respect
of Idlib. I would simply like to know what the Russian
and Syrian rules of engagement are. I would very happy
to have the Russian general back if he can answer
those questions.

Iwould also like to know what is Russia's and Syria's
explanation as to why the deconfliction mechanism is
not working and why hospitals and facilities that have
given their coordinates are being hit. And I would
like to know how the Syrian authorities can claim that
these hospitals and facilities do not exist or have been
decommissioned when the United Nations, Physicians
for Human Rights and others have seen them and are
in touch with their doctors. One has to ask, who is
more likely to be believed, the United Nations or the
protagonists on the ground? I hope that we can actually
get some concrete answers today.

For the rest, I wanted to join those who so far
have called for an investigation into United Nations
de-conflicted sites. It is the utmost importance to
establish clearly the circumstances of the attacks
through a transparent and credible investigation. I
welcome what the Under-Secretary-General said about
the United Nations being able to give its information
to the two United Nations mechanisms already in
existence. I think that is very important.

I should also like to touch on the letter from
the Syrian Permanent Representative dated 16 July
(S/2019/572). Under international humanitarian law, just
because a hospital or clinic has been "decommissioned"
or "ransacked" does not mean it can be attacked with
impunity. I have said before that if, and it is a big if,
a hospital is being used as a military target, then the
Geneva Conventions, the ones that the Syrians have
ratified, require that warnings be given. No warnings
are being given. The Syrian Permanent Representative's
letter admits to attacks on hospitals. It is hard to deny
that that is a war crime and deserves the utmost deep
investigation, so that those units responsible, those
military commanders responsible and the politicians
who give them their instructions can be brought
to justice.

A couple more words ifI may. I agree with those
speakers who are concerned about Rukban. We appeal
to the authorities to let the convoys in. We also share
those sentiments about the political process. There
needs to be a credible and sustainable political process.
The constitutional committee is but one step; many
more steps need to be taken, and reconstruction
assistance from ourselves and our partners will not be
available in the absence of a credible political process.

And in the absence of reconstruction, Syria cannot be
rehabilitated into the international community; I think
that is an important point.

Lastly, ifI may, the Charter requires us to act to
save future generations from the scourge of war. What
part of that is not understood by Syria and Russia in
respect of Idlib today?

