President Kibaki: I should like at the outset to
welcome all of you to Nairobi. You are welcome;
please make yourselves at home, and, perhaps most
importantly, although we assume that you are very
busy people, do not rush home after this meeting. Take
a little time at least to see a little bit of Kenya and to
see a little bit outside of Nairobi. You will be very
welcome and warmly received in those places. We
hope that you will stay.

Secondly, it is very important for this very
important institution to meet in a Member country. You
chose to meet here in Nairobi, which is suitable
because we have a United Nations presence here - the
Secretariat and so on - and for that reason we very
warmly welcome you.

Thirdly, I hope that the meeting will be
successful. I hope also that you will be able to
complete work on the agenda you have set yourselves,
and that we will arrive at positive conclusions, because
none of the problems we face, issues which affect
Member countries, is insurmountable.

We in this country want to join in the
consideration of the matters before the Council. Allow
me, therefore, to make a brief statement.

I warmly welcome the Security Council to Kenya
for this meeting of the Council, which is dedicated to
questions of peace and security in the Sudan and in
Somalia. The issues the Council is going to discuss are
of crucial significance to Kenya and to the region. I am
particularly encouraged that the Council has chosen to
meet here in Nairobi.

That decision, by itself, has sent out strong
signals as to the importance that the Council attaches
to peace and security in the Horn of Africa. The
conflicts in the Sudan and Somalia have adversely
affected Kenya, which has hosted many refugees from
the two countries. This has been compounded by the
problem of the illegal movement of illicit firearms,
which has heightened insecurity in our towns and
cities, as well as in the countryside.

Over the last decade, the Government has been
involved in the peace processes both for the Sudan and
for Somalia. It has been a rugged road for all of us, but
today we are full of hope. For the Sudan, in spite of the
sad situation in the Darfur region, the Naivasha peace
process is on course, and we remain hopeful that,
within the coming months, the final peace agreement
will be signed here in Kenya. We appeal to the
international community not to turn their backs on the
people of the Sudan at this crucial time. The
international community should remain seized of the
process to the very end. That is the only way to
demonstrate our commitment to the realization of
enduring peace for the people of the Sudan.

With regard to Somalia, the Transitional Federal
Government is now in place. Members of the Somali
Parliament have been elected, and the President was
sworn in on 14 October 2004. A Prime Minister has
also been appointed.

The road to lasting peace in Somalia has been
mapped out, but we have not reached our
destination - the establishment of a fully functional
government in Somalia. What Kenya expects today
from the Security Council is for it to collectively rally
behind the Somali Government and help it to relocate
to Somalia.
The presence of the Somali Government in
Mogadishu will strengthen and consolidate the
reconciliation process that is still going on in that
country. I appeal to the international community to
continue to work tirelessly to assist the people of
Somalia achieve lasting peace. The international
community should continue to work closely with the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and the African Union to ensure that the peace
negotiations in Naivasha are sustained. In the case of
Somalia, the support of the international community is
needed now more than ever before.

The newly elected Somali Government requires
both diplomatic and material support to start the
process of peace-building and reconstruction in that
country.

It must be appreciated that the establishment of a
Government in Somalia is not only good for the people
of Somalia, but also good for us in the region and for
the entire world. There is no denying that, without a
central authority, Somalia poses a risk to its
neighbours. There is no way of monitoring the
movement of the illicit arms that have infiltrated our
borders and are the cause of the rise in the incidence of
violent crimes in our cities.

More important, however, Somalia, without a
Government, is likely to be a haven for dangerous
criminals with terrorist intentions. It is in the interest
of global peace that the new Somali Government be
helped to restore law and order in that country. Since it
is within the Council's means, we hope that Somalia
will be assisted to move quickly to peace.

