Mr. Maquieira (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): The
Security Council has been convened to analyse the
problem of the construction of the separation wall by
the Israelis in Palestinian territory. This is part and
parcel of the broader situation in the Middle East,
which recently began a new stage with the road map,
which seemed to be a means for moving towards peace
and reconciliation in the region. However, the
implementation of the road map seems to have
encountered a crisis; it is made very difficult because
of the extrajudicial killings, the destruction of homes,
the constant arbitrary restrictions on, and displacement
of, the Palestinian population and the recent building of
new settlements in territories occupied by Israel.

We have condemned, and continued to condemn,
terrorist bomb attacks against Israeli civilians, but
nothing can justify the use of excessive force or the
imposition of conditions that would seriously hinder
the creation of a Palestinian State.

With regard to the matters before us, we would
like to see a process that would bring about the
minimal conditions for dialogue between the parties,
with the cessation of terrorism and violence, a halt to
the building of settlements in the occupied territories
and the destruction of the separation wall that is being
built in Palestinian territory, which divides villages and
towns.

We strongly condemn the construction of this
security wall - or separation wall. It is an
insurmountable obstacle to finding a just and lasting
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian problem. It not only
flies in the face of what was decided in the road map
and in Security Council resolutions, but also flouts the
basic principles of international law. It makes it
impossible to establish a Palestinian State and throws
into serious doubt the seriousness of the negotiation
process and any work to bring both States to a life, side
by side, within secure and recognized borders.

The Chilean delegation considers that the
Security Council must express its views on the
situation and make a strong appeal, through a
resolution, for the cessation of the building of the
separation wall and the dismantling of what has been
built thus far. Accordingly, Chile supports the text
before us.

