Mr. Feltman: This past Wednesday marked two
months since the horrific crash of MH-17, when 298
people died in the midst of a conflict that they had
nothing to do with. That day remains fresh in our
minds. Today, in line with resolution 2166 (2014), I
will update the Council on developments related to the
investigation of the crash since Assistant Secretary-
General Fernandez-Taranco last briefed the Council on
this issue, on 18 August.

On behalf of the Secretary-General, let me begin by
recognizing the pivotal role played by the Netherlands
in leading the investigation. Australia, France,
Germany, Indonesia, Italy, Malaysia, the Russian
Federation, Ukraine, the United Kingdom, the United
States, the International Civil Aviation Organization
(ICAO) and the European Aviation Safety Agency are
also contributing substantially to the investigation.
As ICAO Council President Olumuyiwa Benard Aliu
stated on 9 September, we are

"encouraged to see that the MH-l7 investigation

is proceeding with the productive collaboration of

accredited international representatives".

On 9 September, the Dutch Safety Board
submitted its preliminary report on the MH-l7 accident
investigation to the International Civil Aviation
Organization. The United Nations is confident
that the Dutch-led international investigation has
been conducted in accordance with annex 13 to the
Convention on International Civil Aviation, on Aircraft
Accident and Incident Investigation.

The report contains the first factual findings
based on various sources, including the cockpit voice
recorder and the flight data recorder, air traffic control
data, and radar and satellite images. While the report is
preliminary, it does assert that MH-17 broke apart over
Ukraine due to penetration by a large number of "high-
energy objects from outside of the aircraft". The report
notes that the aircraft was in "airworthy condition",
with no indication that the plane had any technical or
operational issues. The crew was properly licensed and
no human error had been reported. Finally, no distress
messages had been received.

As for the repatriation of the victims, 225 have
now been identified and the process of identifying
further remains is still ongoing. We understand that
the international investigators will again endeavour
to access the crash site, both for repatriation of any
further remains and to continue gathering physical
evidence toward the completion of the technical report.
While the ceasefire in south-eastern Ukraine is largely
holding thus far, contributing to a marked de-escalation
on the ground, the conditions are still not conducive
for investigators to have full and unfettered access to
the site.

The Secretary-General once again calls on all those
with influence on the situation to exert it immediately,
so as to create a propitious security environment for
investigators. Winter will soon arrive in Ukraine, at
which time it will become almost impossible to retrieve
further remains and to collect further evidence. As
stated in the news release of 9 September,

"ICAO will continue to provide its full support

to the Netherlands, in conjunction with its

international team, while we await the conclusions
and recommendations which will eventually be
contained in the Final Report".

In accordance with paragraph 3.1 of annex 13 to
the Convention on International Civil Aviation, and as
clearly indicated in the preliminary report of the Dutch
Safety Board, the sole objective of this investigation
into the crash of MH-17 is the "prevention of similar
accidents and incidents". What could underscore
the need for such prevention more than the fact that,
according to radar data, three other commercial
aircrafts were in the same control area as MH-17 when
it was hit?

On 29 July, ICAO convened a special Task Force
on Risks to Civil Aviation arising from Conflict
Zones - TF RCZ - which has met twice to date. The
TF RCZ will be meeting again in December for its
next round of talks. One of the tasks recommended by
the TF RCZ is to "reach out to other United Nations
bodies to identify means to collect information on risk
assessments". ICAO will also be convening a high-level
safety conference with all of its 191 member States in
February 2015.

Let us honour the victims and console their families
by never letting something like this happen again.

