Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): First,
merci beaucoup for the very nice, warm and kind
statement that you made about me, Mr. President. It
has been a great honour for me to represent the United
States in the United Nations and in the Council. I thank
you all, fellow members, for the work that we have
done together, and I thank you also for the friendship,
for the spirit and for the relationship that we have
developed and through which we have worked in
dealing with the many challenges that we have faced in
the course of my service here. I shall miss you all, and
I wish you all the best as the Council continues to deal
with many challenges that affect the future of the
world. I shall remember fondly my service here. I
believe that the United States needs the United Nations
and the United Nations needs an active participant in
the United States. So, thank you again, Sir, for your
kind remarks and your personal leadership, as well as
for the work that you and I have done together.

I would like also to thank my colleagues for
unanimously supporting our resolution on Somalia
today. I take pride in the role that the United States has
played in helping move the issue of Somalia to the
forefront of the Council's attention.

Somalia is one of the most complex challenges
faced by the international community. One of the
symptoms of its instability - the scourge of piracy -
was debated earlier this week in this building as 24
countries met to agree on a mechanism to coordinate
international efforts to address this problem. We cannot
afford, however, to address Somalia only through the
lens of piracy. We need a comprehensive approach that
addresses the root causes of instability in Somalia,
which include political, economic, humanitarian and
security issues.
09-21124

The resolution adopted today attempts to address
those root causes by making a clear commitment that
the Security Council will assume its responsibilities
with regard to Somalia. The resolution also provides
for the United Nations to back up this commitment
with concrete logistical support for the forces of the
African Union. We intend this support for the African
Union Mission in Somalia to allow it to continue to
provide security for key humanitarian infrastructure in
Mogadishu until 1 June, by which date the Council will
make a decision on movement towards a United
Nations peacekeeping force.

As we shoulder our responsibility, this resolution
makes clear that the ultimate responsibility for national
reconciliation and stabilization lies with the Somalis
themselves. The United States strongly supports the
political process, led by Mr. Ahmedou Ould-Abdallah,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
calls on all Somali stakeholders to renounce violence
and engage constructively in the formation of a unity
government in the interest of establishing lasting
peace, stability and effective governance in Somalia.
We also attach great importance to the establishment,
under the terms of the Djibouti peace agreement, of
joint Somali security forces, who ultimately will take
responsibility for ensuring security in the country.

Finally, I thank you once again, Mr. President, for
your courtesy and for all the work that you have done
and we that we have all done together. I wish you all
the best. Au revoir.

