Mr. Van Dunem "Mbinda" (Angola): I will speak on
behalf of my Deputy Minister. Since he has gone back
home, he has asked me to speak on his behalf.

I would like to start by congratulating you, Mr.
President, on your assumption of this month's presidency
of this prestigious body and, at the same time, congratulate
your predecessor on his wise and dynamic performance
during his mandate.

As we meet today, some areas of our continent are
going through a particularly difficult and perplexing period.
New hostilities have erupted within some nations. If left
unsettled, they may create new dangers for peace and
regional stability. Fortunately, Africa has also been
registering significant advances that may contribute
mightily to peaceful existence among our nations.

The recent collapse of the regime that for many
decades supported the destabilization of some Central
African nations has helped mitigate regional tensions and
will certainly become an important factor for peace, as
well as for social and political stability, in the continent.
The Angolan peace process will benefit from this new,
improved environment.

We are convinced that this new regional context will
ensure what this Council has repeatedly demanded from
Angola's neighbours in its resolutions - namely, respect
for its sovereignty and territorial integrity and non-
interference in its domestic affairs, as crucial factors for
the re-establishment of peace.

After a long and difficult path, the Lusaka Protocol
has finally entered its final stage. Although much still
remains to be done, its positive effects are now so clearly
apparent that we feel confident about the future.

As members of the Council will recall, the
Government of Unity and National Reconciliation was
sworn in and the Parliament has been completed. For the
first time since the 1992 general elections, both are now
working normally. Their inauguration, even before
UNITA fully complied with its obligations, should be
seen as a demonstration of flexibility, goodwill and
transparency, with a view to promoting mutual
confidence.

Crucial as it may be, however, the swearing in of the
new Government and of the Parliament has not fulfilled
all the requirements for the re-establishment of peace. Its
impact on the peace process may be affected if all
pending military and political matters are not resolved.

We regret to say that these pending issues have not
yet been implemented due to the lack of cooperation from
UNITA, in spite of its repeated promises.

UNITA continues to hold significant amounts of
weapons and forces that were never reported to the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III). Not long ago, many of them were providing support
to the regime in the former Republic of Zaire.
Approximately 2,000 of them are still in Pointe Noire in
the Republic of the Congo.

 

All these forces must be disarmed, confined to
quarters and demobilized as soon as possible. They should
receive the same treatment accorded to UNITA troops
currently in the assembly areas.

The military data regarding troops and weaponry in
the UNITA leader's personal guard, estimated at 4,000
men, has not yet been provided and remains to be
dismantled, although the Parliament has already granted
him special status with privileges and immunity as the
Leader of the Largest Opposition Party.
On the other hand, the country's north-eastern areas
have in recent times seen a massive influx of people
coming from the former Republic of Zaire. They include
former soldiers loyal to the former Zaire regime and
members of the former Rwandese Hutu militia. The
Government felt compelled to take appropriate measures to
keep the country's borders from being violated. The
Government is working in collaboration with the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to
resolve this problem.

The extension of the central State administration,
jointly programmed and scheduled with UNITA, is facing
obstacles. So far, the authority of the State has been
extended to only 10 of the 145 places agreed upon.
Obstacles and the deliberate orchestration of incidents
during the process of the extension of the State
administration raise questions about the seriousness of
UNITA's leadership. This Council must therefore, by all
means possible, keep pressuring UNITA to comply fully
with its obligations. The lack of compliance and delays in
the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol do not serve the
cause of peace and democracy in Angola. They prevent the
effective functioning of the State institutions, of which
UNITA is also an integral part, and also postpone UNIT A's
legalization as a political party.

It is important to establish deadlines for the
implementation of the extension of the State administration
programme. The permanent cooperation of UNITA is
essential as is the supervision of the United Nations.

UNITA must realize that its affirmation as a political
force in the Angolan political context does not depend upon
its continuing to occupy parts of the territory or holding on
to its military forces. Rather, it is dependent upon the
establishment of the legal political framework set forth in
the Lusaka Protocol.

The flexibility that the Government has demonstrated
since the beginning of the implementation of the peace
accords should serve as an incentive for UNITA to trust
in the Government's good faith and see it as an honest
partner.

In spite of these difficulties, we look forward to a
successful conclusion of the peace process. Angolans do
not wish to waste the fruits of this immense effort and the
many sacrifices of all those involved in the restoration of
peace and in the creation of a new foundation for our
development.

This Council and the international community must
be vigilant in order to thwart the intentions of all those
who want to keep Angola's future hostage to the interests
of individuals or groups.

Our peace is still fragile, but its positive effects on
the people and the whole nation of Angola are
innumerable.

Indeed, the widespread climate of fear and insecurity
has been mitigated. In the economic area, inflation has
been declining, important infrastructure is being rebuilt
and demining efforts now allow the rehabilitation of roads
and bridges. People returning to their areas of origin have
started food production and many former combatants have
been demobilized and reintegrated into civilian life. With
the consolidation of the peace process, further
accomplishments will be even more significant.

Today's meeting sets a new stage for the United
Nations presence in Angola and for the peace process
itself. The replacement of UNAVEM. III by the United
Nations Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA) is not a
mere technical formality. It means that the basic
foundations for a future of lasting peace and democracy
in Angola have been laid down. However, taking into
account that the military items of the peace process are
still pending, we reiterate our proposal to defer
temporarily the withdrawal of the Blue Helmets until the
fundamental tasks, especially the military one, are
completed and the full demilitarization of UNITA is
accomplished.

My Government welcomes the formation of
MONUA and believes that its structure and mandate, as
established by the Secretary-General's report, are fully
compatible with the future role of the United Nations in
Angola. We pledge our full cooperation and support, as
we did to UNAVEM.

 

Allow me to take this opportunity to express once
again the gratitude of the people and the Government of
Angola to all those Governments and Blue Helmets who
served UNAVEM, some of whom lost their lives or were
disabled as they fulfilled their peace mission. This was the
case recently with troops from Brazil and Zimbabwe. We
solemnly pay them our homage here.

Allow me also to reiterate, on behalf of my
Government, our appreciation to the Secretary-General, Mr.
Kofi Annan, for his commitment to Angola, to his Special
Representative, Maitre Blondin Beye, and to the members
of the troika of observers: Portugal, Russia and the United
States.

We also wish to thank the humanitarian agencies and
Governments that so generously helped to mitigate the
difficulties of our people most affected by the war. Their
continued support is crucial to the success of the
demobilization and reintegration of the approximately
10,000 former military personnel into civilian life.

The draft resolution to be adopted today has the
support of my Government, although we would prefer some
improvements in its contents. We hope that it will serve as
a new incentive for the consolidation of peace in my
country.

