Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank Under-
Secretary-General Lowcock for his very detailed
briefing. Iwould also like to thank Special Representative
Gamba for her briefing. It was particularly useful to be
reminded of the horrific suffering of Syrian children
throughout the conflict.

We should all remember that one of the sparks
that lit the flame of this conflict was the arrest and
detention by Syrian Mukhabarat of schoolchildren
from Dar'a simply for posting anti-regime graffiti on
a school wall. We should all remember the horrific
recruitment and enslavement of children by Da'esh, and
we should all remember the appallingly high number
of children killed and maimed by indiscriminate aerial
bombardment, whether in Aleppo, eastern Ghouta or
other areas, by the Syrian regime and its allies.

I was particularly struck by Ms. Gamba's conclusion
that most of the killing and maiming of children has
been attributed to the Syrian Government and pro-
Government forces. I would strongly echo her call on
the parties for three things: to respect international
humanitarian law, to comply with obligations under
the Convention on the Rights of the Child and its
Optional Protocol and to allow access for civilian child
protection actors to children deprived of liberty for their
association with armed groups. Given the presence of
the representative of the Syrian Government in this
Chamber today, I would hope that in his statement he
could commit his Government to fulfilling those three
requests that she made.

Wejoin the United States and others in condemning
the appalling terrorists attack claimed by Da'esh in
Al-Suwayda province on 25 July, which killed many
innocent civilians. Such callous disregard for human
life is horrifying. Our ministers have expressed
their condolences to the families of the victims and
reaffirmed our commitment to peace in Syria and
Da'esh's lasting defeat.

The Kuwaiti Ambassador has already reminded us
that in February, all Council members voted in favour of
resolution 2401 (2018) whereby we demanded a cessation
of hostilities and unimpeded humanitarian access. It is
to our deep regret that the Syrian authorities have made
no effort to abide by the terms of that resolution or,
indeed, those of the de-escalation agreement reached
between Russia and the United States last year.

We, like others, are deeply concerned about the
Russian-backed offensive by the Al-Assad regime into
the de-escalation area in south-west Syria. Over the
past month, that offensive has had a devastating impact
on civilians living in the area, with more than a quarter
of a million civilians displaced. UNICEF has reported
that approximately half of all those who have fled the
recent wave of violence are children.

People fleeing fighting must have freedom of
movement to be able to choose where they go and be
allowed to return home once it is safe to do so so that
they can reclaim their property and rebuild their lives.
They must be protected against regime reprisals and
have access to essential supplies and basic services.
We expect the regime and Russia to ensure the safety
and security of all those in southern Syria, including
the safety of humanitarian actors and those active in
civil society.

Like the representatives of Peru, the Netherlands
and others countries who spoke today, we are extremely
concerned about the situation in Idlib, where, as we
heard from Staffan de Mistura the other day, close
to 3 million civilians are in fear of attacks by the
regime and its backers, and more than 50 per cent of
the population have been displaced from their homes,
in some cases multiple times. The dire humanitarian
situation will continue unless real, unhindered
and sustained humanitarian access is allowed. We
urge Russia and pro-regime forces to comply with
de-escalation and remove all obstacles to the delivery
of humanitarian aid.

We are particularly concerned about the lack
of humanitarian access to areas that have recently
come under regime control. We urge Russia to use its
influence to secure rapid and unhindered access to those
areas for humanitarian agencies. Such access needs to
be sustained rather than one-off token convoys. The
delivery of aid also needs to be transparent and subject
to appropriate accountability and oversight.

Cross-border aid represents a significant proportion
of all United Nations humanitarian deliveries. It is
essential that humanitarian assistance be able to reach
people throughout Syria through the most direct routes.
In that regard. I would like to echo the call made by
the representative of France for Russia and Syria to
provide the United Nations with the necessary security
assurances to continue using the Al-Ramtha crossing
from Jordan. This Council has mandated the United
Nations to use the crossing. Resolution 2393 (2017)
remains in force and is a key element to ensuring that
aid is delivered to those in need.

In concluding, let me say that it is clear from
today's briefing that there are several ways in which
the Syrian authorities and their allies could improve the
humanitarian situation in the country. On that basis, I
would like to ask the Syrian authorities and Russia to
do three concrete things: first, ensure safe, immediate,
unimpeded and sustained access to Quneitra for the
United Nations and its humanitarian partners; secondly,
ensure safe, immediate, unimpeded and sustained access
for the United Nations and its partners to priority areas
that have recently changed control, including Douma
and the towns of eastern Ghouta, southern Damascus
and northern, rural Horns; and thirdly and finally, give
the Council assurances - and I hope that we might hear
such assurances from the Syrian representative later in
this meeting - that humanitarian workers in areas that
have recently changed control will be protected and
that humanitarian services for the populations in those
areas will continue.

