Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Let me start by expressing
our deep sympathy to China for the tragic loss of lives
caused by the earthquake today.

Brazil welcomes the holding of this open debate
on the situation in the Middle East. I would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his
briefing and Ambassadors Riyad Mansour and Gabriela
Shalev for their contributions.

The situation in the region is volatile again, as
confrontations between Israeli security forces and
Palestinian protesters, including at religious sites in
Jerusalem, have left Palestinians dead and several
wounded. Rockets have again been fired, bombs
dropped and incursions resumed. This is all very
unfortunate and worrisome. Unfortunately, the
deterioration in the security situation in the occupied
territories is not surprising. We have all long been
saying that the status quo is unsustainable. Violence is
the visible expression of the lack of hope in View of the
absence of a real peace process. We must make no
mistake - political and security conditions are likely
to deteriorate further if no serious negotiations are
initiated very soon. An apparent sense of security
created in Israel by military and physical containment
is precisely that - only apparent. And even if it proved
effective for Israel, it would not be so for other
countries which, directly or indirectly, suffer the
consequences of this open wound in the Middle East.

An independent, democratic and viable
Palestinian State, living side by side with Israel in
peace and security within internationally recognized
borders, remains the only solution to the Arab-Israeli
conflict. We therefore welcome the efforts of the
United States and others to restart the peace process
through the so-called proximity talks. They may help
to overcome the current paralysis if they are a credible
means to a genuine and comprehensive settlement. We
do not need talks about talks, with no immediate effect,
howsoever modest, on the reality of the occupied
territories. In this context, we welcome the timeline set
by the Palestinian Authority and endorsed by the
Quartet in its latest declaration on the establishment of
a Palestinian State.

The continuation of Israeli policies that prejudge
the result of negotiations and change the demographics
of the West Bank and East Jerusalem make it more
difficult for negotiations to be resumed. We are very
concerned about reports of new Israeli regulations that
give the military apparently sweeping powers to detain,
imprison and deport Palestinians in the West Bank. It is
not clear why such measures have been taken at this
time and for what practical purpose. There is no doubt,
however, that they may become a major source of
instability and violence. Palestinians should also do
their part. Overcoming their divisions, keeping
extremists in check, including in Gaza, and enhancing
democratic governance is essential.

While peace is in the hands of the parties
themselves, the international community must sustain
its involvement throughout the future peace process.
This was one of the main considerations that led
President Lula to visit the region recently. In all his
encounters in Israel, Palestine and Jordan, he pressed
for serious, action-oriented negotiations. Brazil
reiterates its support for the holding of a
comprehensive international conference on the Middle
East once conditions are appropriate. Further
engagement by relevant players from outside the
region will prove beneficial. The international
community, including the United Nations, must also
continue to support the Palestinian Authority's State-
building agenda. As the Secretary-General indicated in
his most recent briefing to the Council on 24 March on
this issue, Palestinian statehood must become an
emerging reality. We are encouraged by the latest
positive report of the World Bank on the progress made
by the Palestinian Authority in this regard.

Today, the Council is holding yet another open
debate in which delegations will regret the
humanitarian situation in Gaza, with little practical
effect on the ground. Access to basic goods and
services remains vastly insufficient. The Israeli
decision to allow further exports of Palestinian goods
and the entry of building materials, and to approve
some United Nations reconstruction projects, should be
welcomed. However, it barely scratches the surface of
the problem. Israel should act swiftly to reconcile its
security concerns with the movement of persons, goods
and services into and out of Gaza. We call upon the
international community to consider concrete ways to
help address the problem.

Another unresolved issue related to the war in
Gaza is accountability. There continues to be a need for
credible and independent investigations, in line with
standard international practice, on the disturbing
findings contained in the Goldstone report
(A/HRC/12/48).

We must continue to avoid the return of conflict
between Lebanon and Israel. All parties must therefore
faithfully implement their obligations under resolution
1701 (2006), violations of which should be fully
investigated. We also urge the international community
to assist Lebanon in building up its State capacity and
helping the central Government to exercise its
authority throughout the country.

Peace usually requires difficult decisions to be
made by all sides. It does not emerge from skilful
tactics but from true statesmanship. Those who believe
that there can be peace or security in the Middle East
without a Palestinian State are deceiving themselves.
Rather than trying to avoid the emergence of such a
State, they should help to create the conditions for it to
be peaceful, prosperous and democratic.

