Mr. Apakan (Turkey): I would like to welcome
His Excellency Mr. Abdurahman A. Ibrahim, First
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Fisheries and
Marine Resources of Somalia. I also extend our thanks
to Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
for introducing the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/234). I also welcome Mr. Ramtane Lamamra,
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union.

Of late, we have observed quite a number of
positive developments in and concerning Somalia. The
signing of the agreement between the Transitional
Federal Government and the Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama'a
on 15 March is undoubtedly the most notable. It is an
important achievement and a result of the Transitional
Federal Government's (TFG) efforts to reach out to all
groups in the country. The full and speedy
implementation of the agreement will be a crucial step,
among others, to confirm what the international
community has been saying: that there is no military
solution to the Somali question, and the only road to a
peaceful future is through the Djibouti peace process.
This message must be repeated and firmly conveyed.

Despite the positive developments, the remaining
challenges facing Somalia are far from negligible.
Insecurity continues to be widespread in the country.
My delegation is disturbed by the fact that attacks on
civilians, human rights violations and acts of cruelty
against women and children are, unfortunately, daily
occurrences. Threats against humanitarian assistance,
especially the blocking of World Food Programme
operations in Somalia, are totally unacceptable.

We commend the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) for the crucial role it plays
towards achieving stability in Somalia. We thank all
troop- and police-contributing countries, especially
Uganda and Burundi. We encourage the Department of
Field Support to continue its support to AMISOM. so
that it can effectively implement its mandate.
Expeditious deployment of the logistical support
package is undoubtedly vital in that regard, yet one
should not expect AMISOM. to provide security alone.
Therefore, it is also of crucial importance that the
Somali security institutions be strengthened.

Successful completion of the transition in
Somalia can be achieved only if the necessary political
and security conditions are created, through targeted
efforts coordinated between the Transitional Federal
Government and the international community. The
Transitional Federal Government, which Turkey fully
supports and which it considers to be the only
legitimate authority in Somalia, should continue its
efforts to become more functional, while assertively
pursuing its outreach policy vis-a-vis the opposition

groups. One other critical task that the Transitional
Federal Government should also complete is the
drafting of a constitution. The progress achieved to
date is promising in that regard.

Equally important is the maintenance of the
support provided to Somalia by the international
community. What has been accomplished so far is the
outcome of our coordinated efforts over the past couple
of years. These should be sustained. Turkey believes
that stability in Somalia can be consolidated only if the
gains in the political and security fields are supported
by reconstruction activities.

That said, I would like to touch upon the Somalia
conference which Turkey will host in Istanbul. The
Istanbul Conference on Somalia will be jointly
organized by the United Nations and the Turkish and
Somali Governments, with the participation of the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
from 21 to 23 May. The high-level part of the
Conference, which is expected to be attended by a
number of heads of State or Government and Foreign
Ministers, is aimed at demonstrating the commitment
of the international community to the implementation
of the Djibouti Agreement, which envisaged
simultaneous progress in three areas: security, political
cooperation and reconstruction. I want to underline in
particular that this Conference is not being organized
as a donor conference. The third day of the Conference
will provide an opportunity for the Transitional Federal
Government, Member States, the private sector and
international business investors to engage, with a view
to identifying future opportunities. It will also focus on
recovery and reconstruction activities that aim at
attracting direct investment for infrastructure projects
that will strengthen the Somali economy, create
employment and generate revenue. That will boost
local business, lead to socio-economic development
and contribute to the peace process. This is particularly
pertinent when one considers that 3.2 million people -
or 43 per cent of Somalis - still need humanitarian
assistance.
We genuinely want the Istanbul Conference to
make a change: a change in the future of Somalia, a
change in the effective work of the Transitional Federal
Government and a change in the lives of the Somali
people, who have suffered a great deal in the past.
From Istanbul, we hope to send a strong message of
solidarity and to tell them that they are not alone.

