The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2001/1153, which contains the text of the
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to document S/2001/1154, which
contains a letter dated 5 December 2001 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from the representative of
Afghanistan, in which he requests to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In acceding to this request, the
Security Council recalls that the Interim Authority in
Afghanistan will be established on 22 December 2001.
According to paragraph 3 of the Agreement on
provisional arrangements in Afghanistan pending the
re-establishment of permanent government institutions,
signed in Bonn on 5 December 2001, the Interim
Authority shall occupy the seat of Afghanistan at the
United Nations and in its specialized agencies, as well
as in other international institutions and conferences.

At the invitation ofthe President, Mr. Farhddi
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): It is my
understanding that the Council is ready to proceed to
the vote on the draft resolution before it. Unless I hear
any objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the
vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by Show ofhands.

In favour:
Bangladesh, China, Colombia, France, Ireland,
Jamaica, Mali, Mauritius, Norway, Russian
Federation, Singapore, Tunisia, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America


The President (spoke in French): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1383 (2001).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.30pm.

