Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, allow me, first of all, on behalf of
Panama and my delegation, to express our gratitude for
the report of Prosecutor Moreno-Ocampo, in particular
for his outstanding work at the head of the Office of
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC). We are aware of the difficult task that the
Prosecutor of that institution faces, and we urge him to
continue to tackle his work with the same ability with
which he has done so over all of these years.

The crime of genocide and crimes against
humanity that the world witnessed at the end of the last
century resulted, inter alia, in the establishment of
special criminal tribunals for Rwanda and the former
Yugoslavia. Furthermore, they motivated a group of
States to form a universal tribunal to try this type of
crime. The Rome Statute, through which the
International Criminal Court was established, stipulates
in article 13 (b) that the Security Council, acting under
Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter, can refer to
the Court a situation in which there are indications that
one or more such crimes that are under the Court's
competence have been committed. Indeed, in
resolution 1593 (2005) the Security Council referred
the situation in Darfur to the Prosecutor of the Court
for investigation and, if necessary, to try individuals
held responsible for violations of international
humanitarian law and of human rights. Moreover, the
Council decided that the Government of the Sudan and
the other parties to the conflict in Darfur should
cooperate with the Court and with the Prosecutor.

After 20 months of investigation, the Prosecutor
determined the existence of sufficient evidence to try
Colonel Ahmad Harun and Ali Kushayb for crimes
against humanity committed in Darfur. The Judges of
the Court, as a result, issued arrest warrants for both of
these individuals in April 2007. To date, the
07-6267
Government of the Sudan has ignored those warrants,
as was confirmed to us today by Mr. Moreno-Ocampo,
and does not permit the Court to fulfil its duties.
Moreover, that represents contempt for international
obligations on the part of the Sudan and disregard for
the authority of this Council.

The Sudan's lack of compliance violates the
fundamental principles of the United Nations Charter.
Moreover, if the Council were to ignore that contempt,
that would open space for future acts of contempt.
Therefore, it is the duty of this Council to demand that
the Government of the Sudan and all other parties to
the conflict in Darfur fulfil their obligation to
cooperate with the Court, as set out in resolution 1593
(2005). Otherwise, this Council would not be fulfilling
its own obligations under the Charter.

At the same time, we are concerned that the
civilian population continues to suffer from
coordinated attacks and systematic violations of human
rights. We cannot allow the conflict in Darfur to
continue to serve as an incentive for ongoing crimes
against the dignity of the human being. We support the
International Criminal Court in its investigation of all
of these cases.

Finally, with regard to the attacks on the members
of the United Nations peacekeeping forces in Darfur,
they must be subject to the strictest investigation by
both the United Nations and the Government of the
Sudan.

