Mr. Skinner-Klee Arenales (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I thank the Republic of Indonesia, in
particular Minister Marsudi for convening this open
debate, for circulating the concept note (S/2019/385, annex) that serves as the basis for our deliberations.

Guatemala reaffirms that the protection of civilians
and all other peacekeeping tasks must be implemented
in accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and the guiding principles
governing peacekeeping operations.

Armed conflicts are increasingly taking place in
urban centres. We all know that explosive weapons
in populated areas cause serious injuries to civilians
and affect services that are essential to their survival.
We therefore strongly condemn the use of those
weapons in populated areas, not only because of their
grave consequences but also because they violate the
1949 Geneva Conventions and their 1977 Protocols
Additional, as the Secretary-General reminded us
this morning. In that regard, we address an urgent
appeal to the international community to adopt all the
measures necessary to provide a protection and security
framework for those who suffer from the consequences
of the indiscriminate use of those deadly weapons,
and at the same time offer them protection and relief,
especially for the most vulnerable.

It is important to stress that the Latin American
and Caribbean region expressed its unwavering
commitment to the protection of civilians in the
Santiago communique, in which 23 States, including
Guatemala, together with international organizations,
agreed on additional actions to address this problem at
the national, regional and international levels.

To a large extent, threats to international peace
and security remain the cause of the proliferation and
possession of weapons of mass destruction, which pose
a threat to human safety and innocent populations.

With regard to the civilian protection component of
United Nations peacekeeping operations, my delegation
recognizes that the implementation of those mandates
should be considered part of an integral peace process,
bolstered by national ownership and involving relevant
stakeholders, and should be decisively supported by the
international community.

Guatemala stresses that the protection of civilians
in peacekeeping operations must be carried out in
accordance with missions' mandates and be applied
to all prevention activities and responses to acts of
violence against civilians, including the use of force as
a last resort when necessary, as well as to clear rules
of engagement in order to provide security to civilians
under threat of physical violence and within the areas
of operations.

As a country that contributes troops to peacekeeping
operations, in particular our special forces in the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, we note the launch
of the pilot protection-through-projection model, which
stipulates that both military and civilian personnel
should be highly mobile and, at the first sign of
deterioration in the security situation, be able to deploy
temporarily to prevent conflict and avoid violence. My
delegation requests that the Secretariat provide detailed
information on compliance on the ground and the
impact and implementation of each of those mandates.

For my delegation, it is also important that a clear,
objective and timely assessment of the human and
material resources be carried out, together with the
available capacities, in each peacekeeping operation.
The implementation of mandates depends up on a
number of critical factors, including, among others,
that they be well defined, realistic and achievable; that
there be political will and leadership of the mission's
performance and accountability at all levels; as well
as planning and operational guidelines. Guatemala
therefore takes this opportunity to reiterate that
peacekeeping operations should receive sufficient
resources and training to execute their tasks, including
personnel, mobility assets and capabilities to gather
timely, reliable and actionable information on
threats to civilians, including analytical tools to use
that information.

Any type of attack against civilians, hospitals,
schools, cultural goods or churches, as well as the
recruitmentofchildrenandthehinderingofhumanitarian
access, is a flagrant violation of international law,
international humanitarian law and Security Council
resolutions. It is therefore necessary for the Security
Council to remain committed to protecting civilians in
armed conflict and foster full respect for international
law in order to put an end to impunity for serious
Violations committed against civilians.

Against that backdrop, and in order to support the
protection of civilians, Guatemala is honoured to be a
country that contributes to maintaining and sustaining
peace. From our national perspective, the responsibility
to protect is a standard that coincides with our own
constitutional principles, as the State is organized to
protect individuals and families, with the overarching
goal of achieving shared well-being.

Lastly, my country reiterates its commitment to the
responsibility to protect. We call for all States Members
to strictly abide by that commitment and put aside
indifference to the commission of serious crimes and
human suffering.

