Ms. Jean (spoke in French): We were cruelly
confronted by the news of the two attacks that took
place in quick succession yesterday and the day before
in Mali, which claimed the life of a French soldier in a
mine explosion and that of a Togolese peacekeeper in
an ambush that also injured seven other persons, three
of them critically. We are gathered here aware of the
ultimate sacrifice made by men and women deployed
in the field in the service of peace. We here are driven
by the same determination and urgency and the same
ideal enshrined in Article 1 of the Charter of the United
Nations Charter in 1945, namely,

"to maintain international peace and security, and
to that end: to take effective collective measures for
the prevention and removal of threats to the peace,
and for the suppression of acts of aggression or
other breaches of the peace".

Through those words, the Security Council's road
map - our road map- can be more clearly traced.

Iwouldliketo commendyou, Mr. President-Foreign
Minister Mankeur Ndiaye - and your country, Senegal,
which currently holds the presidency of the Security
Council as well as the chairmanship of the Summit of La
Francophonie, for taking the initiative to convene this
high-level debate, which is so crucial for the conduct
of peacekeeping operations in the face of what have
been called unprecedented asymmetrical threats. This
initiative also reflects Senegal's very active role at the
helm of the Council's Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations, and more generally its major, and
appreciated, commitment to peacekeeping operations,
including those deployed in francophone countries. I
would also like, through you, Mr. President, to thank
Senegal for the trust it places in the International
Organization of La Francophonie (IOF), as reflected in
its invitation for me to participate here today. This is a
historic moment for us.

I am here today as the Secretary-General of La
Francophonie, an international organization made up
of 80 States and Governments from five continents.
The francophone world today accounts for half of all
United Nations peacekeeping operations throughout the
world. Fifty-five member States and observers of our
organization are engaged in peacekeeping operations
today - indicating that we too have recognized the
urgent need to adapt peacekeeping operations in terms
of their mandates and resources in the face of the new
threats confronting them.

We in the IOF can see those threats every day: in
Mali, Lebanon, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Central African Republic, and even in the end-
of-mandate operations in Cote d'Ivoire. The threats are
permanent. They have an impact both on peacekeepers
and the mandate of peacekeeping operations as well
as when it comes to protecting civilians and securing
territory, boundaries and personnel.

We are shocked by recurrent attacks against
peacekeepers in Mali, which we condemn in the
strongest terms. And, as we know, bordering countries
are not spared. We saw recently how the army of the
Niger fell Victim to an attack by criminal militias on
6 October, when 22 soldiers who were providing security
at a site for Malian refugees in the Tahoua region, which
borders Mali, were killed in broad daylight.

The President of the Niger, still in shock when I
called him, did not fail to tell me what the subregion
wanted, that is, that in carrying out its mandate,
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) act more
tactically and robustly and in a more concerted and
coordinated manner with the affected countries in order
to use force in the spirit of Article I of the Charter, which
I mentioned earlier, so as to prevent and remove threats
to the peace and to suppress all acts of aggression. As
La Francophonie is always quick to recall, this is about
our absolute responsibility to protect, by all means,
populations exposed to danger.

We often find ourselves helpless in the face of
the deadly attacks perpetrated by these criminal
groups, which use every cruel and cowardly means
to destabilize already weak countries. To defeat these
criminal groups, whose goal is to control routes and
passages so as to facilitate trafficking in drugs, arms
and human beings, we must foil their plans and counter
their actions by means of more collective and thus
more effective efforts. We can do this only if we work
together in the context of a joint effort that involves
the international community together with the States
concerned and those of the subregion. We need also to
strengthen the capacity of said States to act and fully
participate in defending their territory and protecting
their peoples.

I have repeatedly conveyed to the international
community, and to the Security Council in particular, the
pressing appeals ofthe countries in the Lake Chad Basin
region for additional resources, in the form of technical
and logistical support, for the Multinational Joint Task
Force in the fight to put an end to the deadly attacks
by Boko Haram against isolated, extremely vulnerable
communities. Yes, efforts have been made, and I wish
to commend them. Here I am thinking in particular of
the more modern, sophisticated equipment provided to
the troops; the priority given to intelligence-gathering;
and the strengthening in recent months of the mandate
of certain operations, including MINUSMA, the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic, so that they
can better protect civilians and withstand the attacks of
armed groups. But we see also how difficult it has been
to implement resolution 2295 (2016).

All of these difficulties and shortcomings, and
sometimes even dysfunctions, of which we are fully
aware, are a source of serious concern for the IOF,
because for 20 years we have been actively and concretely
cooperating with our international partners, primarily
the United Nations, in crisis prevention and conflict
prevention and resolution, and supporting countries
as they seek to consolidate peace and democracy. The
French-speaking space has become a kind oflaboratory
for peacekeeping operations. Given our presence on
the ground at all stages of the continuum of peace,
our widely acknowledged experience and expertise in
fragile political, security and socioeconomic contexts,
we welcome the high priority given to crisis prevention
and peacebuilding in the framework of the global
peacekeeping reform undertaken by the United Nations
in 2015.

It is in that same spirit that we call for the
continuation, and even the strengthening, of the
civilian dimension of peacekeeping operations, which
represents a pivotal element of stabilization in countries
emerging from crisis and in transition situations. This is
part and parcel of the preventive approaches promoted
by the Secretary-General's Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism.

I believe that we are all on the same page. A security
approach is necessary but not sufficient. As I said at the
international conference convened by the IOF in June
on countering terrorism and the prevention of violent
extremism, we must also respond to the determined
attacks against us with our own determination to strike
back, using all of our weapons of mass construction:
education, training for all, job creation and investment
in economic initiatives for women and for youth, so as
to bring about sustainable, equitable development. We
also have to create a deep-rooted culture of democracy
and peace and strengthen rule-of-law institutions as
well as respect for rights and freedoms.

Ensuring such freedoms is ajoint endeavour. I wish
to stress also the importance of respecting freedom
of speech and freedom of the press, which are key to
a climate of peace. I have just been informed by the
highest authorities of Radio France Internationale
of the jamming of its FM. signal as well as that of
Radio Okapi, the United Nations radio station in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. This is just one
example. Such incidents are worrisome and must be
avoided so as to preserve freedom of the press and of
speech. The IOF's approach to its work in all the areas I
have just mentioned involves shared responsibility.

Turning to the security dimension, we support
unreservedly the Council's desire to make peacekeeping
operations safer and more robust and increase their
level of performance. On the basis of the conclusions
of the June IOF conference, to which my dear friend
Mr. Jean-Paul Laborde made a valuable contribution,
I wish also to underscore the need to strengthen
cooperation in terms of intelligence-gathering, because
it is clear that while peacekeeping operations cannot be
anti-terrorist actors as they currently stand, they can
and must be provided the resources to better face the
new threats they face and contribute, at various levels,
to minimizing them.

To that end, Blue Helmets must be better equipped,
better prepared and better trained, and the IOF is
contributing to that endeavour. Our experience in the
French-speaking world has shown us that it is vital that
personnel deployed on the ground be able to gather
information, hear witness statements and communicate
in French with the local authorities and population.
They must also have a solid grasp of the historical,
political, socioeconomic and cultural realities. The
operations' security and ability to perform are at stake,
in particular as concerns the civilian dimension. This is
particularly important at a time when terrorist strategies
are based on the capacity of these criminal groups to
infiltrate and melt into local populations. Also at stake
is dialogue and the climate of confidence that must be
established. Let us not underestimate this dimension.

I reiterate here the call I made at the Paris ministerial
conference on peacekeeping operations in French-
speaking environments a few days ago: that every
effort must be made to strengthen the use of French
within the Secretariat and in theatres of operation in
French-speaking countries. We therefore call for greater
participation by the States members of the IOF and for
the greater recruitment of French-speaking personnel
in peacekeeping operations. We also support a greater
expansion of United Nations recruitment activities to
French-speaking populations. Here I would pay tribute
to Mr. Atul Khare and Mr. Herve Ladsous for the very
close cooperation that the IOF has been enjoying with
the Department of Field Support and the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, which has allowed us to
achieve encouraging results. For example, 99 per cent
of MINUSCA police are French-speaking.

A great deal needs to be done. That is why we have
developed a French teaching method for non-French-
speaking defence and security forces, in cooperation
with the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
Experience has shown also that in certain Member
States it is vital to better train and prepare deployed
personnel and Blue Helmets so as to enable them to
more effectively address the new threats facing them.
That is why we regularly support francophone training
centres for peacekeeping operations. That is also why,
as my dear colleague Herve' Ladsous is well aware, we
have a network of French-speaking military, police and
civilian capacities through our Francophone Expertise
and Training Network for Peace Operations, which
acts as the umbrella organization for francophone
training centres and provides information, in French,
on peacekeeping, mobilizing for that purpose a sizeable
community of experts.

Experience has shown that it is vital to increase
security in the environments in which peacekeeping
operations are deployed. That is the goal of the
assistance we provide to our member States to help
them build their capacity to fight terrorism, as
Mr. Jean-Paul Laborde well knows, given that the IOF
is cooperating with the Counter-Terrorism Committee
to promote the ratification by national Governments
of universal, regional and subregional instruments to
counter terrorism and crime. We are also strengthening
the capacities of specialized francophone judges and
prosecutors.

All the crises, conflicts and new threats that we have
to face, wherever they are, concern all of us without
exception, and call for a concerted and coordinated
approach on our part for which we pool our capacities,
experience, resources and means, whether that is in the
context of our cooperation with the United Nations,
our bilateral, multilateral, regional or subregional
cooperation, or our cooperation with institutional
stakeholders and civil society. The Council should
rest assured that the OIF will continue to promote that
essential integrated approach with all its partners,
including the United Nations, and that it can and should
count on us.

