The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of C6te d'Ivoire and Senegal, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Djangone-
Bi (Cote d'Ivoire) and Mr. Fall (Senegal) took
seats at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations. I
should like to draw the attention of members of the
Council to document S/2002/ 1386, which contains the
text of a letter dated 19 December 2002 from Senegal
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
transmitting the text of the Final Communique of the
Economic Community of West African States on C6te
d'Ivoire, adopted at Dakar on 18 December 2002.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council expresses its grave
concern at the situation in cote d'Ivoire and its
serious consequences for the population of this
country and the region. The Council firmly
condemns attempts to use force to influence the
political situation in Cote d'Ivoire and to
overthrow the elected Government. It calls for
full respect for the constitutional order of Cote
d'Ivoire and emphasizes its full support for the
legitimate Government of Cote d'Ivoire. It
stresses also the need to respect the sovereignty,

political unity and territorial integrity of Cote
d'Ivoire. It calls on all States in the region to
refrain from any interference in Cote d'Ivoire.

"The Security Council stresses that the
crisis in Cote d'Ivoire can be solved only through
a negotiated and peaceful political solution. It
calls upon all parties involved in the conflict to
work actively to achieve such a solution and to
abstain from any act or declaration that could
jeopardize efforts to that end. Such a solution
must address the underlying causes of the
conflict.

"The Security Council strongly supports the
efforts by the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), currently chaired by
Senegal, to promote a peaceful resolution of the
conflict. It urges ECOWAS leaders to further
their efforts in a coordinated manner. In this
regard, it welcomes the Final Communique
adopted on 18 December 2002 (S/2002/l386) at
the extraordinary Summit of Heads of States and
Government of ECOWAS in Dakar.

"In particular the Security Council
welcomes the commitment by the President of
Cote d'Ivoire to submit in the coming days a
comprehensive plan to end the crisis. It stresses
that such a plan is a crucial step towards
achieving a peaceful solution and calls upon the
President of Cote d'Ivoire to involve fully all
parties and to seek consensus among them.

"The Security Council also takes note of
paragraph 18 of the Final Communique of the
Dakar Summit, whereby ECOWAS requests the
United Nations and the Secretary-General to
contribute to the resolution of the crisis. The
Council commends the Secretary-General for his
efforts to promote a negotiated settlement, in
coordination with ECOWAS. The Council
requests him to continue those efforts,
particularly by providing all necessary support
and assistance to the ECOWAS mediation. The
Council requests the Secretary-General to keep it
regularly informed about the situation.

"The Security Council expresses its full
support for the deployment in Cote d'Ivoire of the
ECOMOG force, under the command of Senegal,
before 31 December 2002 as called for in the
Final Communique of the Dakar Summit. It

commends all ECOWAS countries which have
decided to contribute troops to this force and calls
upon the international community to provide
assistance to it.
the

"The Security Council also commends
France for its efforts, at the request of the
Government of Cote d'Ivoire, to prevent further
fighting, on a provisional basis pending the
deployment of the ECOMOG force. It also
expresses its appreciation for the efforts of France
to contribute to a political solution of the crisis,
including the possible hosting of meetings related
to the situation in C6te d'Ivoire. It also
recognizes the efforts of the African Union
towards a resolution of the crisis in Cote d'Ivoire.

"The Security Council expresses its deepest
concerns at reports of mass killings and serious
violations of human rights in Cote d'Ivoire. It
calls on all parties to ensure full respect for
human rights and international law, particularly
with regard to the civilian population regardless
of its origin, and to bring to justice all those
responsible for any violation thereof. The Council
welcomes the decision by the Secretary-General
to request the High Commissioner for Human
Rights to send a mission to gather precise
information regarding the violations of human
rights and of international humanitarian law in
C6te d'Ivoire, including through the dispatch of a
fact-finding mission.

"The Security Council also expresses its
concern at the humanitarian consequences of the
crisis in C6te d'Ivoire. It calls upon the
international community to provide urgent
humanitarian assistance to those in need
throughout the subregion affected by the Ivoirian
crisis. It also calls on all parties to provide
unhindered access to affected populations."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2002/42.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 7.45 p.m.

