Mr. Sacirbey (Bosnia and Herzegovina): It is with
pleasure and confidence that we see you, Sir, taking over
the job of President of the Security Council. At the same
time, let me not forget the contributions of your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of Germany,
especially in the very able manner in which he handled
the responsibilities of the presidency of the Council
during the month of June.

Before I continue with my presentation, I should like
to alert the Council to the following information, which
has just come to our attention. A few hours ago, one jet
of the Serbian forces besieging the Bihac area engaged in
an air-to-ground assault upon the Bihac "safe area". We
note this one incident among several that have occurred
over the past few days, for it seems to represent a
growing tendency to test the Security Council's will to
see the "no-fly zone" over the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina implemented and, to our dismay, has in fact
failed to elicit an adequate response.

 

We particularly note the plight of the civilian
population of the Bihac region because, over the past
several days, several unfortunate civilians have lost their
lives as a consequence of malnutrition and a lack of
essentials. This includes a three-year old boy who, at the
time of his death, weighed no more than 15 pounds.

In View of the current, as well as the potential
additional rewards offered to it, we should expect the
Belgrade regime to enter into mutual recognition with its
neighbours, to shut off support and supplies for the
Karadzic Serbs and thereby to promote the peace process.
Unfortunately, exactly the opposite seems to be occurring.
Instead, the Belgrade regime is rounding up draft-age men
and sending them back to serve in the so-called Krajina and
Bosnian Serb armies. Belgrade continues to pay the salaries
of the troops, and especially the officers, of the so-called
Krajina and Bosnian Serb armies. Belgrade continues to
provide further strategic support - including weapons, fuel
and coordination - for the so-called Krajina and Bosnian
Serb armies. As an example, the United States F-16 and its
American pilot, Scott O'Grady, may have been shot down
by anti-aircraft systems of the so-called Bosnian Serb army,
but this anti-aircraft system was controlled by an air-
defence system linked directly through Belgrade. And the
list of inconsistencies is continually growing.

So, one might ask why the Security Council should
continue to support for an additional 75 days the process of
sanctions relief for what appears to be a double game on
the part of the Belgrade regime and in particular the porous
border-sealing with respect to the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Maybe the most honest answer is that this is
the least worst of a set of bad options available in support
of a negotiated settlement.

No matter how accurate this answer is now, it cannot
be the basis ultimately for a successful political process to
find peace. Belgrade cannot be allowed effectively to
dictate the peace process because no attractive alternatives
are perceived. Otherwise, this entire current approach is not
only likely to fail, but could in fact become counter-
productive.

If Belgrade wishes to secure further sanctions relief or
even to maintain the current easing of sanctions, it must be
made to understand that the border closure must be real,
that the recognition of its neighbours - including the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Republic of
Croatia - must be unambiguous, and that its support for
the peace process must be sincere and not just a tactical
step.

The fence-sitting attitude of some in trying to secure
Belgrade's cooperation has not only served to encourage
Mr. Milosevic and his cohorts to be even more obstinate
and ambiguous, but has in fact encouraged Mr. Milosevic
and others to try to dictate the terms of peace. In
particular, Mr. Milosevic believes now that he can define
the international legal nature of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina that he is to recognize and in such a fashion
make his recognition not only ambiguous but in fact
counter-productive. Mr. Milosevic is positioning himself
to recognize a Bosnia and Herzegovina devoid of
sovereignty and only contained in temporary international
borders that would be subject to change at will by
Belgrade. Effectively, his strategy is to declare a
recognition that promotes the advancement of an
ethnically pure Greater Serbia, rather than one that
confirms the most basic elements of sovereignty and
territorial integrity.

In the meantime, let us take inventory of what the
Security Council's actions in easing sanctions with respect
to Serbia have achieved so far. Terrorist actions and the
strangulation of the people of Sarajevo and other Bosnian
towns and cities continue. More than ever before, the
Belgrade regime and the Bosnian Serbs have been
obstinate with respect to peace movements. The targeting
of United Nations officials, troops and other workers has
increased. Finally and most recently, while the basketball
team of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia enjoyed the
opportunity to participate in the recent European
championship, it ended its participation by signalling to
the crowd the sign of the Chetnik Serbs - those that in
fact conduct aggression and "ethnic cleansing" against the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina. This same
basketball team has also promised to give some of its
medals to the leadership of the so-called Krajina and the
so-called Karadzic Serbs.

Obviously, when taking inventory of the
consequences, the result is less than clear. But let us be
clear on this point: we do not ask for anything more than
the legal recognition by the Belgrade regime of our
sovereignty and territorial integrity and what the United
Nations has already recognized in the context of our
membership in this Organization.

On the other hand, we will not accept anything less
and others cannot degrade our legal status by self-serving
and dangerous definitions of our sovereignty and
territorial integrity.

 

The Belgrade regime can choose to recognize the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina within its
internationally-recognized borders without condition, or it
can choose to do nothing. Similarly, if it is sincere in
supporting the peace process in the region, then the border
sealing must also be sincere. We can all benefit from this
sincerity. But Belgrade will in fact reap the greatest
rewards. On the other hand, if Belgrade is not sincere, we
will all lose, but Belgrade will in fact lose the most.

For this reason, we emphasize that the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina must and will wait for a sincere
partner in Belgrade in the process of mutual recognition
and peace.

Consequently, we believe the Security Council must,
and should, also wait for a sincere Belgrade.

