Mr. Abdullah (Malaysia): I wish to express my
sincere congratulations to the United Kingdom on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. My delegation is also ofthe view that this
debate is timely and will contribute to the development
of a better understanding of this important question.

At this juncture, Malaysia joins other nations in
condemning the outrageous attacks on the United
Nations compound in Somalia today. We extend our
deepest condolences in connection with the losses
suffered by both Somalia and the United Nations.

The correlation between conflicts and natural
resources is not a myth, it is a reality. While some
countries have progressed tremendously thanks to
natural resources, others are cursed with an abundance
of strategic commodities. History has proven that wars
have emerged where natural resources are at stake.
Malaysia has always been critical of the violence
and carnage that have been caused by conflict due to
natural resources. Our world is rich in resources, from
the lush plain fields that produce crops to the precious
minerals that have helped countries develop. It is us
who determine if those resources are a boon or a bane.

My delegation believes that the key to the successful
mitigation of conflicts caused by natural resources lies
in good governance and the responsible management
of these resources. Governments are key actors and
must be responsible and accountable. In managing
resources, Governments are the regulators of mining
licences. They are therefore in a position to determine
the distribution of wealth from natural resources, which
generates the growth of a country.

Malaysia is not oblivious to such challenges.
Striking a balance between good governance and
maximizing yields, the managing of Malaysia's oil
reserves has been of the utmost importance to its
Government. In 1974, we established Petronas as our
national oil company. Much of its current success can
be attributed to the relevant laws and to the fact that
it is an entity that is run as a full-fledged commercial
organization. As a State-owned entity, Petronas is
responsible for the effective management of Malaysia's
oil and gas resources and for ensuring the orderly and
sustainable development of the nation's petroleum
industry. Governed by its code of conduct and business
ethics, Petronas has continued to accommodate
developments in local and international laws and
practices, as well as technological developments and
benchmarks in international standards. The code not
only promotes legal and procedural compliance, but
also provides a moral compass in guiding its work in
the international arena.

There is no doubt that the United Nations has a
role to play in providing neutral and impartial advice
to countries in need. My delegation is of the view that
there are many mechanisms already in place to support
such an endeavour. The Peacebuilding Commission
is one such instrument. The Commission has been
active in supporting countries on its agenda. It has
continued to provide the Security Council with advice
on pertinent developments in Sierra Leone, Liberia,
the Central African Republic, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau
and Burundi. Through the Commission, Member States
have been able to interact in the field to support national
Governments in prioritizing strategies and plans of
action, which may include the management of natural
resources to prevent a relapse into conflict.

Malaysia also shares the view that the Commission
and United Nations country teams have a role to play
in developing synergies on conflict prevention. Such
synergies can be realized in peacebuilding programmes
and the capacity-building of Governments, therefore
making them important mechanisms in the monitoring
of adherence to commodity schemes. That will serve
to support efforts in the prevention of conflict in the
relevant countries.

Malaysia also holds the view that the United
Nations can play a critical part in the prevention of
conflict. However, my delegation would also stress
the importance of reaffirming the inherent sovereign
rights of States in the exploitation of their resources.
Such precepts are deeply seated in the principles of
international law and the sovereign rights of Member
States in maintaining their territorial integrity.

Malaysia does not dispute the inherent connection
between natural resources and the fuelling of conflicts.
While good governance and the responsibility and
accountability of Governments play the key role
in preventing strategic commodities from fuelling
conflicts, we, the international community, must also
do our part in providing countries with the necessary
support to ensure that they do not relapse into conflict.

