Mr. Stagno Ugarte (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, I would like to congratulate you
for having convened this debate on the work of the
Security Council's Counter-Terrorism Committee
exactly at the time when the General Assembly is
examining international terrorism. We trust that this
auspicious convergence will enable the members of the
Security Council to hear the opinions of the other
members of the international community as regards the
direction that United Nations activities against
international terrorism should take.

Counter-terrorism is one of the greatest
challenges before the international community. As the
Secretary-General said, "By its very nature, terrorism
is an assault on the fundamental principles of law,
order, human rights and the peaceful settlement of
disputes upon which the United Nations is established"
(S/PV.4618). That is why we categorically condemn
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
irrespective of where it happens or who its sponsors
are. There is no political, philosophical, racial, ethnic
or religious justification for that crime. It goes without
saying that the two most important events in the last
three months as regards counter-terrorism in the United
Nations were the adoption of resolution 1566 (2004)
and the adoption of the plan for the Executive
Directorate of CTC. My delegation interprets the
recent adoption by the Security Council of resolution
1566 (2004) as sending a new signal of its resolute
desire to confront international terrorism. Costa Rica
welcomes the sixth preambular paragraph of the
resolution, where the Council reminds all States that
any measure taken to combat terrorism must be
consonant with international law and, in particular,
human rights law, humanitarian law and the rights of
refugees. We note with equal gratitude that the
resolution emphasizes legal and police mechanisms to
combat terrorism. Practical experience has shown us
that this is precisely the type of action that is most
effective in preventing international terrorism. As
regards the principle of ant dedere aut judicare referred
to in operative paragraph 2, we must recognize that this
is not yet part of international common law. Therefore,
it must be incorporated into international treaties on
legal cooperation, if it is to be truly effective.
Similarly, operative paragraph 3 does not meet the
requirements, from a technical legal point of view, for
functional definition of a crime. We understand that
these two paragraphs are political statements, and not
legal enactments, however, we would like to highlight
that the Security Council can not carry out a task of
codifying international criminal law, because that task
is incumbent on the international community as a
whole.

The Security Council is not a legislative body.
Under the Charter, its mandate is confined to specific
situations or specific disputes that endanger
international peace and security. It can adopt binding
measures only insofar as those measures are designed
to resolve specific conflicts or deal with specific
situations. The adoption of norms with general
application is the prerogative of the international
community as a whole, and is accomplished by
negotiating treaties or through the formation of binding
customary law.

We agree fully with the distinguished delegation
of Brazil that there was no need to adopt those two
paragraphs, under Chapter VII of the Charter.
Furthermore, my delegation notes with interest the
establishment of a working group to consider new,
practical measures and procedures to deal with
international terrorism carried out by groups that are
not part of the Al Qaeda and Taliban network.

We feel it is indispensable that any measure
recommended to the Council by the group be
consistent with international human rights law and
international humanitarian law, and in particular, the
principles of due process and non-refoulement. We
urge the working group to consider and adopt clear-cut
guidelines so that the inclusion or exclusion of persons
from the list of sanctions scrupulously respects the
highest possible international standards of evidence
and due process.

Similarly, we appeal to the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) to promote respect for fundamental
rights and guarantees as a method of preventing
terrorist acts. My delegation welcomes the adoption by
the Security Council on 12 August 2004 of the
organizational plan of the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate (CTED). However, we feel that this is just
a temporary measure.

Costa Rica believes that the United Nations must
adopt a single permanent and centralized policy to
prevent, prosecute and punish international terrorism.
It is imperative that the United Nations take the lead in
combating international terrorism, through the
adoption of a consistent strategy that promotes
multilateral coordination and multifaceted action
against such crimes. It is therefore necessary to
permanently institutionalize the special and temporary
provisions in Security Council resolution 1373 (2001).

It is indispensable that we integrate assistance
mechanisms for States, which are now scattered among
the Terrorism Prevention Branch - a subdivision of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime - and
the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate. We must
incorporate the work of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights in the work of both the CTC and the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al Qaeda and the
Taliban.

Furthermore, it is imperative that we involve all
the Member States of the United Nations in defining
the policies of the Organization concerning counter-
terrorism, thus, returning the initiative to the General
Assembly. Finally, combating terrorism must become a
permanent, regular activity of the United Nations.

My delegation is convinced that the only way we
can enhance United Nations action against
international terrorism is by assigning the task to an
impartial professional standing body situated at the
core of this institution. In that context, I would like to
reiterate the proposal made in the General Assembly on
21 September by the President of Costa Rica, Dr. Abel
Pacheco de la Espriella, in which he proposed the
establishment of a United Nations high commissioner
on terrorism. His proposal is presented in a letter
addressed by our Minister for Foreign Affairs to the
Secretary-General, which appeared as document
S/2004/758. We invite the Security Council to examine
that initiative in depth.

