Mr. Mbabazi (Uganda): It is an honour for me,
on behalf of the delegation I lead and of my country, to
address this important meeting of the Security Council
on the final report of the United Nations Panel of
Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural
Resources and Other Forms of Wealth in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

1 am particularly happy to see the presidency of
the United States once again taking an interest in the
search for a lasting peace in the Great Lakes region.
We can only assure you, Sir, of our readiness to render
Uganda's full cooperation to enable you to achieve this
noble objective.

We are equally grateful to Her Majesty's
Government of the United Kingdom for the able
leadership of Her Majesty's Permanent Representative,
Sir Jeremy Greenstock, whose presidency last month
made the necessary preparations for this meeting.

The Government of Uganda is most obliged to all
of the members of the Security Council for the onerous
task of the maintenance of international peace and
security, which they all render to the world on behalf of
the United Nations.

The Government of Uganda welcomes the release
of this report. I wish to thank you once again, Mr.
President, as well as the Council, for giving us the
opportunity to respond to its contents. I will present to
the Council Uganda's response in full. This response
covers all of the allegations against Uganda in the
report. I have also attached the personal response of
President Museveni of Uganda, a copy of which he has
already sent to the Secretary-General and which has, I
hope, already been circulated to Council members.

Allow me therefore, in the short time I have, to
give the Council a summary of this response. My
summary, like the response itself, will cover three
areas. First, we will talk about the principle itself of
investigating these allegations. Secondly, we will make
comments on the contents of the report, and especially
on the quality of the evidence presented. Finally, we
will talk about the way forward.
The report of the Panel raises important issues to
be investigated which are of interest to Uganda. In
1998, Uganda and Rwanda heard of some allegations
made against some officers of our armies operating in
the Congo. At the summit held in Kampala in October
1998, a decision was made to establish a ministerial
probe committee - which I was privileged to co-chair,
along with my colleague the head of delegation of
Rwanda - to look into those allegations.

It was as a result of those allegations that
President Museveni, in his capacity as Commander-in-
Chief of the Ugandan People's Defence Forces, issued
an order dated 5 December 1998 to all Ugandan troops
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Government officials prohibiting them and their
families from engaging in any trade in the Congo. It
will be of interest to the Council to know that since that
time, that order has been actively enforced and that
some people who have fallen afoul of it have suffered
disciplinary consequences.

We therefore support and welcome the principle
of investigation. We take note of the Panel's serious
allegations that, although the Ugandan Government is
not institutionally involved, as the report states in
paragraphs and 7 and 85, top Ugandan military officers
and civilians are involved in the illegal exploitation of
resources in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
This is the first time that allegations of illegal
exploitation have been specified, and we welcome the
opportunity to put these matters to rest.

In the case of the military officers and civilians
who are mentioned in the report, and in the case of the
Department of Forestry, which is alleged to have
colluded with private companies in a scheme to
facilitate the certification of timber from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo illegally, I am
happy to inform the Security Council that the
Government of Uganda has decided to establish a
judicial commission of inquiry on this matter. The
commission will be independent; it will work openly
and transparently. The actual composition will be
announced in due course in Kampala.

Having said that, I should like to say that Uganda
has serious problems with this report. The report has
fundamental flaws in it. The first flaw is the very basis
on which it is founded: the definition of illegality. The
Panel defines illegality as meaning the violation of
sovereignty, and says that, according to this Council's

understanding of the definition, all activities in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo which are taking
place without the consent of the Government in
Kinshasa are illegal. It goes further, saying that that
interpretation suggests that only non-invited forces and
their nationals are carrying out illegal activities in the
Congo. Finally, the Panel deems illegality to be the
carrying out of an activity in violation of regulations
established by the Government in Kinshasa, stating that
that definition is based on the Security Council's
understanding of the term illegality.

We have a very serious problem with that
definition in many ways. First of all, as the Council
knows, Uganda fully participated in the debate when
the resolution establishing the Panel to investigate this
matter was adopted by the Security Council. This
question of legality or illegality was, indeed, debated in
the context of whether the investigation should cover
the whole of the Congo or part of the Congo. The
argument that the investigation should cover only the
eastern Congo was based precisely on the question of
legality and legitimacy. But there was an argument,
clearly presented by my colleague from Rwanda, that,
in fact, the Lusaka Agreement clearly took care of this
point, because it defined the question of legality during
the period of the implementation of the Lusaka accord.
It was agreed that for that period, as provided for in the
Lusaka accord, the three Congolese parties signatories
to that accord - the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Congolese Rally for
Democracy (RCD) and the Movement for the
Liberation of the Congo (MLC), as it was then
known- would each be charged with the
responsibility of administering the area that it
controlled until State administration was re-established
after the national dialogue resulted in a new political
dispensation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

This argument was presented to this Council and,
obviously, the Council, it its wisdom, decided that the
investigation should therefore cover the whole of the
Congo, not just part of it. I therefore have no reason to
believe the Panel when it says that this definition was
the understanding of the Security Council.

Secondly, if, indeed, that definition as stipulated
by the Panel in the report had been intended, there
would have been no need to have an investigation. It is
public knowledge that 40 per cent of the country is
under the control of the Government in Kinshasa and
that the other 60 per cent is under the control of rebel
authorities. It is also common knowledge that normal
life - normal in the context of a war situation - goes
on in the areas controlled by the rebels. It would not,
therefore, have been necessary to establish a Panel to
investigate something that everyone accepted: the fact
that the central Government in Kinshasa had no
authority and was therefore not consenting to the
activities that were taking place in 60 per cent of
Congo, which would, therefore, have been declared
illegal straight away.

The importance of this point lies in the fact that
the rest of the report, and the rest of the investigation,
was based on the understanding that every activity -
the extraction of minerals, production of any kind and
any commerce or export in areas not controlled by the
Government - was illegal and therefore defined as
looting and plundering of the resources of the Congo.
We think that that is erroneous; it is an incorrect
definition of illegality, and we do not believe that that
was the meaning conveyed to the Panel by this
Council.

Of course, the results are obvious; they are self-
evident. Although the report says that the Panel did not
receive cooperation from the Government side and its
allies, there is no indication that there was actually a
serious attempt to carry out an investigation. Indeed,
the report clearly discloses that the Panel acted on the
assumption that whatever happened on the Side
controlled by the Government was legal and therefore
not subject to investigation.

The second flaw in this report is the quality of the
evidence presented. Most of the evidence is either
hearsay or falsehoods, and the Panel makes statements
which are not attributed. As I said earlier, in our
response we tackled the report paragraph by paragraph
to show that most of the evidence on which it is based
is, in fact, hearsay. I will pick out one example to
illustrate the point. Paragraph 27 of the report states
that

"Numerous accounts in Kampala suggest
that the decision to enter the conflict in August
1998 was defended by some top military officials
who had served in eastern Zaire and who had
had a taste of the business potential of the
region."

It does not give us the sources. However, we know that
these stories are abundantly available in the public
domain in Uganda. They are in newspapers; they are on
the streets.
We think this is a very serious matter. Uganda has
given its reasons why it got involved in the Congo.
These reasons not only were accepted by the
belligerents in Congo, but the security concerns are
actually contained in the Lusaka Agreement. Indeed,
the Lusaka formula proposes to handle that specific
problem. So, if the United Nations Panel of Experts is
to contradict that position, to contradict what you, the
Council, have accepted in various resolutions, surely it
must present clear evidence that leaves no one in doubt
about its truthfulness and credibility - not numerous
accounts in Kampala.

If you go to Kampala, Mr. President, you will
find a lot of street gossip about what is happening in
the Congo and about what is happening in the Security
Council today. But if a panel of experts is going to
make recommendations that sanctions be imposed
against a country of 23 million people, surely it must
present evidence that is credible, that leaves no one in
doubt that what they are saying is true.

The Panel of Experts has made statements in its
report that the members of the Panel know to be false.
They acknowledged maximum cooperation received
from the Government of Uganda. They were received
by the President, the Vice-President, the Prime
Minister, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, the Minister
of Defence, the Minister of Finance, the Minister of
Transport, the Minister of Energy and Minerals, the
Minister of Forestry and all sorts of other officials.
Everyone they asked for they met. But regarding what
they say in paragraph 11 and paragraph 89, that they
asked for individuals and their request was turned
down - they named this specific individual as
Brigadier General Kazini - I would like to inform this
Council that this is not true. First of all, they never
asked for Kazini. I saw this for the first time in their
report. Secondly, in fact, General Kazini met them, not
once, but twice. Thirdly, when they met the military
commander, General Odongo, he offered the Panel
specifically that if they passed out questionnaires or
asked for any officers in the Congo they wanted to
interview, he was ready to make these officers
available. Up to this moment, they have not made such
a request. So to report that they requested these
people - presumably they made these requests to the
Government of Uganda and the Government of Uganda
turned them down - when they know this is false is
totally unacceptable.

On 6 March this year, we communicated with the
Chairperson of the Panel on the follow-up to the
interim report, reconfirming our continued support for
its work and inviting any questions, clarifications or
additional data, as well as extending another welcome
to the Panel to revisit Uganda before the finalization of
the report. The Panel did not respond to this.

What we find most despicable is the attack by the
Panel on the person of President Museveni. Let us look
at paragraph 211. I will read out a sentence:

"Presidents Kagame and Museveni are on
the verge of becoming the godfathers of the
illegal exploitation of natural resources and the
continuation of the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo."

Godfathers are Mafia. Godfathers are those who
control criminal cartels, criminal syndicates. Therefore,
to call President Museveni a godfather is a very, very
serious matter. Or to call President Kagame a godfather
is a very, very serious matter. There must be evidence
for them to justify this label. What evidence is there in
this report? None, absolutely none. The only time they
mention the name of President Museveni is to say that
he has a blood brother called General Saleh, who is
said to have shares in a company that is dealing in
business in the eastern Congo; that he has a son who
has shares in a business suspected to be doing business
in the eastern Congo; and that he has a sister-in-law
who has shares in a company that is dealing in business
in the Congo, all of which, of course, is, by that other
definition, termed illegal.

But even if it were true that these relatives of the
President were in fact engaged in that business, is it
logical, is it normal to call the President, or anyone for
that matter, names; to give him a label for the acts of
relatives without showing any evidence that he was
party to those actions?

The casual manner in which the name of the
President has been handled is totally unacceptable to
the people of Uganda. President Museveni is the head
of State of a Member country of the United Nations. If
you are to call him names, surely you must have
evidence. They call him an accomplice to crime. Why?
Paragraphs 201 to 206 say that some rebel in the Congo
is alleged to have stolen money. The report was given
to President Museveni and he did not act against that
rebel; and therefore President Museveni qualifies as an
accomplice to crime.

We find this despicable, we do not accept it and
we do not know how you will handle this, Mr.
President, because it is setting a very serious precedent.
Even ordinary people's reputations are protected.
Obviously, all these allegations against the name of the
President are calculated to injure the reputation of
President Museveni without cause. We demand an
apology, we demand that they be withdrawn and we
request that this Council look into this matter and take
appropriate action.

When we meet with the Secretary-General, we
know that this Panel, as a body of the United Nations,
enjoys criminal and civil immunities, but our view is
that the manner in which it has treated the name of
President Museveni is an abuse of privilege.

Uganda therefore feels that the quality of the
report is so low that its value and credibility are
seriously diminished and undermined. That is why we
support the extension of the mandate of the Panel, in
the hope that a better job will be done. In this
connection, Uganda would recommend that a new
panel be put in place or that the current one be
expanded, with a new chairperson, to inject some level
of professional competence, impartiality and serious
leadership into the investigation process. We believe
that it is also important to achieve a level of balance in
the new panel of experts in order to make sure that bias
and prejudice are avoided.

Uganda has also learned one lesson, an important
lesson: it pays not to cooperate with this United
Nations Panel of Experts. The Panel of Experts
acknowledges, as the Chairperson did this morning, the
maximum cooperation that Uganda rendered. This
ranged from meeting the President himself, the Vice-
President and others to giving the Panel all the data it
requested. There was nothing that was not given. What
reward do we get? Abuse of the President and
recommendations of sanctions against the people of
Uganda. What evidence is there that Uganda was
institutionally involved in the illegal exploitation of
resources? Some individuals, numbering approximately
10, were involved, yet this Panel recommends that the
United Nations impose sanctions on 23 million
Ugandans. Why not ask for the arrest of those
individuals? On the other hand, countries that are
suspected of actually being illegally involved in the
exploitation of natural resources in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo have had their dubious interests
legitimized, if this report does so. Who has said that a
sovereign State cannot commit a crime?

Uganda believes that the cause of all this is war
in the Congo. It is the absence of a stable, strong State
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Therefore,
we believe that the primary focus should be on creating
peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. This
can be only through the implementation of the Lusaka
Agreement. In this context, we would expect the
Security Council to handle this matter with the utmost
care, because - and members have heard the language
used this morning - this report and what has been said
have seriously poisoned the atmosphere in the region
and have the potential of being diversionary from the
cause of pursuing peace through Lusaka. The
exploitation of natural resources is not the cause, but
the consequence of the war and the absence of a strong
State.

Our view therefore is that the Security Council
should remain determined to play a leadership role in
the search for peace and stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. 1 have been much more pleased
than I was the last time I visited this Council by its
level of involvement. Everybody is happy that the
peace process at long last appears to be moving
towards disengagement. The Political Committee has
adopted a schedule of withdrawal of foreign forces.
National dialogue is on the move. Forces have moved.
Uganda has moved seven battalions and will be moving
another two within the next few days, and we are
considering completely moving out. The Lusaka peace
process provides a unique opportunity to address the
security concerns of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and its neighbours and to create favourable
conditions for an internal dialogue on a new
democratic dispensation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. The withdrawal of all foreign forces and the
emergence of a strong and stable State are the only
guarantee of an end to the illegal exploitation of natural
resources in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

