Mr. Baumanis (Latvia): I should like, first, on behalf
of my Government, to offer heartfelt condolences to Japan
and its people and Government, and especially to the
people of Kobe - the sister city to my capital city of
Riga - for the human suffering and material losses caused
by the earthquake three days ago.

Allow me, Sir, to congratulate you warmly on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of January. Your wide experience and diplomatic
talent make me confident that the work of the Council will
show excellent progress under your leadership. My deep
appreciation also goes to your predecessor, Ambassador
Bakuramutsa of Rwanda, for his capable leadership of the
Council last month.

I am deeply grateful to the Secretary-General for his
Supplement to "An Agenda for Peace". This report contains
a very useful summary of lessons taught by the successes
and failures of this Organization in promoting the
maintenance of peace and security during the first years
of the post-cold-war age. It brings to our attention some
problems that need hard decisions by the Member States.
Last, but not least, it is written in a plain and forthright
style that aids comprehension and emphasizes the gravity
of the subject.

The following is a response to selected proposals of
the Secretary-General and to some subjects he has
addressed in his report.

Latvia welcomes the Secretary-General's proposal,
in paragraph 44 of document S/1995/1, for a rapid
reaction force that can be deployed when there is an
emergency need for peace-keeping troops. Latvia and its
Baltic neighbours - Estonia and Lithuania - have
demonstrated the importance they attach to peace-keeping
through the establishment of a joint peace-keeping force
called the BALTBAT - the Baltic Battalion. This
battalion is currently being trained and equipped. Latvia
is grateful to all those countries that have offered and will
offer, to assist us with training and the supply of
equipment. Subject to legislation of the three Baltic States
and agreement at the United Nations, the BALTBAT
could become a part of the rapid reaction force.

The Secretary-General, in paragraphs 63 to 65 of his
report, has brought to the attention of Member States the
large role that light weapons, especially small arms, play
in the deaths and injuries that result from current
conflicts. Latvia agrees with the Secretary-General that it
is time to begin looking for effective solutions to the
problems posed by small arms. Latvia favours a
comprehensive and long-range solution to this problem.
Without going into technical details of the solution, I can
say that it appears to have three major steps.

The first step is to gather information on the nature
and extent of the problem and then analyse the
information, including a comparison of the present effects
of small arms and weapons of mass destruction. The
information thus gathered and analysed would be
disseminated to Member States and to the public at large.

In the second step the quantities of small arms
available in conflicts would be minimized by various
means, such as United Nations control, buy-outs and/or
confiscation, followed by destruction, and actions to
diminish the volume of intra-regional and inter-regional
transfers of small arms.

 

In the last, and ultimately most important, step, actions
would be taken to diminish the volume of the production of
small arms. A weapon not produced is a weapon that can
never kill or cause injury.

In regard to sanctions - discussed by the Secretary-
General in paragraphs 66 to 76 of his report - Latvia
wishes to make the following points.

Sanctions, especially embargoes on goods other than
weapons, are a blunt and infrequently effective instrument
which can hurt not only aggressor Governments but
innocent people and victims and third countries as well.
This means that they are an instrument to be applied but
rarely and with a clear understanding of its potential
impacts. Sanctions need to respect the right to self-defence
guaranteed by Article 51 of the Charter, and they must
include effective means to respond to the claims of third
countries under Article 50.

In regard to enforcement action - discussed by the
Secretary-General in paragraphs 77 to 80 of his report -
Latvia wishes to emphasize its belief that such action needs
to be clearly separated from peace-keeping actions, in
respect of both the authorities responsible for managing the
actions and the forces engaged in them. The fundamental
reason for the separation is that successful peace-keeping
and successful enforcement are opposites, in three important
respects: the former, unlike the latter, must have the
consent of all parties to the conflict; it must be impartial;
and it must not use force, except in self-defence.

In regard to these points, it is only fair to point out
that Latvia is a party to a bilateral agreement that provides
a role for the Security Council in accordance with
Article 39 of the Charter.

With respect to financial resources for the maintenance
of peace and security, the Secretary-General states in
paragraph 97 of his report:

"The failure of Member States to pay their assessed
contributions for activities they themselves have voted
into being makes it impossible to carry out those
activities to the standard expected." (S/1995/1, para. 97)

Latvia wishes to make two observations in regard to
that statement. First, the table on page 4 of the Secretary-
General's report shows a dramatic increase in United
Nations activities related to peace and security during the
last eight years, including a budget for peace-keeping
operations that has increased approximately sixteen-fold
over this period. Secondly, the important elements of the
methodology of assessing peace-keeping contributions, in
particular the scheme of limits and the division of
Member States into four groups for assessment purposes,
were decided prior to this dramatic increase and may not
be suitable to the present situation.

An inevitable consequence of the aforementioned
points is the fact that over half of the outstanding
contributions to the peace-keeping budget at the end of
December 1994 was owed by 32 Member States. These
are the Member States that suffer from excessive
assessment rates due to distortions from the application of
the scheme of limits, and in addition have generally poor
economies.

We note that Member States did not explicitly vote
a specific large increase in the total peace-keeping budget,
nor did they explicitly vote excessive peace-keeping
contributions for the 32 Member States. Most if not all
Member States did not anticipate, and could not have
anticipated, the present situation, because it is an indirect
consequence of many decisions both by the 15 members
of the Security Council and by the General Assembly,
taken without explicit consideration of cumulative long-
term effects. The time has come to carry out a
comprehensive study of the decision-making process for
peace-keeping operations with a view to improving, inter
alia, control over the total peace-keeping budget and over
the apportionment of peace-keeping contributions to
Member States.

