Mr. Motoc (Romania): Romania associates itself
with the statement to be delivered later by the Irish
Presidency of the European Union (EU). In addition, I
would like to make some specific comments on the
topic under consideration today. We commend the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive and useful
report, and express Romania's support for the
recommendations contained therein.

The problems caused by small arms make this
question not just one of disarmament, but also one of
development, democracy, human rights and human
security. More than 650 million small arms are in
circulation throughout the world - more than one in
nine, in terms of the population of the planet. The
civilian population is affected by the negative aspects
of small arms and light weapons, in both developing
and developed countries. That sombre reality makes the
topic under discussion today a global one.

The illicit traffic in and flow of small arms and
light weapons is a source of instability and human
suffering. But it also feeds organized crime and
terrorism and is capable of undermining peace
initiatives. The proliferation of these weapons
exacerbates conflict, sparks refugee flows, undermines
the rule of law and spawns a culture of violence and
impunity. The result can be a destabilizing
accumulation of such weapons, sponsoring civil war
and creating public disorder, the displacement of the
population and the blocking of economic and social
development. In almost all of the conflicts that took
place in the past decade, ranging from the Great Lakes
region of Africa to the Balkans and Central and South
Asia, the weapons used by the various parties were
mainly small arms and light weapons. Their
availability may prolong fighting, reduce the
willingness to negotiate peaceful solutions and limit
the capacity of States and international organizations to
engage in conflict prevention, management and
resolution efforts.

These arms are used by criminal organizations
operating on either a national or transnational basis. As
a result, the militarization of crime becomes a threat
not only to countries torn by internal conflict but also
to States that are free from instability, but which are
used as routes of transit or trans-shipment for illegal
transactions.

Countries facing economic and social difficulties
are especially vulnerable to additional challenges posed
by illicit traffic in arms and drugs. An increase in crime
and violence can become a serious obstacle to national
development and well-being.

On the other hand, countries have the right to
self-defence in accordance with the United Nations
Charter. Arms production and transfers for that purpose
are therefore legitimate. Transfers should therefore be
conducted in a very responsible manner. The arms
industry must be carefully controlled by Government
policies and regulations, and clear and strict criteria on
arms exports should be implemented.

There are no simple solutions, however, and no
single method for dealing with the impact of the illicit
trade in small arms. Political commitments can,
however, make a critical difference in saving lives and
easing suffering.

In recent years, an increasing number of States
have committed themselves to abide by and implement
regional and international standards to enhance export
controls in order to prevent the illicit traffic in small
arms and light weapons. The United Nations
Programme of Action, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) document of 2000
and the EU Code of Conduct and other related EU
documents are the most relevant standards in place.
The effective implementation of such commitments is
indeed a complex and challenging task which requires
not only political will and adequate resources, but also
transparency, coordination and cooperation in order to
identify and develop a common understanding of
procedures, standards and mechanisms to enforce
controls.

Most countries already have in place laws and
regulations that are used to control the production, use
and transfer of small arms and light weapons.
However, in some countries these existing laws appear
to be inadequate, while control procedures can be
vulnerable to misuse. As a country with a mature
export control system and responsible conduct with
regard to arms transfers, Romania will further promote
the full implementation of the agreed international
instruments and standards on small arms and light
weapons. Romania's policy on small arms will
continue to be focused on combating illicit trafficking,
pursuing a responsible and transparent policy on legal
transfers and promoting the removal and destruction of
surpluses.

In implementing its commitments under the
Programme of Action, early in 2002 Romania
embarked on a programme of destruction of its surplus
of small arms and light weapons, with financial
assistance from the United States, the United Kingdom,
the Netherlands and Norway. Romania stands ready to
share its experience with all countries and to assist
other States in establishing and developing sound
export control systems.

As the current report of the Secretary-General
indicates, some progress has been achieved so far at the
global, regional and national levels. Yet a lot issues
relating to small arms and light weapons remain to be
discussed and agreed upon by means of elaborating and
enforcing international norms and regulations in this
field. The fight against terrorism and organized crime
demonstrates the need for security forces to be well
trained and equipped to respond effectively to such
threats. It also shows that we need effective controls to
ensure that terrorist groups and criminals do not have
access to such weapons. We are not yet close to
achieving global legal standards which would help
keep small arms away from human rights abusers. One
step forward is the United Nations Firearms Protocol to
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime, and Romania has started the legal
procedures for accession to that international
instrument.

The Security Council has a major role to play in
making small arms a focus of global attention and
action. It could add value by improving the
effectiveness of its arms embargoes, by putting an end
to the economy of war, by encouraging moratoriums of
arms sales to conflict regions and by supporting
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes.

The minimum requirement for Governments to
report to the United Nations on their small-arms
activities, including new categories, such as man-
portable air-defence systems (MANPADS), must be
raised. In this respect, Romania welcomes the
international efforts made and the positive results
achieved in 2003 in order to limit MANPADS.

Romania supported the inclusion of this new
category in the United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms transfers, and a Romanian
representative participated in the expert group that
issued that recommendation.

Romania welcomed the OSCE Maastricht
decision regarding the inclusion of MANPADS in the
annual reports relating to OSCE Document on Small
Arms and Light Weapons, as well as the Wassenaar
Arrangement plenary decision regarding the
notification of MANPADS exports.

Weapons management, and in particular the
control of civilian possession of small arms and light
weapons in post-conflict societies, is central to longer-
term human security. This will be effective only if it
takes place within the framework of comprehensive
programmes of security reform, subject to the authority
of civilian representative governments. These are only
a few, but important, elements that, I believe, we all
have to consider in our future undertakings.

