Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank
you, Sir, for having convened this open debate. I thank
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of France, Mr. Laurent
Fabius, for his presence here in the Security Council.
I also express our gratitude for the remarks by the
Secretary-General and the briefing by Mr. Zeid Ra'ad
Al Hussein, High Commissioner for Human Rights. We
also appreciate and deeply value the testimony given
by Louis Rafael I Sako, Patriarch of Babylon of the
Chaldeans, and representative of the Iraqi Parliament,
Mrs. Vian Dakhil.

Venezuela unequivocally condemns all acts of
intolerance, intimidation, aggression and Violence
committed against any religious or ethnic community
by extremist organizations, in particular acts committed
by terrorist groups, which have recently proliferated in
the Middle East. We condemn how human beings have
been degraded, with the revival of medieval practices
that we believed long-buried, including acts of murder,
slavery, kidnapping, torture, and human trafficking
that are motivated by religious belief or ethnicity. We
also condemn the destruction of the cultural, historical
and religious heritage of humankind in the Middle East
region at the hands of these extremist groups.

Venezuela, based on its ongoing commitment
to international peace and security, reiterates its
firm and unequivocal condemnation of violence and
terrorism, whatever their motivations, whoever the
perpetrators and wherever committed. We wonder how
it can be possible that the region that was the cradle
of civilizations, where diverse ethnic and religious
groups have coexisted for millennia, is being torn
apart by the barbaric terrorism that we are denouncing
today. We believe that the prolonged war in the region,
along with military interventions in Iraq, Libya and
Syria as well as assistance to armed groups seeking to
destabilize or overthrow Governments, has led to tragic
consequences, exacerbating inter-religious and ethnic
hatred and violence as State institutions have crumbled
or collapsed.

Prolonged war and intervention have also
jeopardized the unity, territorial integrity, sovereignty
and political independence of the countries of the
Middle East, unleashing a spiral of Violence against
communities based on their social, political, religious
or ethnic identity. The destruction of the social fabric
and the dismantling of State capacities and institutions
are fertile ground for terrorist extremism. We denounce
the current attemptto to apply the same formula in
Syria as was done in Iraq and Libya, The training,
supply and support of armed extremist groups, as well
as action against States based on politically motivated
arguments of questionable credibility have generated
economic, political and social chaos, paving the way
for the rise of extremist organizations such as those that
have generated the present situation.

How is it possible for terrorist groups to act with
such military might? We cannot but notice that such
organizations have continued to proliferate and have
recently grown more powerful. Who is financing them?
Who is providing the military arsenal that enables them
to commit such atrocities agaisnt religious or ethnic
minorities? We call on the Security Council to insist
on full compliance with the resolutions it has adopted
within the framework of Chapter VII of the Charter,
which prohibit funding and support for such criminal
groups. It is essential that the perpetrators of such
crimes and those who provide them with financial and
material support be brought to justice.

The international community must take decisive
action against terrorist organizations such as Al-Qaida,
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and the
Al-Nusra Front, among others. However, a military
vision alone cannot put a stop to those terrorist groups.
In order to guarantee peace and security, States and the
international community as awhole must contribute in an
organic and comprehensive way to building egalitarian
societies that promote inclusive development, eradicate
poverty and universalize systems of social security and
protection that ensure the full enjoyment of the social,
economic, cultural, environmental, political and civil
rights of all people, including minorities.

It is vital to explore the structural conditions that
trigger the appearance and proliferation of terrorist
entities. The international response to the phenomenon
demands an honest appraisal of States' responsibility to
preserve the security and integrity of society as a whole.
The fight to combat terrorism must be conducted within
the framework of international law, human rights, and
international humanitarian law. But the fight against
terrorism must not be used as an excuse to violate
the principles and purposes of the Charter. Political
solutions to conflict should prevail over military ones.

Venezuela is a melting pot of cultures, races and
religions. As a land free of armed conflict, we have
created a society whose common goals are based
on eradicating poverty and promoting inclusive
development to ensure for all its citizens a life with
dignity. Our country views with pain and indignation
the suffering of the Victims and expresses its solidarity
with the countries of the Middle East, with which we
have strong historical and cultural ties. From our seat
on the Council we will do everything possible to resolve
this scourge that threatens humanity itself.

