Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): Let me say how heartbroken
we are to learn of the passing of our dear friend and
brother, Bernard Tanoh-Boutchoue, the Permanent
Representative of Cote d'Ivoire to the United Nations.
We thank you, Sir, for arranging the minute of silence
in his memory and for your remarks on our behalf.

The departure of our friend was so sudden,
untimely and completely unexpected. For three or
four weeks, he had not been himself. He had become
unduly introspective. Nonetheless, he never ignored
his absolute loyalty to friends in whom he confided his
innermost feelings. One could not find a better person
at a time when good people are sorely needed. It is a
time when standing up for the truth and what is right
has become indispensable to regional and international
peace and security. He has leftus extremely heartbroken.
We express condolences to his family, colleagues and
fellow countrymen.

Turning to today's subject, we thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Arnault,
for his briefing on the report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia
(8/2018/279). We are honoured and pleased to see His
Excellency the Vice-President of Colombia here with
us today. We also acknowledge the presence of Her
Excellency the Foreign Minister of Colombia.

The congressional elections held on 11 March send
a positive message to all those who closely follow the
implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace.
It sends a positive message, not only because it was
concluded in a peaceful manner, but also because it is
of symbolic significance, opening a new chapter in the
country's encouraging political trajectory following
five decades of conflict. We congratulate both the
Government of Colombia and the Fuerza Alternativa
Revolucionaria del Comun on their commitment, as
well as on that tremendous achievement.

For reasons that are most obvious, we follow
and care about the success of the Colombian peace
process. For us in Africa, it is a source of inspiration.
The Colombian Peace Agreement has rekindled a
sense of hope and optimism for peace and stability in
the country. The patience and perseverance shown in
facing the challenges in the implementation process has
begun to show results. The Council should continue to
provide the necessary support to the Colombian parties
in the speedy implementation of the agreement.

We are conscious of the sensitive issues that still
require careful handling, including the expeditious
approval by Congress of the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace, the social and economic reintegration of former
combatants of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) into civilian
life, access to land ownership, the provision ofpersonal
and collective security and protection measures, the
absence or inadequate presence of State institutions
in places left by FARC-EP combatants, the continuous
killings of community leaders, former FARC-EP
members and their relatives, as well as other issues
highlighted in the report of the Secretary-General that
could potentially create political complications.

We raise those matters because we care about the
process. As I said earlier, we draw great inspiration from
events in Colombia. While we commend the continued
political will being demonstrated by the Government
with regard to legal guarantees, more must be done to
accelerate the full implementation of the amnesty law
and resolve all other outstanding issues.

With regard to the negotiations between the
Colombian Government and the Eje'rcito de Liberacion
Nacional (ELN), we recall the Council's condemnation
in January of renewed attacks by the ELN. We are
encouraged by reports that the two parties have now
resumed the fifth round of negotiations to broker an
improved ceasefire agreement. We urge the parties
to engage in constructive discussions in good faith in
order to reach a new ceasefire and a permanent peace
agreement. We commend Special Representative
Arnault, as well as United Nations personnel in
Colombia, on all their efforts in support of the peace
agreement. We also reiterate our appreciation to
countries of the region and other international partners
that continue to closely support and accompany the
implementation of the peace agreement.

Lastly, we take this opportunity to reaffirm our
continued support for the full implementation of the
Colombian Peace Agreement and stand in solidarity
with the people and Government of Colombia in their
exemplary efforts to transition to sustainable peace.

In conclusion, I would like to stress the fact that the
continued success of the process is critical not only to
the people of Colombia but to the entire world. We hope
that Colombians will continue to rally behind the Peace
Agreement and support the sustainable implementation
of the accord. The successful holding of the presidential
elections in Colombia, whose first round is scheduled
for 27 May, will be vital to ensure continued progress.

