I thank the Special Coordinator Mladenov for his important and, as usual, very comprehensive briefing on the situation on the ground. This month marks the seventy-second anniversary of a catastrophe for the Palestinian people known as the Nakba, when more than 700,000 Palestinians were ousted from their homes and stripped of their lands in Palestine. Since then, there has been only tragedy after tragedy for the Palestinian people. And just yesterday, the President of the State of Palestine announced their withdrawal from a previously made agreement with Israel. That is indeed unfortunate. However, we realize it is to be expected given the oppression and injustice suffered by the Palestinians all these years. Against that backdrop, let me share a number of pertinent points. First, the catastrophic situation can be brought to an end only by ending the Israeli occupation. We must never forget that Israel's illegal occupation of Palestinian land is the root cause of this protracted problem. Compounding it is Israel's illegal settlement policy in the occupied territories, which blatantly disregards international law and opinion, including resolution 2334 (2016). Without addressing the root cause, the Palestinian people will never escape their suffering. As Indonesia has repeatedly stressed, the Security Council has the responsibility to put an end to this situation, and to prevent the proposed annexation of large parts of the West Bank. I therefore come to my second point: it is the solemn duty of the Council to act against that annexation plan. There should be no ambiguity on this matter. Annexation constitutes a flagrant violation of international law, including the Charter of the United Nations, the Fourth Geneva Convention and various United Nations resolutions. It puts the two-State solution in jeopardy. Israel's insistence on continuing on the path of annexation will destroy any prospect for peace, create regional instability, usher in a new cycle of violence and eventually undermine Israel's security interests. Rather than stand idly by, the Security Council, in affirmation of its mandate to maintain international peace and security, must address Israel's illegal actions. Moreover, I also urge the international community at large to stop Israel's creeping annexation through various means, including halting any support to businesses related to the illegal settlements. In that regard, let me remind this body that resolution 2334 (2016) calls on all States "to distinguish, in their relevant dealings, between the territory of the State of Israel and the territories occupied since 1967" (para. 5). We would therefore be complicit if we allowed Israel to continue its journey to annexation. Let me now turn to my third point, regarding the coronavirus disease mitigation efforts in the occupied Palestinian territories. Palestinians face the looming threat of annexation amid the equally formidable threat of the pandemic. With the ongoing demolitions of homes, forced evictions and displacement of families, Palestinians are facing a health, humanitarian and human rights crisis. We join all others in appealing to the international community to strengthen support to United Nations agencies and civil society organizations, which are making a difference on the ground. We also applaud all health and humanitarian personnel, working tirelessly to address this multitude of crises. We warn that the accelerating "creeping annexation" by Israel of Palestinian lands definitely threatens to destroy the vision of two States. We cannot allow this to happen, as it would generate a perpetual catastrophe affecting the region and beyond. I would also like to echo what Special Coordinator Mladenov said and the warning of the Secretary-General of the danger of taking unilateral actions that would hinder ongoing diplomatic efforts to create the conditions for bringing Israelis and Palestinians back to the negotiating table. It is time to resume credible multilateral negotiations on the Palestinian question, guided by the internationally agreed parameters, and to implement the two-State solution, as called for by President Abbas and echoed by Nickolay just now. I once again reaffirm Indonesia's unequivocal solidarity with, and support for, the Palestinian people in achieving their inalienable rights, including the establishment of a contiguous independent State of Palestine, within the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital. In conclusion, I agree that there has been enough talking; what is needed now is for all Council members to implement the various relevant Council resolutions so as to get all parties to sit back down together again.
