Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I thank High
Representative Valentin Inzko for his excellent briefing
today.

We welcome the successful holding of the first
post-war census in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and note
improvements in its economic performance, including
its export and industrial production growth. As the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina comments
in his report (S/2013/646, annex), we hope that the
census can help bring economic and social benefits to
the country. However, the negative trend that concerns
the Security Council also persists. In that regard, I
would like to make the following three points.

First, it is worrisome that the political gridlock
continues to hinder stable governance. The sustained
political stalemate and the resulting failure to provide
basic governmental services not only affect people's
daily life, but also threaten the stability of the country.

Secondly, the political crisis has also led to
continuing delays in Bosnia and Herzegovina's
progress towards Euro-Atlantic integration. We note
that the country lags behind, while other countries in
the Balkans that shared the same experience of war are
moving towards regional integration. In that regard, we
would like to call on the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to take a forward-looking approach and
make necessary reforms to address the needs of people.
The long-overdue implementation of the European
Court of Human Rights Sejdie-Finci ruling will also be
an important step in that direction.

Lastly, we are concerned about the recurring and
divisive rhetoric against and challenges to Bosnia and
Herzegovina's sovereignty and territorial integrity.
They are particularly troublesome as they undermine
trust among the country's diverse ethnic communities
and hinder their genuine national reconciliation.
Commitment to the unity of Bosnia and Herzegovina
as one sovereign country is the very foundation of
the peace agreement that brought the country back
to life 18 years ago. Such genuine reconciliation and
commitment to a shared future are critical to building
the country's future. We therefore call upon all political
leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina to refrain from
divisive rhetoric,and to make every effort towards
national integration and reconciliation.

In conclusion, the Republic of Korea welcomes
the extension of the mandate of the European Union
military operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
continued role of the international community. We
would also like to reiterate our support for a democratic,
stable and unified Bosnia and Herzegovina.

