Mr. Harrison (United Kingdom): Through you,
Mr. President, I would like to thank the Secretary-
General for his latest report on the work of the United
Nations Political Office in Bougainville (UNPOB) and
Assistant Secretary-General Danilo Tiirk for his
informative briefing. We welcome the progress that has
been made since the last discussion in the Council, and
we pay a warm tribute to the work of Ambassador Noel
Sinclair and his team in Bougainville. At a time of the
Council's other preoccupations, it is very good to be
reminded of an area where the United Nations is
making a very positive contribution to the peace
process.

We welcome the signature of the memorandum of
understanding between the National Government and
the Bougainville parties, establishing a mechanism for
consultation on all aspects of the autonomy
arrangements, including the transfer of powers,
functions and resources and the settlement of disputes.

We welcome the commitment of Prime Minister
Sir Michael Somare to the peace process and the close
personal involvement of his Cabinet Ministers, led by
the Minister for Intergovernmental Relations, Sir Peter
Barter.

We are pleased that an Action Plan for the
Completion of Weapons Collection is being taken
forward, and that progress is being monitored. We hope
that that progress will be speedy.

We noted what Assistant Secretary-General Tiirk
said on sparing no effort to ensure that UNPOB's
mandate is completed in time. In that context, it will be
important that stage II is completed on time to ensure
the entry into force of constitutional arrangements
before the end of the mandate.

We support the engagement of all parties in
pressing to involve Francis Ona and his Me'ekamui
Defence Force in the peace process, but we do not
think that that should be allowed to delay the speedy
progress towards stage III of the weapons disposal
programme.

We also recognize the valuable contribution made
by the Peace Monitoring Group, and we would be
interested to know what UNPOB has in mind as an
alternative to the Group, when it withdraws at the end
of June. There is obviously no provision for additional
resources. In that context, we were disappointed to
learn that weapons disposal was unlikely to be
completed by the end of June, when the Peace
Monitoring Group ceases operations.

The United Kingdom continues to be committed
to giving what help it can. We have provided over
£50,000 over the past two years to support weapons
disposal and rehabilitation.

Finally, we would be interested to know about
discussions between the United Nations Development
Programme and UNPOB on post-conflict peace-
building sustainability, including how to address the
issue of the reintegration and rehabilitation of former
combatants.

