Mr. Berml'ldez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
We would first like to thank Mr. Valentin Inzko,
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for
his briefing today and for his most recent report (see S/2017/922, annex) to the Council. We also thank the
Italian presidency of the Security Council for convening
today's debate.

We welcome the Council's adoption today of
resolution 2384 (2017), renewing the mandate of the
European Union-led peacekeeping force (EUFOR)
Althea in Bosnia and Herzegovina for another year.
We appreciate the work that the Office of the High
Representative is doing on the ground to promote the
implementation of the General Framework Agreement
for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as the
efforts ofEUFOR Althea to ensure the country's political
and social stability. The international community must
continue to support the process of consolidating the
Dayton Agreement.

As we have often said, Uruguay is a firm believer
in strict respect for the principle of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations. Today, in that spirit, we reaffirm
our support for Bosnia and Herzegovina's unity,
territorial integrity and sovereignty. Respect for State
institutions and for the rule of law represents the path
to achieving a stable Bosnia and Herzegovina whose
constituent communities can live side by side in peace.
In that regard, Uruguay considers the rule of law and
the authority of the institutions established under the
1995 General Framework Agreement for Peace to be
crucial, and respect for them the road to stability and
peaceful coexistence for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Bosnia and Herzegovina's political stakeholders
must act responsibly and participate in a constructive
dialogue that will enable them to overcome their
differences, focusing on national reconciliation and on
achieving the shared goals that can make Bosnia and
Herzegovina strong and prosperous. Ensuring stability
and development for Bosnia and Herzegovina and
peaceful coexistence among all of its ethnic groups will
benefit the international community generally and the
region in particular.

I would like to make a few comments on some
aspects of the High Representative's report and recent
events. As the previous report did, it indicates that the
Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities have made only
limited progress towards meeting the requirements of
the five objectives and the two conditions established
by the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation
Council as a prerequisite for the closure of the Office
of the High Representative. It is therefore essential
to underscore the importance of working to make
headway on full compliance with the 5+2 agenda.
Despite the lack of progress in some areas, we should
also emphasize that Bosnia and Herzegovina has taken
some measures aimed at implementing its reform
programme, which is a positive step, making progress
in carrying out the July 2015 reform agenda, which
focuses on socioeconomic issues that directly affect
citizens, and taking some steps towards integration with
the European Union. However, there is still much work
to be done to strengthen the rule of law and improve the
country's overall political climate.

It will also be essential to tackle these reforms
before the start of the election campaign scheduled for
October 2018. The parties concerned in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the international community must
all support every effort to promote peace and stability
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In that regard, Uruguay
reiterates its desire to see a stable, sovereign Bosnia
and Herzegovina where all of its citizens can live in
peace and work for the common good.

