Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium): I shall make this statement on behalf of Germany and Belgium, the humanitarian co-penholders. Millions of Syrians continue to be in need of humanitarian assistance and protection. We all know the numbers - 11 million Syrians need humanitarian assistance. These are essential and critical needs: food, water, shelter, medical assistance and care. Since 2014, cross-border operations have offered a true lifeline to the Syrian people. The mechanism continues to allow the United Nations and its implementing partners to ensure life-saving assistance that reaches around 4 million Syrians. Since 14 November, the humanitarian co-penholders have done their utmost to find agreement on a draft resolution to renew the mechanism. We have done this in good faith and in an inclusive, transparent and thorough manner, with all Council members and also consulting neighbouring countries. We have followed a clear humanitarian imperative. It is the fate of those 4 million people that has been our exclusive motivation. As was clearly demonstrated by the voting on 20 December 2019 (see S/PV.8697), the divisions among various Council members run deep. We have since continued to engage with all parties, aiming to keep the bar high. Three crossings are at the very heart of this mandate; they are the bottom line from a humanitarian perspective. Yet, over and over again, it has been made clear that a mandate including all three crossings is not acceptable to all members. The crossing point of Al-Yarubiyah, in the north-east of Syria, has provided medical aid to 1.4 million people. Today, there is no viable alternative to that crossing point. We deeply deplore the fact that we could not come to an agreement to keep that crossing point, which the United Nations and humanitarian partners deem essential to the work. Our text requests the Secretary- General to examine alternatives by the end of February in order to ensure that humanitarian aid can be provided throughout the country, including in the north-east. Today is the last day of the current mandate. In the north-west, where military escalation continues, 2.7 million people completely depend on the mechanism. Therefore, the co-penholders now propose a text that allows for humanitarian aid to continue to reach those people in dire need. We thank all delegations that have constructively and actively contributed to the text. The amendment orally proposed by the Russian Federation is, however, not acceptable because it contradicts the very system of the cross-border mechanism, which is in itself an exception to the principles that were mentioned by the representative of the Russian Federation. This system is needed more than ever. We need to preserve it. We now ask the Council to approve the draft resolution as presented by the co-penholders and to vote in favour of it.
