Mr. Mladenov: Just a few short weeks ago we
teetered on the precipice of another devastating conflict,
as we witnessed the most intense fighting between
Israeli forces and Palestinian militants from Hamas
and Islamic Jihad in Gaza since 2014. The United
Nations worked intensively with Egypt and all sides
to calm the situation, but Israeli and Palestinian lives
were tragically lost. My sincere condolences go out to
the families and friends of all those who were killed,
and I wish a speedy recovery to the injured. While the
situation has now stabilized, it remains very tense. One
thing is clear: these dangerous cycles of escalation and
de-escalation are not sustainable in future.

Thousands of Palestinians participated on 3 May
in the weekly demonstrations at the Gaza perimeter
fence. Incendiary balloons were launched, and stones
and pipe bombs were thrown at Israeli soldiers, who
responded with live fire, rubber bullets and tear gas,
killing two Palestinians and injuring 49. Later that day,
a sniper, reportedly from the Palestinian Islamic Jihad,
fired across the fence, injuring two Israeli soldiers. In
response to the sniper attack, the Israel Defense Forces
(IDF) launched several tank shells, while the air force
targeted military sites in Gaza, killing two Palestinian
militants and injuring two civilians. That was the
beginning of the most serious escalation since 2014.

Over the course of the following 48 hours, 650
rockets were fired from Gaza. While approximately 240
projectiles were intercepted by the Iron Dome system;
several houses, two kindergartens, a school and a
hospital in Israel were directly hit. Four Israeli civilians
were killed and over 200 were injured, according to the
IDF. During the same period, the Israel Defense Forces
reported that it had hit over 300 Palestinian militant
targets in Gaza, including a senior Hamas official, who
was targeted and killed by an air strike. According to
sources in Gaza, 25 Palestinians were killed and over
150 were injured.

After intense efforts by the United Nations and
Egypt, a cessation of hostilities was established as of
early morning on 6 May, ending the escalation. I take
this opportunity to once again urge all sides to use this
period to reduce tensions, solidify the fragile calm and
commit to implementing the understandings established
in the past few months.

Sniper fire from Gaza has been a constant threat
that, on at least four occasions over the past year,
has pushed both sides closer to confrontation. This
latest incident followed a pattern that has been well
established - the closer we get to consolidating an
understanding that would relieve the pressure on people
in Gaza and reduce the risk of rocket fire towards Israel,
an incident like the last one occurs and undermines our
careful and painstaking efforts.

Despite that, the United Nations and Egyptian teams
will continue to work intensely with all sides to use this
window of opportunity to provide assistance to the
people of Gaza and further reduce the risk of conflict.
Sustained calm is also critical to supporting Egyptian-
led efforts to advance intra-Palestinian reconciliation,
which should enable the return of a unified, legitimate
Palestinian Government to the Gaza Strip.
I take this opportunity to welcome Israel's decision
to lift the ban on accessing the Gazan fishing zone
and expand it to 15 negotiationsautical miles in some
places, reopen the Erez and Kerem Shalom crossings
as normal on 12 May and other steps taken in the past
few days. I also welcome the renewed commitment by
the Palestinian Government in Ramallah to engage
constructively on addressing the situation in Gaza.

I also want to reiterate the call by the Secretary-
General, who condemned in the strongest terms the
launching of rockets from Gaza into Israel, particularly
the targeting of civilian population centres, and also
call on Israel to exercise maximum restraint and refrain
from using lethal force against protesters, except as a
last resort.

Turning briefly to the humanitarian situation,
Deputy Special Coordinator Jamie McGoldrick has
warned that health providers in Gaza are struggling to
treat the high numbers of injuries sustained during the
weekly demonstrations. Many of the wounded require
complex surgeries not currently available there. Yet
access to treatment outside of Gaza continues to be
challenging, as the lack of consistency in the approval
process is having very serious and negative implications
on people.

Meanwhile, the international community
has continued its efforts to address the dreadful
situation in Gaza. The Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of International Assistance to
Palestinians met in Brussels on 30 April and reiterated
its support for the implementation of a package of
urgent humanitarian and economic interventions in
Gaza through the United Nations. Between October
2018 and April 2019, approximately $112 million was
mobilized, enabling a significant increase in electricity
supply through the Gaza power plant, the creation of
thousands of temporary jobs in Gaza and the delivery
of essential medical supplies and other support for the
struggling health sector. Fuel deliveries for the power
plant have been extended. As I speak, we are moving
forward on other more sustainable efforts for the energy
sector, with a focus on renewable energy. On 13 May,
I visited the second-largest hospital in Gaza, where a
landmark World Health Organization-developed solar
power plant project will cover a substantial part of the
energy needs of the hospital.

I appreciate the financial support provided by
Japan and many others for those critical projects. I urge
other donors to further increase their support for our

joint efforts to improve the situation on the ground. The
most significant contribution to date remains that of
the State of Qatar. On behalf of the Secretary-General,
I would like to express our sincere appreciation for
the assistance provided by Qatar, without which the
situation in Gaza would have been untenable. On
6 May, His Highness the Emir of Qatar announced
an assistance package for the Palestinian people of
approximately $480 million - $180 million for Gaza,
$250 million as loans for the Palestinian Government
and $50 million as grants for projects in the West Bank.
In relation to Gaza, some of that funding will allow
the United Nations to provide fuel for electricity until
the end of the year, expand temporary employment
programmes and focus on permanent job creation.

While Gaza continues to command significant
attention, the situation in the occupied West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, is of growing concern
to all of us. The prolonged absence of a political
horizon to resolve the broader conflict has coincided
with a steady deterioration of the living conditions of
Palestinians. That, coupled with violence, settlement
expansion, demolitions of Palestinian property and
the persistent threat of further economic decline, is
creating an explosive mix that could have serious
security implications.

Two hundred and forty Palestinians were injured
by Israeli forces during the reporting period, including
nine children, during demonstrations, clashes,
security operations and other incidents in the West
Bank. According to the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), four Palestinians
were injured or had their property damaged by settlers,
While one Palestinian attack against Israeli civilians in
the West Bank was recorded, resulting in one injury
and damage to a vehicle. I unequivocally condemn all
attacks on Palestinian and Israeli civilians and call on
all sides to refrain from violence. All perpetrators must
be accountable for their crimes.

Allow me to reiterate that settlements are illegal
under international law and remain a substantial
obstacle to peace. In that context, Israeli authorities
demolished or seized 40 structures during the reporting
period, displacing 31 people, overwhelmingly on the
grounds of a lack of Israeli-issued building permits,
which are nearly impossible for Palestinians to obtain.
On 29 April, 31 structures were demolished in East
Jerusalem, the highest single-day total monitored by
OCHA since 2009. On 3 May, a joint statement by the
Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator, the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
called for

"an immediate halt to the Israeli authorities'
destruction of Palestinian-owned property in
East Jerusalem".

On the following day four structures were
demolished in Silwan, displacing 11 Palestinians.
According to OCHA, five people were seriously
injured when Israeli forces reportedly beat and used
stun grenades and sponge-covered bullets to push
residents away as they tried to retrieve belongings prior
to the demolitions. Moreover, in a worrisome move,
Israel's High Court of Justice upheld a new Israeli
military order that accelerates the demolition process
for new structures built without permits in Area C of
the West Bank.

Regrettably, the reporting period saw no resolution
to the Palestinian Authority (PA) financial crisis.
For the third consecutive month, the Palestinian
Government has refused to receive Israel's transfer of
any tax revenues less than the full amount owed to it. I
am concerned that, despite the PA's announced austerity
measures and the support package committed by Qatar,
the latter's survival remains at risk.

I briefed the Council in March (see S/PV.8489)
and said that the crisis would have a substantial
impact on the Palestinian economy, with reduced
purchasing power and weakened growth. The first
signs of that negative trend are already beginning to
show. A long-term resolution of the financial crisis is
urgently needed. Its continuation threatens to further
destabilize an already volatile situation. Both parties
should implement their bilateral agreements and avoid
taking unilateral actions that undermine the stability
of the Palestinian Authority. Against that backdrop,
a team from the Office of the Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process recently visited
the Al-Fawwar Palestinian refugee camp, where the
residents endure harsh living conditions and UNRWA's
ability to deliver essential services is hampered
by its own financial crisis. Commissioner-General
Krahenbiihl, who will also be briefing the Council
today, will speak more on the severity of the current
challenges facing Palestine refugees.

On a positive note, with the advent of the Muslim
holy month of Ramadan, hundreds of thousands of
Muslims from the occupied West Bank were able
to pray at Al-Aqsa Mosque during the holy month. I
would also like to take this opportunity to welcome the
relative calm at the holy site and urge continued respect
for the status quo and relevant agreements.

Turning very briefly to the region, the situation on
the Golan is calm. However, the potential for heightened
tension between the parties to the 1974 Disengagement
of Forces Agreement persists. On 1 May, the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF)
saw that some Israel soldiers, who had been laying
razor concertina wire in the area between the Israeli
technical fence and an UNDOF position, had crossed
the ceasefire line. During that activity, Syrian Arab
Armed Forces soldiers deployed close to that location
to monitor their activity. UNDOF liaised with both
sides and was able to de-escalate the situation.

In Lebanon, the Cabinet started reviewing the
draft 2019 State budget on 30 April, as protests over
reported austerity measures continued. At stake in the
ongoing budget discussions is meeting commitments
from the 2018 CEDRE conference on economic
development and reform, which include the need to
reduce Lebanon's deficit.

In conclusion, I would like to return to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict. The recent escalation in Gaza has
once again demonstrated the urgency of solidifying and
expanding the existing understandings on the ground.
We must ask ourselves, how many more years will
Palestinians in Gaza be forced to live on a pittance
from the international community, under the control
of Hamas, and suffer from Israeli closures? How many
more years will Israelis be forced to run for shelters as
rockets launched by Palestinian militants in Gaza rain
down indiscriminately from above?

The United Nations and its partners have, yet again,
tried to mitigate the impact of the crisis in Gaza, but
those efforts will ultimately fail unless there is progress
on resolving the Palestinian divide, lifting the closures
and charting a course towards the two-State solution,
based on long-standing international parameters,
including the relevant United Nations resolutions
and previous agreements. There are no short-cuts to
sustainable peace.

I also take note of the invitation by the United
States and the Kingdom of Bahrain to convene
Government, civil society and business leaders to
discuss the potential for economic investments and
initiatives that would be made possible by a future
Palestinian-Israeli peace agreement and a solution to
the final-status issues. Humanitarian and economic
support is very important for people, but it is also
critical for creating an environment conducive to viable
negotiations. However, the solution to the conflict
remains fundamentally political.

