Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like at the outset to thank
Mr. Ibrahima Fall and Ms. Liberata Mulamula for their
presentations this afternoon.

The holding of the Second Summit of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region is
an important event with respect to a lasting return to
peace and stability in the region, which has
experienced harsh ordeals. Resolution of the problems
of the Great Lakes region involves national peace
processes, which the United Nations has supported in
recent years in Burundi and in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. However, they also require the
development of regional cooperation in areas of
common interest.

The high level of participation at the Nairobi
Summit and the documents signed there show that the
desire of the States concerned to promote such
cooperation, in the spirit of the United Nations Charter,
is strong.

I should like to stress two areas for vital
cooperation that are identified by the Pact on Security,
Stability and Development in the Great Lakes Region.
The first relates to security. The Security Council has
often noted that many security problems in the Great
Lakes region have a trans-border dimension.
Increasingly, it has focused on this regional dimension,
for example by adopting resolution 1653 (2006) early
this year.

The second concerns economic relations. All
States of the region have a clear interest in cooperating
to ensure economic development and to make the best
of their natural resources. We consider that ownership
by the States of the region with respect to security and
regional economic cooperation is essential. The
African Union and the United Nations provided
significant support for the preparation and convening
of the Dar es Salaam and Nairobi Summits. But it is
the continued commitment of the States of the region,
within the context of the follow-up mechanism, that
will determine the success of this approach. My
delegation therefore welcomes the determination of the
countries of the Great Lakes region to meet their
common challenges together.

Finally, I wish to thank the Permanent Mission of
the United Republic of Tanzania for having prepared
the draft presidential statement, which France supports.

