Mr. van Aartsen (Netherlands): The Netherlands
fully associates itself with the statement of Belgium,
which currently holds the Presidency of the European
Union. Therefore, I will limit myself to three specific
but interrelated issues - politics, security and
reconstruction a to convey a message of urgency.

First, concerning politics, as the military
campaign proceeds, the realities on the ground in
Afghanistan are changing quickly. This has direct
consequences for the political weight that every
segment of the Afghan population carries in
negotiations on the future Government. It is urgent that
Ambassador Brahimi start bringing parties together, as
part of the fulfilment of the comprehensive proposals
he presented this morning. A new political structure
should be founded on Afghan ownership and should
not be imposed from outside. A central role for the
United Nations, as a catalyst and adviser e not as a
governor - is a necessity. The Security Council
resolution must, in our View, encourage Ambassador
Brahimi to act speedily.

Secondly, as concerns security, the success of the
military campaign against terrorism should not result in
the predominance of a particular party or faction. More
specifically, the possession of towns should not
determine exclusively the outcome of the political
process. The Security Council resolution must enable
swift action to ensure as soon as possible some
international, preferably United Nations, presence in
the towns that changed hands in recent days. Very soon
after that, transitional military arrangements will be
essential to create a secure environment. It is therefore
important that the Security Council resolution decides
on possible and doable options on that.

My third point is on reconstruction. The United
Nations should take the lead in coordinating and
organizing reconstruction and rehabilitation. Quick-
impact projects in areas such as food, housing and
water supply should be implemented without delay to
support economic recovery.

There is no need to set up new channels or
structures for international aid. The Afghanistan
Support Group can continue to act as the platform for
donor coordination, supporting the United Nations. A
humanitarian donor conference must be coordinated by
the United Nations. The Security Council resolution
must underpin the role of the United Nations and the
Afghanistan Support Group.

I fully agree with Ambassador Lavrov's idea that
Afghanistan is not the prerogative of the "six plus
two". For the United Nations effort to succeed, it is
important that not only the wider membership stays
involved, but that also those countries providing the
bulk of resources, are a participant in the policy-
making process. Their level of commitment must be
reflected by, for example, setting up a group of friends
to support the work of the Secretary-General on
Afghanistan.

To conclude, I am grateful for Ambassador
Brahimi's briefing this morning; he deserves our full
support. The Security Council resolution has to provide
him with the right tools to act promptly. These tools
are: first, encouragement to bring the parties together
speedily; second, some international presence in the
cities in the very short term; third, a quick decision on
achievable or doable options for security arrangements;
and fourth, swift action in the area of early
reconstruction and an unequivocal choice in favour of
the Afghanistan Support Group.

In this way, the Council will have set up a
coherent strategy that will allow the United Nations to
move forward.

