Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): Like speakers before
me, I would like to commend you, Mr. President, and your
delegation for organizing this briefing on a very important,
specific aspect of the concept of human security, to which
you are so personally committed. We would also like to
thank the three briefers, who have provided us with a large
number of new ideas.

Just over 100 years ago, on 11 January 1899, the
Russian Minister for Foreign Affairs, Count Mikhail
Nikolayevich Muravyov, dispatched a circular to all
independent States, convening what was to become known
as the first Hague Peace Conference. Although the
Conference, which was attended by 26 States, failed to
achieve its primary objective - the limitation of
armaments - it did adopt a number of conventions relating
to war on land and sea. It also accepted three declarations:
one prohibiting the use of asphyxiating gases, another
prohibiting the use of dumdum bullets and a third one
prohibiting the discharge of projectiles or explosives from
balloons. Its most important achievement, however, was
that it was generally seen as the first in a series of peace
conferences which would gradually eliminate the scourge of
war.

The second Hague Peace Conference was held in
1907, and the third was planned for 1915. The latter failed
to meet, due to the outbreak of the First World War, but
the rhythm of the Hague Peace Conferences provided the
impulse for the subsequent creation of the League of
Nations, the forerunner of our present United Nations.

The modern concept of the law of war - the notion
that war is not a total surrender to barbarity, but that certain
norms of behaviour continue to apply even after the
outbreak of hostilities - is also closely linked with the
Netherlands, thanks to the epochal work of Hugo Grotius,
De Jure Belli'ac Pacis (On the Law of War and Peace),
published in 1625. These norms of behaviour under
conditions of armed conflict are the subject of our open
briefing today.

As we approach the end of the twentieth century, we
are disturbed to find that there is little left of the relative
optimism which prevailed at the Hague Peace Conference
a century ago. What makes it difficult to continue to
believe that we are in the process of gradually alleviating
and restraining the horrors of war is the fact that two
important distinctions seem to be simultaneously
vanishing: that between international wars and civil wars,
and that between combatants and non-combatants. Of all
the armed conflicts currently being discussed in the
Security Council, only one is a war between two States,
and it is generally estimated that more than 75 per cent of
the casualties produced by a modern armed conflict are
civilians. If this trend continues, the law of war will
slowly cease to play its regulatory role, and we will
witness a return to the days when war was a phenomenon
of unmitigated barbarity.

This is not due to a lack of legal instruments. Law
of war, like international law in general, is, of course,
never complete, and many studies and seminars are
devoted to its further development. The Security Council,
however, should not try to add more documents to the
already impressive list of available texts. It should be our
aim to obtain a wider acceptance of existing legal
instruments, to promote a strict application of their
provisions, to bring about an early entry into force of the
International Criminal Court, and most of all to identify
feasible, practical steps that by their nature lend
themselves to being taken by this Council rather than by
other organs, bodies or agencies.

One thing the Security Council can and should do is
to keep drawing special attention to the problem of
security for humanitarian workers, not because
humanitarian workers deserve more protection than the
people they are supposed to protect, but because attacks
on them put the whole concept of humanitarian assistance
in jeopardy. We have seen in Angola how two attacks on
aircraft carrying humanitarian workers have almost
succeeded in bringing the United Nations presence in that
country to a halt.

In addition, the Security Council could see to it that
for every United Nations-led intervention a clear mandate
is drawn up. Whenever Chapter VI or Chapter VII
operations are planned, the need for civilian protection
should be given a prominent place in a specific mandate.

The Security Council certainly would not wish to
interfere with the work of other members of the United
Nations family, but it could take the initiative in
requesting the establishment of a strategic framework to
guide the work of the various United Nations organs in
complex emergencies. Although the peaceful resolution of
any conflict will always be the ultimate goal, protection
of civilians should be one of the pre-eminent short-term
aims of such a strategic framework. Although one might

 

argue that this approaches the limit of the Security
Council's competence, we could urge the humanitarian
relief agencies to apply principled programming so as to
preserve the credibility of their humanitarian activities. It is
clear that relief agencies depend on the parties in the
conflict to reach the victims they want to help. At times a
warring party may be tempted to obstruct a relief operation
if it considers it predominantly beneficial to the other party.
Relief agencies will be able to deal with such situations
only if their operational decisions are based on a sound and
transparent set of humanitarian principles. This is what is
meant by principled programming, and it is our view that
in the context of a strategic framework the Security Council
may legitimately ask for it to be applied by all humanitarian
actors.

If we want to salvage anything of the concept of the
law of war in this modern age, when most wars are internal
conflicts, we must finally find a solution to the problem of
maintaining contact with both warring parties. In all internal
conflicts - leaving aside the extreme contingency that a
State has ceased to exist - we are faced with a recognized,
sovereign State on the one hand and a rebel movement or
insurgency on the other. We cannot hope to promote
respect for humanitarian law in what common article 3 of
the Geneva Conventions calls "armed conflict not of an
international character" if we do not allow ourselves to
establish contact with the non-State party.

The problem becomes even more intractable when the
recognized, sovereign State is itself the terrorizing party.
The Netherlands disagrees with those who believe that even
then Article 2, paragraph 7, of the United Nations Charter
provides us with the ultimate answer. That article should
never be read in isolation. After all, the opening words of
the Charter do not refer to sovereign States but to the
peoples of the United Nations. It must be the peoples who
are entitled to the protection we are discussing today.
Nothing contained in the United Nations Charter authorizes
a State to terrorize its own citizens.

