Mr. Jeremic' (Serbia): This afternoon, we meet
again for a regular meeting of the Security Council on
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMMIK) pursuant to resolution 1244 (1999).
I welcome the presence of Special Representative
Lamberto Zannier.
The United Nations remains an indispensable
actor in the province. We believe that it is critical for
all responsible stakeholders on the ground, together
with the Security Council, to reaffirm support for
UNMIK as a strong pillar of peace and stability. It is
equally critical for stakeholders to fully cooperate with
UNMIK at all times, including in the work it does at
the municipal level through the UNMIK Administration
in Mitrovica.

The status neutrality of the United Nations - and
that of all organizations that operate under its overall
authority, such as the Kosovo Force (KFOR), European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) Mission in Kosovo (OMIK) - remains the
only acceptable framework within which all of us can
work together to improve the lives of ordinary people
in Kosovo, irrespective of their ethnicity.

Serbia highly appreciates the unwavering
commitment of the United Nations to maintaining the
external representation function of UNMIK, which is
its obligation under resolution 1244 (1999). However,
we are deeply concerned by the fact that the province's
ethnic Albanian authorities have actively resisted such
a role by the United Nations of late, as the report under
discussion points out. That situation is highly
regrettable, for "should this policy continue over time,
it might result in increasing isolation of Kosovo", to
quote the report (S/2010/562, para. 54). We hope
Pristina will come to embrace the more constructive
approach offered by UNMIK and supported by this
Council.

The report highlights the fact that there has been
no significant change in the consistently low numbers
of returns of internally displaced persons to the
province - only 233 Kosovo Serbs in three months, to
be exact, out of a total of 205,835 expelled since June
1999, according to figures from the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

In addition, the report refers to the 3 October
enthronement of our Patriarch Irinej in the spiritual
home and administrative centre of the Serbian Orthodox
Church for the past eight centuries, the city of Pee. In
his enthronement address to the faithful, His Holiness
emphasized the importance of reconciliation when he
said:

"Appealing in this solemn moment from this
sacred place with love and respect not only for
10-63455
the Serbian Orthodox in Kosovo, but also for the
honourable Albanian people and all other local
inhabitants here, we invite them to peace and
unity, always predicated upon divine and human
justice".

For some, the words of His Holiness were
overshadowed by the stoning of buses full of pilgrims
on their way back from the holy site and by what
today's report mentions in passing as "posters placed
prior to the ceremony along the road to the Patriarchate
depicting the Patriarch as a war criminal" (ibid., para. 49). The posters also portrayed the Patriarch as a
demonic figure. That kind of incident can only serve to
enflame the passions of extremists on both sides. It is
deeply regrettable that no international or local officials
condemned that act and that no investigation was carried
out to uncover the perpetrators of that hate crime.

The report draws attention to continuing efforts
by the authorities in Pristina to unilaterally alter the
complex reality on the ground, especially in north
Kosovo. It underlines the fact that the situation "has
remained unstable, and tensions have grown" (ibid., para. 59). One event that triggered tensions, according
to the report, was the insistence by the ethnic
Albanians to try to alter the status quo in north Kosovo
by authorizing a construction project without approval
by the UNMIK Administration in Mitrovica.

Another event, according to the report, was the
deployment of Kosovo Police Regional Operations
Special Units to north Kosovo without agreement with
EULEX. The unsanctioned act of sending those
paramilitaries, the vast majority of whom are ethnic
Albanians from south Kosovo, is perceived by the
majority that lives in north Kosovo as a provocation
and an incitement to violence.

During this reporting period, the authorities in
Pristina unfortunately resorted to unilateral action
against Serbian targets in other parts of the province as
well. For example, in late September, armed teams of
ethnic Albanians brought down Serbia Telecom's
mobile and fixed telephony network in south Kosovo,
including equipment located in isolated enclaves and
monastic communities. Aside from the significant
material damage that resulted, the destruction of that
network immediately affected approximately 100,000
south Kosovo Serbs, disrupting their ability to
communicate beyond their enclaves. That is a serious
breach of contemporary humanitarian norms.
10-63455
As the report underscores, that carefully
orchestrated operation disrupted the normal functioning
of several licensed Kosovo Serb media outlets. It also
affected access to emergency services, with hospital
officials in Gracanica ascribing several fatalities to the
inability of patients to call for help.

The report informs us that the ethnic Albanian
authorities in Pristina called their elections, which,
according to news reports, may take place next month.
Unfortunately, those elections are not being held in
accordance with resolution 1244 (1999). Since the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General did not
call them, the OSCE will not monitor them and the
United Nations will not certify them. Under such
circumstances, it is plainly impossible for the
Government of Serbia to invite any of our citizens to
participate in them.

The world has supported by acclamation the fact
that dialogue is the only road to peace in Kosovo -
the only way both dignity and stability can be delivered
to Serbs and Albanians alike.

The European Union's facilitation role and its
capacity to act as an honest broker could play a
decisive role in moving us towards a new, more
promising moment. We hope that our differences may
now be readdressed in less adversarial circumstances.
For us, the dialogue means negotiating and being open
to compromise. It is about overcoming prejudices and
taming passions.

A fair and balanced process could become the
catalyst for harnessing the forces of moderation - an
instrument for those seeking to rebuild bridges and
begin reconciliation in earnest. It could also provide a
critical boost to securing a peaceful European future
for the entire Western Balkans. Serbia wants this
dialogue to begin as soon as possible, and we expect it
to focus on the least controversial issues first. Early
successes should be able to be leveraged as a way to
build momentum for further achievements when we
proceed to other, more delicate topics.

The journey to creative solutions will require
political imagination, respect for our democracy and
great skill. We hope we can enter a phase in which all
parties will leave behind anachronistic analyses and
diplomatic ambushes and instead concentrate on the
task at hand.
5
Serbia has always maintained that Pristina's
attempt to secede unilaterally is a violation of the basic
principles of the United Nations Charter and the
Helsinki Final Act, as well as of resolution 1244 (1999).
Our principled position, enshrined in our Constitution,
remains unchanged: we shall not recognize Kosovo's
unilateral declaration of independence, explicitly or
implicitly. As we would for any other place in the
world, we believe there can never be a sustainable
solution to an issue of such magnitude without the
consent of all stakeholders.

We hold the firm view that the continued pursuit
of recognitions of the unilateral declaration of
independence is futile and counterproductive. Everyone
who wanted to make a point has already made it, and
we still do not have a settlement. A vast majority of
States Members of the United Nations have refrained
from recognizing the unilateral declaration of
independence. On behalf of the Republic of Serbia,
allow me once again to sincerely thank those countries
for their support and solidarity. We appeal to them to
stay the course throughout the dialogue process.

We believe it is critically important that no
impediments be placed on the road the stakeholders
have committed to take. It would be equally harmful if
someone tried to alter realities on the ground while
discussions are under way. Any attempt to change
those realities unilaterally or through the use of force
would dramatically, and perhaps fatally, undermine the
dialogue.

That is one of the many reasons why the
reporting function of the United Nations remains
indispensable. Serbia welcomes the Secretary-General's
commitment to report all developments in the dialogue
to the Security Council. Its centrality and leading role
in determining and providing legitimacy to a
comprehensive settlement remains paramount in
accordance with its resolution 1244 (1999) and the
primary responsibility to maintain international peace
and security assigned to it by the United Nations
Charter.

No one in this Chamber should doubt our
readiness to be a true partner in forging a transforrnative
peace. But we cannot do so alone, for in the twenty-
first century no side can ever triumph by demanding
unilateral concessions or seeking to maximize narrowly
conceived objectives. Win-win solutions are impossible
to find with zero-sum attitudes. Serbia, for its part, will
spare no effort; we will neither tire nor lose our nerve.
Without denying either the good or the ills of the past,
we shall confidently continue to pursue our vision of
the future.

Out of respect for our ancestors - but even more
because of the generations that will follow - we shall
leave no stone unturned in our quest to achieve a
legitimate compromise. But this we shall seek not out
of fear or under duress. Rather, we shall do so on the
basis of our belief that, if we act together in good faith,
we can finally transform that plot of land, so rich in
history and dear to both peoples, from one of
contention to one of harmony.

