Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, I wish to thank you, Sir, for arranging
this formal meeting to consider the question of Kosovo
in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

We also wish to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kouchner, for his
detailed briefing. He, along with the United Nations
Interim Administration in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the
Kosovo Force (KFOR), have done a great deal of work
in very difficult circumstances. The Chinese delegation
supports their efforts to ensure the full implementation
of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999).

It is the view of the Chinese delegation that there
has been no fundamental improvement in the situation
of Kosovo. The security situation there is far from
desirable. The atrocities and violence against Serbs and
other minorities remain cause for grave concern. We
support the positive role played by UNMIK in its
efforts to promote tolerance and reconciliation and to
prevent ethnic violence. We hope that UNMIK and
KFOR will continue to adopt concrete measures to
ensure that all residents of Kosovo can live without
fear of violence, intimidation and harassment.

We welcome the fact that Kosovo minorities are
beginning to return home, but their numbers and pace
of return are far from satisfactory. It is our hope that
UNMIK will continue to encourage the voluntary and
safe return ofthe Kosovo minorities.

We have also noted the fact that the preparatory
work for municipal elections is under way. In the
current circumstances, we cannot help but be sceptical
as to whether the elections can be conducted in a
climate of freedom and peace. We are very disturbed
by the recent increase in political violence. If the
politically motivated violence perpetrated by
extremists and hard-liners is allowed to continue
uncurbed, the independence of Kosovo and the policy
of ethnic cleansing will be legitimized. For a variety of
reasons, Kosovo Serbs and most of the Kosovo Turkish
communities have not participated in the process of
civil registration. If the elections are held in such
circumstances, the results cannot be expected to be
perceived as fair and equitable and are likely to trigger
ever more acute ethnic hostility. We expect UNMIK to
adopt concrete measures to improve law and order and
to help alleviate the fears of the minorities so that they
will feel encouraged to participate in the electoral
process.

Finally, we wish to emphasize that the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia must be respected. Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999) specifically provides
for the status of Kosovo. No members of this Council
recognize or support Kosovo as an independent State.
Any course of action designed to steer Kosovo towards
independence is dangerous and illegal. Unfortunately,
however, some people are trying to do precisely that,
which is absolutely unacceptable. It is our hope that
UNMIK and the Special Representative himself will
strictly adhere to the provisions of resolution 1244
(1999).

