Mr. Henze (Germany): Since the Security Council
met on 9 April this year to have a discussion on
Afghanistan, the situation in this war-tom country has
further deteriorated. Instead of committing themselves to
all-inclusive political negotiations, the Afghan parties
have continued to prefer war to peace, to the detriment of
the country and the people of Afghanistan.
Since Kabul was taken over by the Taliban on 27
September, this Council has heard disturbing reports
about the human rights situation in the Afghan capital,
especially regarding the treatment of women and girls.
My Government is very concerned by these reports and
fully supports the statement made by the
Secretary-General on 7 October, in which he warned of
possible repercussions on United Nations programmes
should women be continuously denied access to education
and employment.

Less than three weeks after control over Kabul
changed hands, Afghanistan faces the danger of another
battle for its capital. This time it could be started by an
attack from the north. Yet again, the civilian population
would have to pay the price. It is appalling that repeated
calls by the international community, including the United
Nations General Assembly and Security Council, for a
cessation of hostilities and serious political negotiations
have so far been disregarded by the Afghan parties.

More than ever, the recent events in Afghanistan
make it clear that there is no military solution to this
conflict. Control over Afghanistan cannot be won in war.
Indeed, as stated in the joint declaration by Kazakstan,
Kyrgyzstan, the Russian Federation, Tajikistan and
Uzbekistan, it is time to end the war in Afghanistan,
which has been dragging on for years - and, I would
add, for too many years. But still the war continues and
the country suffers.

 

My country enjoys a long history of friendly relations
with all segments of Afghan society. We therefore strongly
deplore the ongoing civil war and its political, economic
and humanitarian consequences. With many others, we have
tried and will continue to try to help the civilian population
through humanitarian aid. However, we feel that the ever
more urgent priority must be to help Afghanistan to leave
of the vicious circle created by nearly 17 years of war and
enter a meaningful peace process.

The international community has developed a clear
understanding about the basic framework of an Afghan
peace process. It is ready to help the people of Afghanistan
to achieve peace and agrees that there is a leading role to
be played by the United Nations in this respect.

General Assembly resolution 50/88 B on the situation
in Afghanistan, adopted by consensus on 19 December
1995, calls for national reconciliation through the transfer
of power to a transitory "mechanism". The transitory
"mechanism" is usually referred to as the
"fully representative and broad-based authoritative
council" (resolution 50/88 B, para. 4).

It would be responsible for negotiating and overseeing
an immediate and durable ceasefire, the creation and initial
supervision of a national security force and the formation
of an acceptable transitional government. The transitional
government would be in office until the conditions for free
and fair elections were established.

General Assembly resolution 50/88 B on the situation
in Afghanistan also contains a firm commitment from the
international community to national reconciliation in
Afghanistan and to its sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity. It affirms the readiness of the United Nations to
assist the people of Afghanistan in their efforts to achieve
these aims.

The General Assembly resolution has been
complemented by several Security Council decisions since
it was adopted, the latest being the presidential statement of
28 September 1996. In that statement the Council called
for - among other things - the immediate cessation of all
armed hostilities. The leading role of the United Nations in
international efforts towards a peaceful solution of the
Afghan conflict was confirmed in the letter from the
President of the Security Council dated 22 August 1996
addressed to the Secretary General.

 

We see that the international groundwork for a
viable intra-Afghan peace process has been laid. At least,
the entrance to the road towards peace has been
completed and clearly marked by the General Assembly
and the Security Council. Still, until now, the Afghan
parties have failed to embark on that road. There can be
no doubt that the main responsibility for accepting or
declining the offer of a United Nations-sponsored or
facilitated peace process lies with the Afghan parties. At
the same time, the United Nations should continue to do
everything possible to convince the parties to commit
themselves earnestly to such a process, as it represents the
best chance for peace, stability and, in the long run,
prosperity returning to this United Nations Member State
of Afghanistan.

The principal instrument of the United Nations peace
efforts in Afghanistan is the United Nations Special
Mission to Afghanistan, which my Government has fully
supported from its establishment. We welcome the fact
that the Mission was strengthened through the creation of
four additional posts for political affairs officers. We feel
honored by the appointment of a German former
colleague, Mr. Norbert Holl, as its new Head. We would
like to express our appreciation to all members of the
Special Mission for their tireless efforts to mediate
between the parties. We also commend the decision of the
Secretary-General to send Under-Secretary-General
Marrack Goulding to Afghanistan in September this year.
We feel that the intense discussions Under-Secretary-
General Goulding has had with all the parties have been
extremely helpful.

Having considered possibilities of how to focus
international efforts for Afghanistan under United Nations
auspices, we think that the efforts of the United Nations
in Afghanistan could be further strengthened through the
United Nations-coordinated participation of regional
organizations, States of the region and other important
States. We hope that such an international element will
yield incentives to the Afghan parties to enter into a
meaningful political process.

Even after the start of the process, continued support
for the United Nations efforts by concerned States could
add stability to the intra-Afghan talks. This approach
would be in line with the Security Council presidential
statement of 28 September. That statement called upon all
States to refrain from interfering in the internal affairs of
Afghanistan and, at the same time, to take all steps
necessary to promote peace in Afghanistan and to work
together with the United Nations to this end.

 

One important step for mustering increased
international support for the United Nations peace efforts
would certainly be the expansion of contacts between the
United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan and regional
and other Governments. We would encourage the Head of
the Special Mission to establish such international contacts
to the extent possible. A further step might be the
convening by the United Nations of an international
meeting or conference on Afghanistan. We would welcome
the possibility of the Secretary-General's further exploring
this idea to see whether its time has come.

Every new day of war in Afghanistan brings continued
hardship to the civilian population and negatively affects
regional security. Every new intra-Afghan alliance that is
not all-inclusive and is designed for confrontation rather
than cooperation threatens to deepen the divisions inside
Afghan society and could eventually endanger the country's
territorial integrity. And every day that Afghanistan remains
without a broad-based interim Government and an effective
civil administration pushes the country further backwards
on the scale of economic and human development. It also
preserves the lawlessness that has allowed parts of
Afghanistan to become notorious for producing and
exporting drugs.

All this shows that the time for finding a solution to
the Afghan conflict is not unlimited. What is needed is full
cooperation between the United Nations, regional and other
concerned States and all Afghan parties. Only if all these
unite behind a United Nations-led, impartial approach will
there be a chance to see the war in Afghanistan finally
come to an end.

