Mr. Wittig (Germany): At the outset, let me, as
others have done, congratulate you, Mr. President,
and the whole Moroccan Security Council team for
your assumption of the presidency for this month, and
assure you and your team of our full support. Let me
also commend Ambassador Puri and his team for their
outstanding leadership in what turned out to be a very
challenging month. Many thanks also to Mr. Benomar
for his excellent briefing. This will probably be my last
statement on the situation in Yemen, as my country's
Council membership comes to an end soon, regrettably.
Allow me, therefore, to take this opportunity to begin
with three more general observations.

First, when peaceful demonstrations in Sana'a were
met with violence in early 2011, my delegation was
among those calling early on for appropriate Council
action. Not all shared that sense of urgency, but, in
hindsight, there is no doubt that that was the right
thing to do. By addressing the situation on the ground,
we made clear that the international community was
watching. That also shows that early action by the
Council can help prevent a conflict from escalating
further. The horizon-scanning briefings provided by the
Department for Political Affairs proved instrumental in
that regard.

Secondly, the Council, in October last year,
unanimously endorsed the Transition Agreement of
the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC), which paved the
way towards a democratic transition process. It is no
secret that agreement among Council members was not
easily reached. Some saw the Council as indulging in
undue interference in internal matters, but again it was
the right thing to do. I am convinced that it was the
Council's united endorsement of the GCC Transition
Agreement that made the difference on the ground.
Sadly, that contrasts starkly with the situation in Syria,
where consensus in the Council on effective measures
continues to elude us.

Thirdly, what the Council says and what it does
matters to the people in Yemen, and it is registered by
those eager to turn back the hands of time. That is why
my delegation co-sponsored resolution 2051 (2012) in
June. In that resolution, the Council not only expressed
its full support for the transition process, under the
leadership of President Mansour, but we also warned
potential spoilers of the consequences that they would
face. The Council must remain closely engaged with
the situation in Yemen. If necessary, it will have to take
appropriate action.

We can acknowledge today the progress achieved.
It is the accomplishment, first and foremost, of the
Yemeni people, especially the youth. They have stood
up for freedom, democracy and dignity. It was their
struggle that found recognition in the Nobel Peace
Prize being awarded to Ms. Tawakkol Karman. We
must ensure that those legitimate demands of the
Yemeni people are met. The progress achieved thus
far is by no means irreversible. We have already seen
numerous attempts by the old guard in the political and
security apparatus to resist change or even to hijack the
process. Yemen's transition will thus require continued
international support from the Security Council and
beyond.

The United Nations plays a pivotal role. Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon and Special Adviser Jamal
Benomar deserve our support. Their efforts were
also recognized by the Government and the people
of Yemen during their recent visit to Sana'a. At the
Friends of Yemen meeting in September in New
York, the international community also underlined its
commitment to supporting the Yemeni people on their
path to democracy.

A meaningful, fully inclusive and balanced National
Dialogue is a key element for the success of Yemen's
transition. Progress is urgently needed. We welcome
the agreement reached last week on the remaining
outstanding issues by the preparatory committee, with
the support of Mr. Benomar and his team. We encourage
all relevant actors to engage constructively so that the
National Dialogue Conference can start without further
delay. My country will continue to support those efforts
on the ground.

In closing, I want to highlight the important visit
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
to Sana'a last week. The fight against the recruitment
of child soldiers has been a matter of long-standing
concern for my Government, including during our
tenure here in the Council. We welcome the commitment
made by President Mansour to ban the recruitment of
children into the regular armed forces, and we call on
the armed groups to do likewise. That was also called
for in resolution 2051 (2012). Finally, let me assure the
Yemeni people and my colleague, Ambassador Jamal
Abdullah Al-Sallal, that my country will remain a
reliable partner for Yemen after 31 December.

