The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of August, I should like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to Mr. Sergey Lavrov, Permanent Representative
of the Russian Federation to the United Nations, for his
service as President of the Security Council for the month
of July 1998. I am sure I speak for all members of the
Security Council in expressing deep appreciation to
Ambassador Lavrov for the great diplomatic skill with
which he conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan

The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Afghanistan in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Farhadi
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have received photocopies of
a letter dated 5 August 1998 from the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
transmitting a note from the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan. This communication will be issued as a
document of the Security Council under the symbol
S/ 1998/713.

Following consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council expresses its grave
concern at the new sharp escalation of the military
confrontation in Afghanistan, which is a growing
threat to regional and international peace and
security, and demands an urgent and unconditional
ceasefire leading to a final end to the hostilities.

"The Security Council reiterates that the
Afghan crisis can be settled only by peaceful means,
through direct negotiations between the Afghan
factions under United Nations auspices, aimed at
achieving mutually acceptable solutions
accommodating the rights and interests of all ethnic,
religious and political groups of Afghan society.

"The Security Council calls upon all Afghan
parties to return to the negotiating table without
delay and preconditions and to cooperate with the
aim of creating a broad-based and fully
representative government, which would protect the
rights of all Afghans and observe the international
obligations of Afghanistan. The Council calls upon
all States neighbouring Afghanistan and other States
with influence in Afghanistan to intensify their
efforts under the aegis of the United Nations to
bring the parties to a negotiated settlement.

"The Security Council demands that the Afghan
parties and those countries concerned observe fully
the provisions of the relevant resolutions on
Afghanistan adopted by the United Nations General
Assembly and Security Council.

"The Security Council calls upon all States to
refrain from any outside interference in the internal
affairs of Afghanistan, including the involvement of
foreign military personnel. It reiterates that any such
interference from abroad should cease immediately
and calls upon all States to end the supply of arms
and ammunition to all parties to the conflict and to
take resolute measures to prohibit their military
personnel from planning and participating in combat
operations in Afghanistan.

"The Security Council is deeply concerned at
the serious humanitarian crisis in Afghanistan. It
calls upon all Afghan parties and, in particular, the
Taliban, to take the necessary steps to secure the

 

uninterrupted supply of humanitarian aid to all in need
of it and in this connection not to create impediments
to the activities of the United Nations humanitarian
agencies and international humanitarian organizations.
The Council condemns the killing of the two Afghan
staff members of the World Food Programme and of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees in Jalalabad.

"The Security Council once again urges all
Afghan factions to cooperate fully with the United
Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan and
international humanitarian organizations and calls upon
them, in particular the Taliban, to take the necessary
steps to assure the safety and freedom of movement of
such personnel. The Council deplores the measures
taken by the Taliban which have made it impossible
for nearly all international humanitarian organizations
to continue their work in Kabul. It supports the efforts
of the Office of the Coordinator for humanitarian
affairs in its current talks with the Taliban in order to
ensure adequate conditions for the delivery of aid by
humanitarian organizations.

"The Security Council remains deeply
concerned at the continuing discrimination against
girls and women and other violations of human
rights as well as violations of international
humanitarian law in Afghanistan.

"The Security Council calls upon all parties to
respect international conventions regarding the
treatment of prisoners of war and the rights of non-
combatants.

"The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1998/24.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.05 p.m.

