Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank Under-
Secretary-General Holmes for his detailed and
informative briefing. The Chinese delegation also
appreciates his efforts and his extensive work on the
ground since he took office. We express our positive
assessment of the work accomplished by the relevant
United Nations agencies on the ground for many years.

The Security Council has been discussing the
protection of civilians in armed conflict for almost a
decade and has adopted many resolutions and
presidential statements on the matter, including
resolution 1674 (2006), which constitutes the legal
framework within which the Security Council may
address this issue.

However, as the characteristics of conflicts
change and the complexity of interwoven issues
increases, many civilians are still being negatively
affected by armed conflict. The implementation of the
aforementioned resolutions still faces challenges. We
express our profound concern about the threat to the
life and property of civilians in armed conflict and call
upon the parties involved in conflict to comply with
international humanitarian law and the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and to protect the
life, property and legitimate rights and interests of
civilians.

On this occasion, I would like to highlight the
following points on how to improve the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.

First, the Security Council should strengthen its
efforts to prevent conflict and safeguard peace.
Civilians are a vulnerable group in situations of armed
conflict. The best protection that can be offered to
civilians is to prevent and reduce armed conflicts. The
Security Council should proceed to take action within
its mandate to prevent and reduce armed conflicts,
improve the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations
and improve the humanitarian situation in conflict
areas. Meanwhile, the Security Council should not
approach the question of civilians in an isolated
manner. It should take an integrated approach to
addressing the issue as an integral part of the peace

08-3528]
process and the complex political situation in a given
conflict area.

Secondly, the role of national Governments in the
protection of civilians should be respected and
supported. The primary responsibility for the
protection of civilians lies with national Governments.
The international community and external forces can
provide constructive help and support. However, they
should provide this in compliance with the provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations and in full respect
for the will of the countries concerned. It should not
undermine the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the countries concerned and, still less, intervene
forcibly.

Thirdly, when discussing the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, the Security Council should
approach the concept of the responsibility to protect -
and especially its application - with great prudence.
The Final Document of the 2005 World Summit
devoted a lengthy section to a very careful description
of the responsibility to protect civilians from
massacres, war crimes, genocide and crimes against
humanity. It also indicated that that concept should be
further considered by the General Assembly. Many
members are currently deeply concerned about the
concept of the responsibility to protect, and the
relevant discussions should therefore be pursued in the
United Nations. The Security Council is in no position
to interpret or expand the concept of the responsibility
to protect at will, much less to abuse it.

Fourthly, humanitarian assistance should be
delivered in accordance with the principles of fairness,
neutrality, objectivity and independence. Humanitarian
relief is closely and practically linked to the protection
of civilians. Humanitarian relief agencies provide
assistance and support to civilians in dangerous
circumstances. Those efforts should be appreciated and
acknowledged. Moreover, humanitarian assistance
must retain its credibility and humanitarian nature. It
should be undertaken in accordance with international
humanitarian law and the principles of fairness and
neutrality. It should not be allowed to become
embroiled in local political disputes or involved in
actions that affect the peace process on the ground.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict
cannot rely solely on the efforts of the Security
Council. We expect the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council and the Human Rights

Council to play a greater role. We also encourage the
United Nations Development Programme, the World
Bank and other international agencies, as well as such
regional organizations as the African Union, to play
their role in helping the countries concerned in their
economic development, the resolution of their conflicts
and the promotion of reconstruction. We also welcome
the positive role that non-governmental organizations
play in that regard.

China is prepared to join with the rest of the
international community in a solid and effective effort
to enhance the protection of civilians in armed conflict
and achieve more constructive results.

