Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): At the outset,
I would like to thank Ambassador Ranko Vilovic',
Ambassador Jorge Urbina and you, Mr. President, for
the very comprehensive briefings on the work of the
Security Council Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1373 (2001), 1540 (2004) and 1267 (1999),
respectively, during the six-month period since the
previous joint briefing (S/PV.6128), held in May. We
express our appreciation for the implementation of
heavy work programmes by all three Committees in
accordance with their mandates under the respective
Council resolutions. Those achievements would not
have been possible without the professional and
effective support of the three Committees' expert
groups.

Viet Nam acknowledges with serious concern the
complex developments in the fight against
international terrorism, in particular the evolving
threats posed to international peace and security and
the tragic consequences inflicted upon innocent people
by terrorist attacks. In that context, countering
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, by all
means and through all channels, in accordance with
international law, should remain high on the agenda of
the United Nations, including all its competent bodies.

Following the direction of the Security Council
set out in paragraph 25 of resolution 1822 (2008), the
1267 Committee has been undertaking a
comprehensive review of all the names on its
consolidated list, making use of that review process to
update the list where possible. We wish to encourage
Member States to lend further cooperation and
assistance in order to ensure the success of the review
process. We share the Committee's concerns over the
credibility of the 1267 sanctions regime and support its
continued efforts to address challenges regarding the
consolidated list and to improve its procedures.

In September this year, convinced that promoting
interaction and cooperation between the Security
Council Committees and Member States is key to the
success of their work, Viet Nam facilitated a working
visit by the Monitoring Team of the 1267 Committee to
our country. The visit allowed experts of the
Monitoring Team to exchange views with competent
Vietnamese agencies in relation to the implementation
of the 1267 sanctions regime in the region.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), for its
part, continues the stocktaking exercise of the
implementation by Member States of the Security
Council's counter-terrorism resolutions. Through a
series of direct conversations between the three
subcommittees and representatives of Member States
that have fallen behind in assuming their reporting
obligation, the Committee has gained a better
understanding of the difficulties faced by many
Member States, which, in many cases, involve a lack of
capacity or coordination, rather than a lack of
willingness or commitment. Another key channel
through which the CTC can monitor and promote the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) is visits to
Member States. We recognize that, over the past six
months, the CTC, through its Executive Directorate
(CTED), has been able to carry out visits in various
formats to eight countries. We encourage the CTC to
engage CTED in regional visits aimed at analysing
good practices and addressing vulnerabilities on a
regional scale.

We note the CTC's efforts to remind Member
States of their obligation to respect international law on
human rights and refugees in countering terrorism and
that, for that purpose, CTED intends to include human
rights references in all Preliminary Implementation
Assessments (PIAs). In that regard, my delegation wishes
to reiterate our position - which we have made clear
while considering the PIAs of several countries - that
the human rights concerns raised by the CTC in the
PIAs must be placed in the context of counter-
terrorism.

My delegation notes that, over the past six
months, the 1540 Committee's major focus of work has
been to conduct a comprehensive review of the status
of the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) with a
view to reporting the outcome to the Security Council
by the end of January 2010. We welcome the
Committee's efforts, through various forums, to solicit
inputs from Member States, relevant international and
regional organizations and representatives of relevant
industries, academic institutions and non-governmental
organizations in order to improve the implementation
of the resolution. We look forward to the Committee's
report on the outcome of the comprehensive review.

Although each of the three Committees has a
distinct mandate that determines the framework for its
activities and those of its expert group, we encourage
the Committees to promote, where possible,
coordination and cooperation among their expert
groups with a view to improving the cost-effectiveness
of their work. Along the same lines, we support the
efforts of the expert groups to contribute to and
coordinate their work within the framework of the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, which
was established to ensure overall coordination and
coherence in the counter-terrorism efforts of the United
Nations system and to help implement the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

In conclusion, Viet Nam continues to recognize
the important role of the three Committees and their
positive contributions to the implementation of the
Council's resolutions aimed at addressing the threats to
international peace and security caused by terrorism.
We wish to reaffirm our consistent support for and
cooperation with the Committees in carrying out their
mandates.

