Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to pay a tribute to the very professional and
excellent work accomplished by the Panel of Experts
chaired by Mr. Martin Ayafor. The other day
Ambassador Mahbubani mentioned the cost of the
Panel's operation, which, we believe, appears to be
entirely justified in view of the very substantive report
submitted to the Security Council. Certainly in the
future we might think about recalling the French
proposal that a light standing mechanism be established
to monitor all sanctions regimes decided upon by the
Security Council, with a view to ensuring proper
coordination among them.

I would also like to thank Mr. Tsui for his
excellent report on the humanitarian impact that any
additional sanctions would have on Liberia, and I
welcome the Liberian Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Captan.

With the two reports before us today the Security
Council for the first time has all of the elements
necessary to make a precise assessment of the
effectiveness of existing sanctions and the advisability
of imposing new ones. As most of the previous
speakers have indicated, three conditions must be met.
The first is a direct, established connection between the
sector contemplated for new sanctions and the
financing and arming of the Revolutionary United
Front (RUF). The second is humanitarian
consequences, which ought not be prohibitive for the
Liberian people. And third is a political interest
affecting stability in the subregion.

The Ambassador of Belgium will be making a
statement on behalf of the European Union, and France
endorses it completely. I will therefore limit my
intervention to six points.

First, France supports the efforts of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) for
greater effectiveness of embargoes on weapons which
continue to be exported to the Mano River region,
particularly those that are being sent to the various
armed rebellions.

Secondly, France supports the recommendation
made by the Panel of Experts aimed at lifting the
prohibition on aircraft licensed in Liberia. The
Monrovian authorities and people must be able to see
that the encouraging measures of Security Council
sanctions are sincere.

Thirdly, France would like to see resumed exports
of raw diamonds from Liberia within the context of a
certification system comparable to the one established
in resolution 1306 (2000) on Sierra Leone's
diamonds - as recommended by the Panel of
Experts - and placed under the control of the
sanctions Committee of the Security Council.

Fourthly, in view of the fact that measures to
restrict exports of tropical wood from Liberia may risk
the loss of the main means of sustenance for more than
100,000 persons in the country a as detailed in the
OCHA report - France would like there to be an
investigation into whether a direct relationship exists
between the yield of such exports and the arming of
Revolutionary United Front (RUF) rebels in Sierra
Leone. An audit, as recommended by the Panel of
Experts, might be performed with a View to enabling
the Security Council to get exact information on this
issue when it reaches a decision next May on a possible
extension of the sanctions set forth in resolution 1343
(2001).

Fifthly, France approves the recommendation to
place in escrow any revenue from the maritime
registry. Its allocation would be subject to the approval
of the sanctions Committee to ensure that its utilization
is authorized for purposes in the State's budget, with
humanitarian needs as a priority, particularly the
restoration of public services.

Sixthly, France encourages a positive response to
the request of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) - referred to by
Ambassador Ouane - to create a small investigatory
team in the field that would work with the Panel of
Experts now working with the sanctions Committee
and would help the Liberian authorities implement the
measures set forth in resolution 1343 (2001). This team
would be entrusted with monitoring arms trafficking,
including arms being sent to the Liberian rebels;
diamond smuggling; and the exploitation of tropical
woods, rubber and the maritime registry. If the team,
whose task would be to carry out spot checks and
report to the sanctions Committee, were successful, the
Security Council might decide to make it a standing
body rather than renew the measures set forth in
resolution 1343 (2001) when the resolution comes to
term in May 2002.

I also have a question to address to the Chairman
of the Panel. Last week, a United States newspaper
reported that there might be a financial relationship
between Mr. Bin Laden and the sanctioned diamonds in
Liberia and Sierra Leone. I would be interested in
hearing any comments from the Chairman of the Panel
on this issue.

