Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to express my gratitude to
Mr. Georges Rebelo Chikoti, Minister of External
Relations of the Republic of Angola, for presiding over
our meeting today. I commend the important initiatives
launched by Angola during its Council presidency,
foremost among them this open debate.

The Great Lakes region is at the heart of the
African continent, and therefore at the centre of
Egypt's concerns - not only because of geographical
considerations but also for political, economic and
development reasons, given the rich natural resources
of the region, the great cultural heritage of its people
and its massive growth potential. Promoting peace in
the Great Lakes region will have an impact on and
implications for development and stability across
Africa.

As a sponsor member of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, Egypt is proud
of the important role played by the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region in promoting democracy
and strengthening cooperation among the countries of
the region.

We should seek durable solutions based, first
and foremost, on the principle of national ownership;
secondly, on collective responsibility, given the
regional dimension of peacebuilding operations and the
challenges facing security and stability; and thirdly,
on the building of partnerships with regional and
international partners, especially the African Union
and the United Nations system.

Despite the significant advances made and all of
the efforts undertaken by the Congolese forces and
the support and cooperation provided by the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in that area, the
situation in the eastern part of the country still suffers
from instability and the spread of armed groups, which
pose a major impediment to the establishment of State
authority and a great threat to civilians, which has dire
humanitarian consequences. In addition, a number of
the countries in the region face serious challenges that
require the support of the international community.
The great challenges facing the elected authorities in
Central Africa in terms of rebuilding State institutions,
achieving reconciliation and finding durable solutions
for dealing with armed groups require the consolidation
of regional and international efforts.

With regard to the situation in Burundi, there is a
need to build on the positive outcomes ofimportant visits
undertaken by the delegation of African Presidents, the
Secretary-General and the Peacebuilding Commission
and to intensify efforts aimed at achieving a political
solution through inclusive national dialogue. All
possible assistance must be extended to the mediation
efforts of the African Union and the East African
Community. Actions to prevent conflicts must be
undertaken under the coordination of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General.

Armed groups pose the greatest security
impediment in the region. Egypt therefore welcomes
the communique issued by the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Rwanda, which includes measures
aimed at resuming joint military operations against
armed groups. Egypt also stresses the need for all
the parties to implement their obligations set out in
the Nairobi Declarations and the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region. Egypt would like to stress
the need to coordinate United Nations efforts with the
African Union and international partners, with a view
to creating a regional environment that promotes those
commitments and requirements.

Moreover, the neutralization of armed groups
requires the pursuit of an integrated approach that is
not limited to military means alone, but also includes
measures to address the root causes of instability. The
most important reason for those conflicts is likely
the illegal exploitation and trafficking in natural
resources, which is worth more than $1.2 billion
annually. Such trafficking finances the activities of
armed groups and organized crime and deprives the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo of
their natural resources and the potential contribution
that those resouces could make to the national
development process.

I would like to refer to important developments over
the past few years, including the development of national
legislation with regard to the management of natural
resources and fighting the illicit exploitation thereof.
We must address the gap between the enactment of laws
and the implementation of those laws on the ground.
Better enforcement would allow the region and beyond
to uphold the rule of law and to hold perpetrators to
account. Egypt will continue to accord that matter due
importance through its chairmanship of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004) and the work of the Group of Experts on
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which traces the
financing of armed groups there.

An integrated approach to addressing those
different challenges requires an emphasis on the close
relationship among peace, security and development. In
that regard, Egypt welcomes the holding of the Private
Sector Investment Conference for the Great Lakes
Region, given the potential contribution of the private
sector to development and the creation of jobs for youth.

In View of its close relations with the countries of
the region, Egypt is keen to do its part in supporting
development projects, especially through the platform
of the Egypt Agency for Development Partnerships,
through capacity-building and the exchange of expertise
in all development spheres. Furthermore, Egypt's
initiative for the development of the Nile River Basin
countries has been extended to include several projects
in the Great Lakes region in areas such as infrastructure
and energy. Recently, a memorandum of understanding
was signed with the Congolese development agency for
the development of such projects in the region.

In conclusion, it is our hope that our debate today
will provide an opportunity to reinvigorate the resolve
of the international community to bolster the will of the
countries in the Great Lakes region and its people to
work towards peace, stability and development across
the region.

