Ms. Banks (New Zealand): I would like to take
the opportunity to express once again to the
Government of the United Kingdom, and to the
families and friends of those who were killed or
injured, New Zealand's heartfelt sympathy regarding
the tragic events of 7 July. Those unconscionable
terrorist attacks in London have underlined once more
the critical importance of the international campaign
against terrorism.

I would like to thank the Chairs of the three
committees for their briefings this morning and for
their important ongoing efforts. The London attacks
were a bleak reminder of the vital importance of that
work.

One of the key messages in today's briefings has
been the need for cooperation, including regional
cooperation. In that regard, I am pleased to advise
members that New Zealand hosted an inaugural
meeting of the Pacific Working Group on Counter-
Terrorism in Auckland in June as part of a broader
initiative to strengthen our region's legal and
operational counter-terrorism infrastructure. The
meeting also provided a forum in which to discuss the
challenges faced by Pacific island countries in
complying with international counter-terrorism
obligations - a point I would like to come back to
later.

With respect to today's debate, I would like to
make three brief comments.

First, there is now a common view within the
Security Council and the wider United Nations
membership that, having established the tools for
fighting terrorism through the Security Council, we
need to continually review their effectiveness. New
Zealand welcomes those efforts. We note that the Al-
Qaida/Taliban sanctions Committee is currently
looking at a new draft resolution to sharpen and update
sanctions against Al-Qaida and the Taliban. Given the
Chapter VII obligations that would flow from such a
resolution, we believe it is important that interested
Member States be kept informed of, and be given the
opportunity to provide input into, the Council's
deliberations. While we do not wish to slow down the
work of the Committee, earlier outreach from the
Council will help us all when it comes to
implementation.

Secondly, we remain of the view that in order to
improve the effectiveness and legitimacy of its
counter-terrorism efforts, the Security Council must
ensure that recognized basic standards of due process
are met. We share the concerns raised by others with
respect to the current designation process -
particularly with respect to listing and de-listing - and
we urge the Council to consider amendments to the
sanctions regime under resolution 1267 (1999) to meet
those concerns. There are a number of proposals in
circulation, including those outlined today by the
representatives of Denmark, Greece, Liechtenstein and
Switzerland. We ask that the Council give them serious
consideration.

Thirdly, we would once again draw the Council's
attention to the problems faced by small Member
States, including in our own region, in meeting the
Council's considerable reporting requirements. In the
recent Pacific counter-terrorism meeting that I just
mentioned, it was made very clear that the reality of
limited resources and the challenge of competing
policy priorities mean that compliance with counter-
terrorism remains a significant challenge for many
Pacific countries. We welcome the Council's efforts to
address that issue. We very much hope that the
enhanced cooperation among the three committees and
expert groups now under way will include some
discussion of the consolidation of reporting
requirements for small Member States. There is a lot
that can be done by way of technical assistance, and we
urge the Council to take the initiative on that.

For its part, New Zealand, together with Australia
and the Pacific Islands Forum secretariat, has
established a programme to help Pacific countries to
put in place effective counter-terrorism legislation and
to plan for counter-terrorism contingencies. New
Zealand has offered to work with interested Pacific
partners to help them meet their reporting requirements
and obligations to the Security Council. We will
continue to work closely with Australia and our Pacific
partners in those endeavours.

In closing, I would like to take the opportunity to
underscore once again our unequivocal support for
international counter-terrorism efforts and for the work
of the Security Council. We must continue to work
together to defeat terrorism, ensuring at the same time
that respect for the rule of law and fundamental human
rights remains the cornerstone of our efforts.

