Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): Mr. President, I would
like to start by thanking you for having convened this
meeting on the Middle East at such a critical juncture
for peace in the entire region. Let me also acknowledge
the relentless efforts undertaken by Secretary-General
Kofi Annan and his colleagues in the Secretariat with a
View to promoting peaceful solutions to the crisis in
the region. I would also like to thank the Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Ibrahim
Gambari, for presenting us with an informative update
on the situation in the Middle East.

The present crisis in the Middle East poses a
renewed challenge to the Security Council as regards
the effectiveness of its reaction, its methods of work
and its transparency. Once again, the spiralling and
unchecked use of force in the Middle East requires the
urgent attention of the Security Council. Brazil
welcomes the cessation of hostilities in Lebanon and
calls upon all parties to abide by the obligations
established in resolution 1701 (2006). The parties
should refrain from any action that jeopardizes the
fledgling truce. They must do their utmost to ensure
that the cessation of hostilities holds and is further
transformed into a durable ceasefire.
Brazil regrets that the prolonged inaction of the
Council, faced with a flagrant threat to international
peace and security, allowed the conflict to drag on for
34 long days. We also deplore the fact that combat
operations in Lebanon were characterized by the
rapidly increasing use of indiscriminate and
disproportionate force, causing the death of many

hundreds of innocent civilians, the unprecedented
displacement of a large proportion of the population
and severe damage to essential housing and
infrastructure, in open violation of international
humanitarian law.

The incident in Qana is deeply disturbing. The
observation contained in the Secretary-General's letter
that the incident reflects "a pattern of Violations of
international law, including international humanitarian
law and international human rights law, committed
during the course of the current hostilities"
(5/2006/626, p. 5) is alarming and warrants further
investigation into this matter. Our Government
welcomes the setting up by the Human Rights Council
of a fact-finding commission to investigate the human
rights violations committed during the fighting.

At least seven Brazilian nationals, including three
children, perished as a consequence of Israeli military
incursions in southern Lebanon. The Brazilian
Government launched an unprecedented operation to
evacuate approximately 3,000 of our own nationals.

Since the very beginning of the conflict,
President Lula da Silva has appealed for a ceasefire
and underlined the hope for a negotiated process that
could end the hostilities and help bring peace and
understanding. President Lula interacted with the
Secretary-General and with many other international
leaders in order to contribute to a peaceful resolution
of the conflict. Minister for External Relations Celso
Amorim visited Beirut on 15 August to consult with
the Government, reiterate our commitment to
supporting the Lebanese people and deliver a sizeable
contribution in medical supplies to provide emergency
treatment for thousands of people.

Brazil strongly supports the resolution 1701
(2006) framework for providing the assistance the
Government of Lebanon will require to extend its
sovereignty and authority throughout its territory, in
accordance with relevant Security Council resolutions
and the Taif Agreements, including the calls for the
dismantling and disarmament of all militias in the
country. We appeal to the countries in a position to
help reinforce the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) to do so promptly.

Furthermore, we call for the release of the
abducted Israeli soldiers and the creation of conditions
for achieving a durable solution for the crisis.
Particular attention must be paid to the sensitive issue
of the large number of Lebanese prisoners detained in
Israel.

Brazil calls upon the international community to
continue to lend its support for prompt humanitarian
action and for the rebuilding of Lebanon. We all expect
that the donors conference to be held on 31 August in
Stockholm will accelerate the humanitarian efforts to
meet the immediate needs of the civilian population
and to gradually phase in a response, coordinated by
the Government of Lebanon, that is geared towards
recovery and reconstruction.

Brazil does not condone the use of violence to
obtain what can be achieved only through negotiation.
Non-negotiated solutions do not bring about peace. As
a country that firmly believes in dialogue and peaceful
resolution of conflicts, we stress the need for the
resumption of a political process involving all
interested parties. Brazil is also convinced that stability
ultimately rests on the achievement of a just, lasting
and comprehensive settlement of the Arab-Israeli
conflict in all its aspects.

The Lebanese crisis has made the current
paralysis of the Middle East peace process even more
Visible. It has also highlighted the urgent need to
address the underlying causes of the conflict.

As a main goal, the world community should
strengthen efforts to create conditions for the
resumption of the peace process in the region on all
tracks. Within this framework, one of the urgent tasks
is the normalization of the situation in the Palestinian
territories and the resumption of dialogue between the
Palestinian National Authority and Israel. In this
connection, the Palestinian political leaders now
detained in Israel should be promptly liberated.

Brazil welcomes the decision by the League of
Arab States to request a high-level meeting of the
Security Council in September, open to the
participation of all interested delegations, to address
the situation in the Middle East. Brazil stresses the
need to put in motion a political process for the
development of a strategy with a pertinent timeline to
implement the vision of two States, Israel and
Palestine, living side by side in peace and security, as
stated in Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003). Such strategy
should also take into account the Quartet road map, the
principle of land for peace derived from the Madrid
Conference and the Beirut Arab League Summit
decisions.

The international community should seize this
opportunity to review the deadlocked Middle East
peace process and put an end, once for all, to conflicts
that have caused too much suffering and despair over
many decades.

