The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Argentina.

Argentina's delegation voted in favour of resolution
2180 (2014) on the understanding that the Haitian
Government has expressed its agreement with the terms
of the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), as well as
an expression of Argentina's continued solidarity with
efforts to strengthen the democratic process and bolster
Haiti's security and stability.

However, we would have preferred that the
resolution reflect the comments and proposals made by
Argentina and other Latin American troop contributors
during the negotiations in the Group of Friends of Haiti,
as well as the concerns of those same contributors in
the debate the Council held on the situation in Haiti
on 11 September (see S/PV.7262). Unfortunately, it is
for that reason that we did not join as sponsor of the
resolution, as have on previous occasions in which the
Council renewed the mandate of the Mission.

We are greatly concerned that the security situation
in Haiti has not improved enough to favour a rapid and
sharp reduction in the level of MINUSTAH troops, or
such a substantial change in its mandate as this, in a year
when such an important electoral process for Haiti's
future is scheduled to take place. We also believe that
the Haitian National Police does not yet have or come
to have in the next year the capabilities necessary to
maintain public order and security, especially during
the elections.

We are concerned in particular that, as indicated by
the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2014/6l7),
the residual military component will not have the
capacity to carry out the important deterrence
and conflict-prevention tasks it has undertaken
to date, including conducting patrols. That could
have unintended consequences and could force the
international community to have to face an even more
difficult and complex situation. In such circumstances
Argentine troops could be called upon to perform duties
beyond deterrence that are prohibited by law in our
country. Therefore, my delegation believes it important
to reiterate that the Argentine armed forces do not,
and will not, perform repression activities, neither in
Argentina nor abroad. They will therefore not carry out
functions of that kind in Haiti.

Moreover, we would like to emphasize the
importance ofthe Secretariat consulting with countries
that contribute military or police personnel when
evaluating the reconfiguration of a peacekeeping
operation, including taking their views into
consideration, especially when dealing with reductions
of this scope.

Argentina, along with many other countries,
has made great efforts over the past 10 years to help
strengthen the democratic process, safety and the
economic and social development of Haiti. Therefore,
we believe that we must make a final effort, in the
most appropriate way and in accordance with the
circumstances, to properly and successfully conclude
the work to which we have committed ourselves.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that the
delegation of Argentina voted in favour of resolution
2180 (2014) in the understanding that the Government
of Haiti has expressed its acceptance of the terms
of the renewal of MINUSTAH's mandate and as an
expression of our solidarity with the efforts aimed
promoting at democratic, economic and socially
inclusive development in Haiti.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Guatemala.

