Ms. Lee (Singapore): First, Mr. President, we too
would like to express our appreciation for your able
leadership of the Council's mission to Kosovo. We also
express our thanks to the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2001/565), which we found very useful as
background to the mission. We further thank the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Guehenno, for his analysis of the key issues
relating to the situation in Kosovo.

Singapore's participation in the mission to
Kosovo gave us a better understanding of one of the
more complex United Nations peacekeeping mission,
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). We were impressed with what has
been achieved in the two years that the United Nations
has been involved with Kosovo, and we commend Mr.
Hans Haekkerup for his outstanding leadership and his
time work since taking up the post of UNMIK head in
January 2001. We also commend the staff of UNMIK
for their efforts and their achievements in rebuilding
Kosovo in all aspects: security, socio-political and
economic, to name just a few.
However, much more needs to be done. The
involvement of the United Nations in Kosovo and the
strict implementation of Security Council resolution
1244 (1999) must continue despite the great difficulties
facing UNMIK. The political status of Kosovo is clear
in resolution 1244 (1999); that issue should not be
allowed to create further divisions in Kosovo, with all
their adverse regional implications. In a statement
made in January of this year by the Foreign Minister of
Singapore, His Excellency Mr. S. Jayakumar, we
outlined three critical areas which we felt needed to be
addressed in Kosovo to bring it back to normalcy.

Today I would like to reiterate what we believe to
be the most critical of them at this time: the urgent
need for reconciliation amongst the Kosovar ethnic
communities. That, of course, is easier said than done.
But we have learned from our own experience that
promoting ethnic tolerance is the key to bringing
together all ethnic communities. In 1964 two waves of
racial riots broke out in Singapore. A third wave of
riots occurred in 1969, about four years after we
attained independence as a republic. Many
Singaporeans were killed in those riots. Although they
were not on the scale of what has happened in Kosovo,
the riots shook our nation badly. Singapore is a multi-
ethnic society where different races have lived and
worked together for more than three decades. It was
recognized at an early stage in our history that the very
existence of Singapore would depend on maintaining
racial and religious harmony among our people. Thus,
the Government of Singapore has adopted and
continues to promote a policy of multi-ethnicity and
multiculturalism. Each Singaporean is taught from an
early age to respect other races, religions and cultures.

We therefore associate ourselves with those who
have spoken out to condemn the continuing violence
against members of ethnic minorities, in particular
ethnic Serbs, in Kosovo. We also welcome the recent
establishment of the first pillar and the initiatives taken
by UNMIK to tackle terrorism and organized crime.
We urge that all necessary measures be taken to
improve the security environment in Kosovo.

It is essential that the United Nations be clear on
the goals for Kosovo, in order to ensure that they are
achieved. Besides reconciliation, there are other
important goals. We note that the initial economic
reconstruction measures that have been taken and the
progress that has been achieved in the economic arena
have produced encouraging results to spur economic
development in Kosovo. We support the continued
emphasis on developing economic sustainability.
Economic growth is a strong incentive for the Kosovars
to work towards a peaceful, stable and secure
environment, which, in turn, is essential for the further
building of the economy.

However, progress in reconciliation and
economic development depends on the preparedness of
the Kosovo political leadership, as they take on the
responsibility of self-government, to build a
democratic multi-ethnic society and a sustainable
market economy in Kosovo. We also associate
ourselves with those speakers who stress the
importance of the full participation and engagement of
all the ethnic communities in Kosovo in developing
substantial autonomy.

In that regard, we support the position that
Kosovo-wide elections should be held only when all
the necessary conditions are in place. It is crucial to the
success of the elections that all communities, including
refugees and displaced persons - who should be
encouraged to return - participate both in registration
and in the elections themselves. Rebuilding public
administration capacity is also crucial to bringing
Kosovo back to normalcy. In that regard, the
uniqueness of UNMIK as a United Nations
peacekeeping operation, like that of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor, stands out.
UNMIK is an interim administration in every sense of
the word, and its task must therefore be to develop
Kosovo's ability to administer society as part of the
peace-building process.

It is clear that, while UNMIK has made
significant progress, Kosovo's return to normalcy is
likely to take many more years. The priority tasks that
have been outlined today require the United Nations
and the international community to continue to be
actively engaged in Kosovo. It is imperative that the
United Nations, having taken on such a major
undertaking, not terminate it prematurely.

Allow me to say that we welcome the improving
relations between UNMIK and the Government of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. We should continue to
encourage it. In that regard, the establishment of the
UNMIK Office in Belgrade was a step along the right
path. Direct dialogue between Kosovar political leaders
and the Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia should also be encouraged. We share the
view that continued dialogue with the Government of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is important for the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999).

