Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (Spoke in Arabic): First
and foremost, Madam President, I would like to thank
you for convening this meeting of the Security Council
today, and the Secretary-General for his report to the
Council on the activities of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) in Libya (S/2018/429). I am
also grateful to Mr. Ghassan Salame for his briefing,
in which he outlined UNSMIL's activities aimed at
bringing an end to the political crisis in my country
that sadly seems so deeply entrenched. Lastly, I thank
Ambassador Olof Skoog for his briefing in his capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.

In the light ofthe efforts spearheaded by the Council
to come to the aid of my country and help us emerge
from our current crisis, the international community
also has a responsibility to support and engage more
effectively and efficiently with Libyans in order to help
us to set aside our domestic differences and establish the
foundations and institutions for a modern, responsible,
democratic State, free from unjustified meddling by
some parties, which so far has only hampered our
efforts to transition to a more inclusive political process
and has further exacerbated the suffering of the Libyan
people. It must end.

We therefore welcome the United Nations action
plan, announced here in New York when it was unveiled
on 20 September 2017. Among other things, it is aimed
at ensuring that elections are held by the end of 2018,
within a year of its adoption. We would like to reiterate
the position of the Government of National Accord,
which is firmly behind the action plan and fully
supports the importance of organizing and holding
presidential and legislative elections within the given
time frame, thereby leading to the establishment of the
executive bodies and branches needed to enable an end
to be brought to the crisis in Libya.

Nevertheless, all of this can be achieved only with
effective, efficient and ongoing international support,
which will enable all the parties in Libya to engage in
the democratic process so as to ensure that the votes of
the Libyan people themselves will be used to set aside
differences and produce an acceptable outcome. In the
past few years we have witnessed a great deal ofpain in
which Libyans have suffered on every front - political,
economic and social. It has been a harrowing time.
We would therefore like to once again underscore the
importance of ensuring that everyone moves together
in lockstep in their efforts to help end the crisis in
Libya. We cannot have a fragmented approach. We
must all act as one in order to ensure that we end up
with a democratic and responsible State that safeguards,
protects and upholds the rights of its citizens, that can
fight terrorism and prevail and that believes in political
pluralism and the peaceful transition of power - in
other words, a State that is working to move ahead on
the basis of progress and prosperity. That goal reflects
the aspirations of all Libyans, who have reached the
end of their rope. They are no longer prepared to
suffer under the successive crises they have endured
in recent years, particularly through the issues of the
proliferation of weapons, the wave of organized crime
and major economic problems. Irresponsible parties
have been wreaking havoc on our economy, which is
being damaged by people who, to put it mildly, should
be properly labelled as criminals. They have turned
Libya into a fertile breeding ground for their criminal
activities through their predatory acts and their effects
on our economy.

The Government of National Accord will spare no
effort to bring Libyans together to ensure that it can
meet the aspirations of all parties and hear all of their
concerns. Despite the difficulty of that task, we are
determined to do all we can to satisfy all aspirations and
needs. I want to underscore that national and patriotic
Libyans have lent their support to the Government
of National Accord and to our efforts to bring about
national reconciliation on a comprehensive, country-
wide basis. All national efforts within Libya enjoy our
support, particularly local mediation and initiatives,
because we have repeatedly seen that they help to reduce
tension, end crises and bring about rapprochement and
reconciliation between tribes. Such local reconciliation
activities have meant that many cities and towns in
Libya that were previously theatres of war between
clashing armies, often pitting brotherly neighbouring
tribes against one another, are now enjoying security
and safety.

We also welcome all positive efforts by neighbouring
States and the international community to help Libya
recover from the crisis. We commend the 30 April
communique from the quadripartite negotiations in
Cairo, which underscored support for the United Nations
action plan for Libya and the need to work quickly to
implement it. The emergence of terrorism and the acts
of armed groups in Libya have resulted from ideas and
ideologies that are completely foreign to the nature and
desires of the Libyan people, who are, on the contrary,
well known for their moderation and tolerance. Such
foreign, erroneous ideologies fuel notions imported
from abroad and have nothing to do with the actual
precepts of our religion of Islam, seeking rather to sow
anarchy, terror and destruction in our country. By way
of response, therefore, we have taken action.

In that regard, we welcome the support for our
response from many of the countries that have stood
with Libya as we seek to tackle that phenomenon,
which unfortunately has killed or seduced many of our
young people. The most recent attack by these armed
terrorist groups in Libya, which targeted the High
Commission for National Elections on 2 May, resulted
in large numbers of deaths and injuries and was broadly
condemned by the international community and
Libyans alike. This cowardly attack showed once again
that these groups must be brought to justice and their
universally reviled acts ended.

We call on the international community to step
up its efforts to exterminate this global scourge by
cutting off the sources of financing for armed terrorist
groups. We in Libya will spare no effort in upholding
our responsibility to eradicate terrorism, including
by cooperating with the international community.
In that regard, we would like to cite the Presidential
Council statement issued on 16 May, which affirmed
the Government of National Accord's opposition to
terrorism in every form and urged the Libyan people
to overcome their differences. With regard to the
ongoing operations in Derna, the Government of
National Accord also urged all people of sense in the
region to help to intervene, lift the siege on the city
and protect the lives of innocent civilians. We want to
emphasize once again how urgent it is to ensure that
while combating terrorism we also protect the lives of
innocent civilians. We call on all parties throughout
Libya to overcome their differences through peaceful
dialogue and to refrain from the use of force, which can
only further divide the Libyan people and destroy more
of our infrastructure.

The recent reduction in the number of migrants
arriving in Libya via trafficking and smuggling has
provided some respite, as some countries of destination
have recognized. The drop is thanks largely to efforts
to cut off migrant flows at the source, including on
the part of the Security Council and, in Libya, by the
Presidential Council and the Government of National
Accord, as they work to reverse the adverse impact of
migrant trafficking and smuggling. For example, we
have launched broad campaigns, which have had some
effect, targeting those who smuggle and traffic migrants
in or through Libyan territory. The Government has
also established reception centres for migrants through
joint efforts with UNSMIL and with the support of
the International Organization for Migration. We have
also been able to repatriate many migrants, but further
efforts in that regard will require the continued support
of the international community, in cooperation with the
countries of origin. The countries of origin, in turn,
must get the support they need to pursue development at
the domestic level, in accordance with the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, thereby giving migrants
an incentive to stay home rather than put their lives on
the line by migrating, especially through clandestine
trafficking or smuggling.

Turning to the area of humanitarian action, some
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) are being
used as cover by human traffickers or smugglers. On
19 March, for example, two members of the crew of
a rescue boat operated by an NGO were arrested
by a European Government because, despite their
NGO disguise, they were covertly supporting human
trafficking and smuggling. The phenomenon must be
recognized and addressed. We must also address the
elephant in the room, which is the fact that the smuggling
and trafficking of migrants is very closely coordinated
by criminal gangs on both sides of the Mediterranean,
in Europe and Africa alike. We want to stress the
importance of tackling trafficking and smuggling
groups on both continents as the one sure way to put
an end to their abhorrent enterprise. In that regard, we
must end the suspicious activities of certain NGOs that
threaten Libya's democracy and national security.

In conclusion, I would like to once again
reiterate that the Libyan people have had enough of
the deteriorating conditions in their everyday lives,
especially on the economic front, as a result of the
country's ongoing political divisions. We sincerely
hope that through the Security Council the international
community will redouble its efforts to support the
implementation of the United Nations action plan for
Libya, adopted on 20 September 2017, and to put an
end to foreign interference in Libyan affairs while
continuing to address our security problems, which
are just as important as political issues. As we have
repeatedly stressed, no initiative in Libya can succeed
without resolving the security situation.

