Mr. Pedersen (Norway): I will not read out my
prepared statement.

It has been three months since the United Nations
called for 48-hour pauses in the fighting in Aleppo.
Since then, another ceasefire in Syria has broken
down and a Security Council draft resolution to end
the bombardment of Aleppo has been vetoed. That
is highly disappointing. It is unacceptable that the
fighting continues, the eastern part of Aleppo is in the
process of being destroyed and civilians and hospitals,
medical personnel and schools are routinely attacked.
The bloodshed and the bombing must stop and the
massive violations of international humanitarian law
must end.

Once again, we underscore that the Syrian regime
is obliged, under international humanitarian law, to
provide immediate, full, unhindered and sustained
humanitarian access to all parts of Syria. We expect the
Security Council to fulfil its responsibility and ensure
an end to the conflict. The countries in the region,
as well as international actors, have a particular duty
to secure a credible political process and to ensure
that resolution 2254 (2015) is fully implemented. We
welcome the resumption of meetings between regional
and international actors at the ministerial level.

Norway firmly supports United Nations efforts in
Syria on both the political and humanitarian tracks. All
actors must work together to ensure that life-saving aid
reaches the millions in need. The Syria Humanitarian
Response Plan for 2016 has only been 37 per cent
funded. Many donors have delivered on the pledges they
made in London in February, but humanitarian needs
are increasing. Donors must deliver on their promises,
and more countries need to contribute. Norway has
disbursed 80 per cent of its pledge of $280 million
for 2016. and we intend to deliver on our pledge of
$1.16 billion over the next four years.

The Ad Hoc Liaison Committee (AHLC) meeting
in New York on 19 September was the most constructive
meeting in years. The recent agreement on the transfer
of authority for the electricity sector to the Palestinian
Authority and on electricity debts was indeed important.
It proves that economic cooperation between the
parties can yield positive results. We urge the parties to
continue resolving other outstanding fiscal issues and
to agree on key infrastructural projects. The Palestinian
Authority will not be able to close the current financial
gap by itself. Continued budget support is also needed
to enable reform.

The rationale behind the Gaza Reconstruction
Mechanism is to prevent unintended use of the building
materials entering Gaza. However, the current volume
of imported construction materials remains insufficient
to meet the needs. An increase in the flow of cement
through the Mechanism is urgently needed. The entry
of construction materials through other channels
is undermining the efforts to address dual use and
security problems in Gaza.

Israelis and Palestinians have to address the most
imminent threats to the two-State solution. Every
announcement of a new settlement and every act
of violence corrodes the prospects for a two-State
solution and they must end immediately. Our own
contribution, through the AHLC, is to underpin the
efforts to realize a two-State solution and to advance
the Palestinian institutions and economy in preparation
for independence.

