Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): First, I would
like to thank Ambassador Nelson Santos, Permanent
Representative of Timor-Leste, for his statement. I
would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Marie Guehenno for his briefing on the situation
following the attacks on the President and the Prime
Minister of Timor-Leste, and for his introduction of the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2008/26).

The report indicates that, in the context of the
many difficulties that they are facing in the first year of
the new Government and parliament, the people and
the public institutions of Timor-Leste have made many
efforts in their nation-building and recovery processes.
However, the report also indicates that progress is
limited: apart from that made in the performance of
parliament, the Government and other State institutions
in the areas of policymaking and political debates, little
can be found in other domains of activity.

We agree that Timor-Leste continues to face
numerous challenges, as noted by the Security Council
mission that visited the country last November. The
recent attacks targeting the President and the Prime
Minister - attacks that members of the Council have
strongly condemned - tell us only that, while there
has been overall improvement, the security situation
and the political situation remain fragile. That,
combined with the weakness of institutions and the
lack of cooperation among political leaders and parties,
makes the task of tackling, on a daily basis, pressing
problems such as widespread poverty and
unemployment, the housing crisis, the great number of
internally displaced persons and crime even more
challenging.

In expressing our support for and solidarity with
the people and the Government of Timor-Leste - and
mindful of the observation of the Security Council
mission that, unless the differences among the
Timorese leaders are resolved, political uncertainty
will persist, together with the prospect of renewed
violence and bloodshed - we call upon all parties
concerned to exercise restraint and to actively engage
in peaceful dialogue to address differences, together
promoting the process of national reconciliation and
development, in the national interest of Timor-Leste
and in the interest of peace and stability in the region.

In the context of the present situation, we
consider that the continued assistance of the
international community is necessary. The visits of the
Secretary-General and the Security Council mission
have reaffirmed the commitment of the United Nations
to Timor-Leste at this critical moment. In that regard,
we commend the efforts of UNMIT and various United
Nations agencies in support of the peace and
development process in Timor-Leste over the past year
in the many fields of their activities.

At the request of the Government of Timor-Leste,
and upon the recommendation of the Secretary-
General, Viet Nam supports an extension of UNMIT's
existing mandate in order to enable it to accomplish its
tasks. We welcome UNMIT's plan for a phased
handover of policing responsibilities to the National
Police Force of Timor-Leste in order to enhance the
capacity of the Timorese authorities in maintaining
security with a view to long-term stability.

Before concluding, let me once again, on behalf
of my Government, extend to President Jose Ramos-
Horta our best wishes for a quick and full recovery to
allow him to resume leadership of the country at an
early date, consolidate peace and implement the
national strategy for recovery.

