The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.

I thank Ms. Altalli for sharing her personal story
with the Security Council today. It is really important
for the Council to hear about her work and that of
the other human rights defenders who work at great
personal risk. Their efforts on the behalf of all Syrians
are courageous and valuable. We deeply value and
support the voices of representatives of Syrian civil
society, particularly with regard to women's roles in
the political process. I would also like to thank Special
Envoy Pedersen for his briefing today and for his
leadership this year.

Thanks to the determination of Special Envoy
Pedersen, the willingness of the Syrian parties to step
forward and the support of the international community,
especially the small group and Turkey and Russia, we
witnessed a notable political breakthrough after almost
two years of negotiations. Following the successful
October launch of the Constitutional Committee, the
United States and many on the Council believed that there
would be momentum to move towards the creation of a
constitutional reform package, in line with resolution
2254 (2015). However, the delegation of the Al-Assad
regime entered the second round of negotiations with
preconditions, which stalled any progress. The regime's
call for agreement on a set of national pillars not only
represented barefaced propaganda, it also violated
the spirit of the Constitutional Committee's rules of
procedure and obstructed the work of an important
diplomatic initiative, an initiative supported by the
United States, our small group partners and the
Astana group.

In the new year, the Council must fully support
the Special Envoy's efforts to facilitate the work of
the Committee. As a sign of support in that regard, the
United States calls for the Office of the Special Envoy
to circulate formal written summaries of the most
recent round of the Committee's meetings in November.
We call for similar reports to be issued after all future
meetings. With written reports in hand, the Council
can bolster Special Envoy Pedersen's efforts to hold
representatives accountable and, we hope, bring an end
to the obstruction and delays. However, if Damascus is
not serious about the Constitutional Committee's work,
the Council should reconsider whether the Committee
is a viable mechanism for producing the reforms called
for in resolution 2254 (2015). Beyond the issue of the
Committee, in 2020 we expect to see progress on
two specific goals of resolution 2254 (2015) that will
support progress in the political process, a nationwide
ceasefire and the immediate unilateral release of
civilian detainees, especially women, children and
the elderly.

The Al-Assad regime and its supporters - Russia
and Iran - should commit to an immediate nationwide
ceasefire. This week, ongoing hostilities continue to kill
civilians, destabilize the region and threaten to destroy
any progress made by the Constitutional Committee.
There must be no Christmas offensive in Idlib, and any
attack on civilians or civilian infrastructure must cease.

The United States also calls on the Al-Assad
regime to ensure the immediate unilateral release of
civilians whom it continues to hold in detention centres
and prisons without just cause and who are even
subjected to torture. At this moment, we are displaying
photographs in the lobby of our Permanent Mission,
dedicated by the Syrian Network for Human Rights to
several of the approximately 128,000 Syrians who have
been unlawfully detained and, in many cases, tortured
and killed by the Al-Assad regime. I want to reflectjust
briefly on one of the human stories behind the images
in our windows.

Leila, a paramedic with the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent, was shot by a Government sniper and then
arrested - not once, but twice - for providing
material support to terrorists. She was subjected to
daily beatings in regime detention. What was her
crime? It was providing medical care to individuals
injured while peacefully protesting for reform. This is
simply outrageous.

Sadly, Leila's story is all too common, and although
individuals like her remain dedicated to providing
medical assistance to all in need, they are unable to
safely return to Syria for fear of being targeted by the
regime. We must see the mass release of those who
have been arbitrarily detained. I want to be clear today
that there will be no lasting peace until the regime's
inhumane and destructive behaviour against the
Syrian people is reversed and accountability measures
are established.

The United States firmly believes that achieving
those goals in the next 12 months will yield meaningful
progress towards an end to the conflict and a
sustainable, negotiated peace. We are eager to work
with every member of the Council to reach those goals
and advance all aspects ofresolution 2254 (2015) in the
coming year.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.

