Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me to begin by thanking Mr. Staffan de
Mistura for his valuable briefing and to extend our high
appreciation for his efforts. We would also like to
thank His Excellency Mr. Zalmay Khalilzad, the
representative of the United States, for the useful
presentation he made on the work of the Multinational
Forces. We welcome the presence of our brother,
Mr. Hamid Al Bayati, the Permanent Representative of
Iraq, and thank him for his briefing as well.

The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya expresses its
satisfaction with the continued improvement of the
security situation in Iraq. The decrease in the instances
of violence in the country has already been highlighted
by Mr. de Mistura in his briefing and by the figures
cited by Mr. Khalilzad in his presentation. There has
been an increase in the Iraqi forces' assumption of
security tasks from the Multinational Force. Additional
United States forces have withdrawn without affecting
the security situation. Internally displaced persons
returned to their homes in growing numbers during the
three months of June, July and August. All of those
facts are, without a doubt, indicators that the security
situation is moving in the right direction, as we
continue to hope it will.

We also welcome the political developments and
progress in other sectors in the fraternal country of Iraq
during the period under discussion. The electoral law
for the governorates was adopted, as the hurdles that
had earlier prevented its adoption were overcome.
There have been positive developments in terms of the
voter registration update, a date set for elections in
14 governorates, the situation with regard to the
"awakening councils" and support for the rule of law
and justice in Iraq. In addition, there have been
improvements in the level of social services provided,
particularly in the provision of food supplies. As
indicated by Mr. Al Bayati, economic indicators have
improved. Other positive issues are highlighted in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2008/688).

All these developments provide reason for
optimism; we are confident that they have had a
positive impact on the direct and indirect bilateral
relations of Iraq with its neighbouring countries. We
have witnessed the return of foreign ambassadors to
Iraq, in addition to high-level visits, continued regional
dialogue and attempts to address pending issues
between Iraq and some of its neighbours. All those
elements are positive indications that the situation in
general is moving in the right direction.

However, Iraqis and the international community
must still overcome certain challenges. Critical issues
now lying dormant must be addressed through a
comprehensive approach. For example, the security
situation, despite a relative improvement, remains
fragile. Events have taken place in Mosul targeting
Christians. Some Iraqis are still reluctant to return to
their homes. Between 1,000 and 2,500 Iraqis per month
refuse to return, and some 20,000 have sought asylum
in other countries during the first eight months of this
year - the highest number in the world to do so.
Internally displaced persons returning to their homes
have faced real difficulties in terms of stability, which
has led the head of a committee on forcibly displaced
people to claim that the Government and the security
forces have had a hand to play in the situation. The
explosions that have occurred this week in Iraq are
disheartening and disquieting. They highlight the
vulnerability of the security situation.

We have said many times before in this Council
that the situation in Iraq will never become stable
without achieving national reconciliation, the three
most important aspects of which - all requiring
immediate and urgent progress - involve first, an end
to foreign occupation. The people of Iraq have always
rejected and resisted occupation. Continued occupation
in any form will be a divisive factor, thereby
contributing to instability and possibly causing a
setback in the security situation.

Secondly, an agreement on the constitutional
review process must be reached. The current Iraqi
Constitution, in the words of Mr. al-Maliki, the Iraqi
Prime Minister, might have been drawn up in an
atmosphere of fear. Unfortunately, we have entrenched
those fears and compromised our aspirations. To quote
paragraph 17 of the report of the Secretary-General:

"In mid-July, the Constitutional Review
Committee of the Iraqi Parliament submitted its
second report to the Presidency of Iraq. The
report outlined a number of key issues within the
constitutional review process on which the
Committee has, thus far, been unable to reach a
political consensus."

We hope that all parties concerned will work on
promoting dialogue in the spirit of the sincere national
desire that we have always known to be prevalent
among Iraqis, so that they can draft a constitution that
reflects the national and legitimate realities and
aspirations of Iraq, thus establishing Iraq as a
democratic Arab country that guarantees the rights of
all its social groups and minorities.

Thirdly, there are issues that, in our View, are
considered hallmarks of any national reconciliation
process. In the case of Iraq, these include the
demarcation of the internal boundaries among the
governorates. Such efforts should be buttressed by a
true and continuous effort in the field of development,
covering all the Iraqi regions and resulting in a positive
impact on the Iraqi people.

Paragraphs 40 to 45 of the report of the
Secretary-General address the question of human
rights. The report points to some improvements in the
field of human rights as a result of the overall
improvement in the security environment. However,
the report also stresses that serious and systematic
human rights violations persist. By way of example,
the report cites the assassination of journalists and
political activists and the arbitrary attempts to impact
the demographic composition of some Iraqi
governorates. These include, of course, the recent
events targeting Christians in Iraq. The report points
out that the number of detainees has decreased from
24,000 in 2007 to 18,000 currently. While we welcome
and encourage that trend, we hope that the
Multinational Force would positively respond to the
efforts of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI) in respecting the provisions of
international humanitarian law.

It is also regrettable that the report confirms that
many of those released by the Multinational Force have
been rearrested by the Government of Iraq. According
to the report of the Secretary-General, there are

currently more than 27,000 detainees in Iraqi
Government prisons. We also share the concerns
expressed by the Secretary-General in paragraphs 43
and 44 of his report.

It is also disquieting that the Multinational Force
in Iraq crossed the Syrian border for the first time since
2003. On 26 October, those forces attacked the village
of Sukkariyah, within Syria's borders, resulting in
many civilian casualties. Not only is that a violation of
the Charter of the United Nations, but it will no doubt
raise tensions in a region that should be spared any
further causes of tension. We do not believe that such
an act can in any way contribute to Iraq's stability.

In conclusion, my country highly appreciates the
efforts of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq and its positive contributions to the political
situation, to national and regional dialogue and to
supporting constitutional processes and human rights.
We also welcome the signing of a strategy between the
United Nations and Iraq's Government concerning the
assistance to be provided by the Organization to that
country.

