The President: The Security Council will now
proceed with the election of the one remaining member
of the International Court of Justice, in accordance
with Article 13 of the Statute of the International Court
of Justice.

May I take it that the Council is now ready to
proceed with the election of the one remaining member
of the International Court of Justice?

It is so decided.

The Council will now proceed to a second ballot.
I request the Conference Officer to distribute the ballot
papers.

At the invitation of the President, Mrs. Onanga
(Gabon) and Mr. Onown (Nigeria) acted as
tellers.

The President: Members of the Council should
place an "X" in the box next to the name of the
candidate for whom they wish to vote.

***


The President: I take it that all the members of
the Council have now voted and I ask the Conference
Officer to collect the ballot papers.

>l<>l<>l<


The President: All the ballot papers have been
collected. I should like to remind Council members
that in accordance with the established practice, the
ballots will not be counted until it has been verified
that the ballot papers in the General Assembly have
also been collected. The Council will remain in session
pending the receipt of that information.

>l<>l<>l<


The President: The result of the voting is as
follows:
Number ofballot papers: 15
Number of invalid ballots: 0
Number of valid ballots: 15
Number of abstentions: 0
Required majority: 8
Number of votes obtained:
Ms. Tsvetana Kamenova 2
Mr. Abdul G. Koroma 10
Ms. Julia Sebutinde 3
Mr. El Hadji Mansour Tall O

I wish to inform the Council that I have received
from the President of the General Assembly the
following letter:

"I have the honour to inform you that, at the
54th plenary meeting of the General Assembly,
held today for the purpose of electing five
members of the International Court of Justice, the
following candidate obtained an absolute
majority of votes in the General Assembly:
Ms. Julia Sebutinde."

Accordingly, no candidate has received the
required majority in the Council and in the General
Assembly. As fewer than five candidates have received
the required absolute majority of votes in both the
Council and the General Assembly, the Council shall
proceed to a third ballot for the remaining vacancy, in
accordance with rule 61 of the Council's provisional
rules of procedure.

I should also like to inform Council members that
I have received a letter from the President of the
General Assembly informing me that the candidates
Ms. Tsvetana Kamenova and Mr. El Hadji Mansour
Tall have decided to withdraw their nominations for
election to the International Court of Justice.
Accordingly, the ballots for the third round of voting
will not include the names of Ms. Tsvetana Kamenova
and Mr. El Hadji Mansour Tall.

I understand that the President of the General
Assembly has proposed that the Assembly end its
meeting and reconvene at 3 pm. to hold the third
ballot. I propose that, with the consent of the members
of the Council, we proceed in the same manner and
reconvene at 3 pm. to hold a third ballot.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m.
11-58820

