The Secretary-General: I thank His Excellency
Ambassador Liu Jieyi, President of the Security
Council, for convening today's open debate on
countering terrorism. It is clear that both terrorism
and the violent extremism that can be conducive to it
are at the top of the international agenda. I have just
returned from Switzerland, where, together with Swiss
Foreign Minister Didier Burkhalter, I co-chaired the
Geneva Conference on Preventing Violent Extremism.
It was encouraging that many ministers and heads of
regional and United Nations organizations, as well as
civil society, came together to focus on solutions.

Two weeks ago, the Nuclear Security Summit in
Washington, DC, adopted an important action plan
in support of the key role that the United Nations can
play in mitigating the threat and managing the response
to the possible use by terrorists of nuclear, chemical,
biological and radiological materials. Recent attacks
around the world have destroyed lives, heightened
fear and defied all norms of international law and our
common humanity. Terrorism and violent extremism are
global threats, transcending cultures and geopolitical
boundaries. They should not be associated with any one
religion, nationality or ethnic group.

While recognizing the importance of measures to
counter terrorism, we also need to engage earlier and
address the drivers of violent extremism. We know
that violent extremism flourishes when groups are
marginalized, political space shrinks, human rights
are abused and people lack prospects and meaning
in their lives. My Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism asks each country to develop a national plan
that engages key communities and focuses on conflict
prevention. The Plan also calls for the resolution of
long-standing conflicts, which would give hope to
those enduring oppression and eradicate the breeding
grounds of violent extremism and terrorism.

Da'esh is adept at raising funds through nefarious
activities and has shown an ability to radicalize and
recruit disaffected youth, including women and girls,
through strategies involving the Internet and social
media. More than 30,000 people from all over the world
have joined Da'esh's campaigns in Iraq and Syria.
These foreign terrorist fighters also pose a significant
security threat to their home or third countries when
they return.
We need to focus on implementing the relevant
provisions of Security Council resolutions 1373 (2001),
2178 (2014), 2199 (2015) and 2253 (2015), and other
resolutions and measures that sanction terrorist groups
and individuals. We also need to implement all four
pillars of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in a
comprehensive and balanced manner, recognizing that
security and respect for human rights are mutually
reinforcing. Member States need to take more concrete
steps to stop fundraising through the smuggling of oil
and gas, the illicit trade in cultural artefacts, kidnapping
for ransom and donations from abroad.

We must also curtail the ability to abuse and
misuse the Internet and social media to radicalize and
recruit young people by identifying global and regional
solutions that involve Governments, private enterprise
and civil society. Strategies to counter the threat of
online radicalization will also require legislative and
law enforcement measures at the national level. We also
need an effective approach to strategic communications,
moving beyond counter-narratives to reinforcing the
values of peace and tolerance. The United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre has made this a priority area
in its new five-year programme.

To stem the flow of foreign terrorist fighters, we
need to intervene at all stages - from their initial
radicalization to their travel and return. Resolution
2178 (2014) called on all Member States to cooperate
in this effort and, at the request of the Security
Council, the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force (CTITF) developed the United Nations Foreign
Terrorist Fighters Capacity-Building Implementation
Plan, which includes 37 mutually reinforcing project
proposals to be carried out by 12 CTITF entities.
The Security Council also called on Member States
to provide the needed financial assistance. While the
Counter-Terrorism Centre will support several of these
projects with catalytic funding, more funding will be
required for implementation.

We must also be sure that our approaches to
preventing violent extremism and countering terrorism
respect our shared values, as reflected in the Charter
of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and international human rights and
humanitarian law. Too often, this basic understanding
has been broken or ignored. We must also have the
courage to address certain difficult situations, such
as the support that violent extremists and terrorists
may receive - directly, indirectly and perhaps even
unintentionally - from Governments. We must also
recognize that, too often, Government counter-terror
strategies are so heavy-handed and discriminatory
that they end up being counterproductive, generating
further alienation among targeted communities and
even more terrorists than there were beforehand.

Through the Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism and the Capacity-Building Implementation
Plan, the United Nations system has come together
through an all-of-United Nations approach to provide
support to Member States in their struggle. As we
look ahead to this year's General Assembly review
of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy on its tenth
anniversary, I hope that Member States will find
consensus on a strong outcome resolution that reinforces
international unity in the face of the divisions that
terrorist groups and violent extremists seek to create.

The Security Council has a key role to play, and I
look forward to continuing our shared efforts to address
this global menace.

