Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I would like to thank
Ms. Sandra Honore Braithwaite, Special Representative
ofthe Secretary-General, for her comprehensive briefing
today. We commend Haiti's efforts to consolidate
democracy, restore constitutional order and promote
stability, as well as the contribution of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
to that end.

In order to ensure the successful implementation
of MINUSTAH's mission and, above all, to support
Haiti's reconstruction efforts, Japan is proud to have
contributed to MINUSTAH, especially after the
earthquake in 2010. The Security Council's visit was
timely given the inauguration of the new Government
and the transition of the United Nations presence. The
visit provided us with a clear understanding of the
reality on the ground and enabled us to demonstrate
the continued United Nations support of the Haitian
people. It also offered an opportunity to encourage
Haitian efforts to further consolidate national unity and
build a resilient and more prosperous society.

Japan is well aware that the smooth transition
from MINUSTAH to the United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) is essential.
We look forward to a continued responsible transfer of
tasks to MINUJUSTH, along with a greatly expanded
role for the United Nations country team. We welcome
the Secretary-General's vision for implementing
MINUJUSTH's mandate and designing a strategy for
gradual transition to local institutions, as outlined in
his most recent report (S/2017/604). Japan strongly
hopes that MINUJUSTH will further strengthen police
and justice institutions as foundations for the stability
and development of the country.

During our visit, we witnessed the positive results
of the close cooperation between MINUSTAH and
the Government of Haiti on strengthening the Haitian
National Police (HNP). Challenges remain, however,
including the ability of the Haitian National Police
to respond to large-scale violence; border controls;
the need for police stations and related facilities;
and ongoing rule-of-law issues. We hope that the
Government will focus on those priority security areas
in partnership with the international community.

Another area of concern is public health. Cholera
was mentioned by everyone, including the President,
during the Council's visit. Since 2010, Japan has
contributed more than $9 million through UNICEF and
other international organizations in order to combat
cholera. We are prepared to continue our support,
especially on preventive socioeconomic measures
such as poverty reduction and improving resilient
infrastructure, with a focus on water, sanitation and
hygiene. Japan will also continue to support post-
disaster reconstruction in Haiti as well as development
and the improvement of basic social services. While the
main focus ofthe United Nations Mission is undergoing
changes, our support to the people of Haiti should and
will remain steadfast.

