Mr. Verbeke (Belgium) (spoke in French): First
and foremost, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for having taken the initiative to organize this debate
and for having travelled from Jakarta to New York to
preside.

Better defining the respective roles of regional
and subregional organizations and of the United
Nations in the maintenance of international peace and
security is a major challenge.

As a member of the European Union, I make
reference to the statement to be delivered later by the
representative of Portugal on behalf of the presidency
of the Union.

In resolution 1631 (2005), the Security Council
stressed the importance of closer cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations at all stages in the management of a
crisis. Pursuant to that resolution, the Secretary-
General has presented recommendations (S/2006/590)
that are particularly relevant; a number of those should
be considered with a view to their implementation in
specific regional contexts.

Basic conditions for effective cooperation are
knowledge of respective capacities and the creation of
rapid communication channels. Meetings like today's
are useful, first and foremost, in enabling regional and
subregional organizations to explain their activities and
their expectations.

But knowledge of respective capacities can best
be acquired through regular relations between
secretariats. For this reason, my country favours
strengthening such relations where they have not yet
been sufficiently developed. The same can be said for
meetings and exchanges between high-level officials.
Through such relations between secretariats and high-
level meetings, we can have a fruitful exchange of
experiences, on both a technical and a geopolitical
level. Meetings of political bodies supplement this
groundwork, as can be seen by the visit of the Security
Council to the headquarters of the African Union, and
its 16 June meeting in Addis Ababa with the African
Union Peace and Security Council.

The role of regional and subregional
organizations in the maintenance of international peace
and security embraces the whole gamut of areas of
action, from conflict prevention to peacebuilding. The
ongoing exercise within the United Nations
Department of Political Affairs aimed at strengthening
prevention and mediation capacities must be
accompanied by a discussion on how to make greater
use of the prevention and mediation capacities of
regional and subregional organizations and how to
avoid duplication of efforts.

As far as peacekeeping operations are concerned,
great progress has been made in cooperation between
the United Nations and the European Union, between
the United Nations and the African Union and among
the three organizations. Strengthening the capacities of
regional and subregional organizations is essential and
efforts to that end must, if necessary, be assisted by the
United Nations or other organizations. Moreover, since
every peacekeeping operation has its own particular
characteristics, the main challenge is to adapt
cooperation to the capacities involved, taking
scrupulous care to achieve the highest standards and a
clear chain of command. In that connection, we believe
that the structure of the hybrid force decided upon in
the context of the Darfur crisis should not necessarily
lead to a generally applicable model.

The role of regional and subregional
organizations in peacebuilding is undeniable. The
Peacebuilding Commission offers an ideal framework
for consultation among all relevant actors, and it is
important to ensure the greatest possible involvement
by regional organizations in such work.

Belgium is aware of the dangers inherent in all
processes aimed at the institutionalization of
relationships. That is why we believe it is more
important to create pragmatic and flexible synergies
than to establish theoretical frameworks, which very
often prove to be rigid and not very functional.

Nevertheless, it remains true that many actors and
instruments are involved in the very broad area of
maintaining international peace and security.
Therefore, it is essential to structure cooperation
according to need. The practice of joint statements,
used by the European Union and the United Nations in
2003 and, most recently, in June 2007, is an instrument
enabling us to be flexible in defining subjects for
discussion, to specify certain modalities and to
determine certain cooperation mechanisms. However,
such exercises should not cause us to make cooperation
conform to rigid and prescriptive criteria.

Belgium believes that a practical approach,
favouring practice over theory and taking particular
account of lessons learned from ongoing operations,
can serve as a framework for continuing to strengthen
and refine the relationship between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations.

