Mr. IliicheV (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. O'Brien for his briefing.

In general, in Syria, the cessation of hostilities that
began on 30 December 2016 is holding. At the same
time, there have been incidents in which it has been
undermined and there have been actions carried out by
terrororists and armed groups. Their offensive actions,
including those taken in Damascus, which undermined
the most recent round of inter-Syrian talks in Geneva,
are fresh in our memory. These types of escalations
have an adverse impact on the humanitarian situation.

The ongoing criticism of the Syrian Government
and the emotional calls to the country's guarantors,
including Russia, do not help matters.

We are carrying out our obligations in good faith.
There are other influential players who are unfortunately
in no in hurry to meet us halfway. In that regard, the
only approach that can have a positive impact is a
collective one. And we should not forget the ongoing
importance of the task of separating the constructively
disposed opposition from the terrorists. The first steps
in that direction succeeded only thanks to the joint
efforts of the countries that are the guarantors of the
Astana process, but much remains to be done.

In many cases, the cessation of hostilities regime
has enabled the various humanitarian convoys agreed
on with the Syrian Government to proceed successfully,
and the progress made in the past few months is
evident. Painstaking efforts to establish the parameters
for humanitarian access and a medical evacuation in
eastern Ghouta are ongoing. Given the delicate nature
and operational constraints of that effort, we should not
count on getting instant results. Brash public-relations
campaigns will not help. To start with, it is not as simple
as some would like to imagine, and the problem is not
just about facilitation letters, but also because one key
reason for the difficulties is the provocative actions of
the fighters.

Furthermore, we do not fully share the concerns
about the situation in this area. Rural Damascus is
an ancient farming region that provides the capital
with food. It is no accident that the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/339) notes that the supply of
agricultural products from eastern Ghouta to Damascus
has been halted as a result of the worsening situation.
We understand that sending humanitarian convoys
in a time of conflict is always fraught with risk, and
not everything goes according to plan. Our military
specialists often accompany caravans, which is why,
unlike the humanitarian theoreticians, we know first-
hand the cost of those operations. In order to draw up
optimal parameters for them, we still need the platform
of the humanitarian task force of the International Syria
Support Group.
In spite of all this, however, the reconciliation
process is under way in a number of Syrian
neighbourhoods. Thanks to the activities of the Russian
Centre in Hmeimim, at least 1,500 towns have joined
the process. Such agreements also take the form oflocal
truces, in which appropriate agreements are signed by
representatives of the authorities and militia leaders.
For instance, we are close to concluding a local truce
in the problematic area of Al-Waer in the city of Homs.
While members of the illegal armed groups and their
families are leaving for areas of Syria that have not gone
along with the cessation of hostilities regime, many of
the rebels have decided to return to a peaceful life by
accepting the Government's amnesty. we hope that the
problem of the four towns can be addressed when the
regional power centres reach a firm agreement.

The treacherous terrorist attack in Al-Rashidin
on residents evacuated from Fo'ah and Kefraya rightly
aroused outrage across the globe. In that connection,
we do not agree with the criticism of the practice of
concluding local truces. It may not be ideal, but it is
a practical instrument for bringing normalcy to the
situation and saving lives on a temporary basis, as
experience has shown in eastern Aleppo and other
urban areas. Now Syrians need help in restoring decent
living conditions in liberated areas so they can return
to their homes.

We were surprised by the statements of our United
Kingdom and French colleagues regarding local
truces, which are the result of agreements between
the Government and relevant opposition groups. They
represent another option for avoiding the greater
numbers of casualties that would occur without such
agreements. In that regard, double standards are still
at work. When Muslim populations in the Central
African Republic were moved from the capital and
western areas to the north-east, with the participation
of the United Nations and the French operation, it was
justified as an attempt to save human lives. We all
know what happened. The Muslim population in the
capital of Bangui was reduced by 99 per cent and the
consequences of the move are still being felt today. The
destabilization we are now seeing now in the centre
of the country is being provoked specifically from the
north-East, where the Muslims were moved. Let us
refrain from distinguishing between the dignity of the
lives of Syrians and of people in other countries where
we have to act from the best motives to try to save lives.

We are seriously concerned about the situation in
the north of Syria, where several military operations
are breaking out simultaneously. The majority of the
participants, including the so-called coalition, were
not invited in by the Syrian Government. This is a
clear violation of the sovereignty of the country and
encroaches on its territorial integrity. Peaceful civilians
are being killed in the bombing and Vital infrastructure
is being destroyed. The strikes on the Kurdish militias
who have been fighting the terrorists this entire time are
in total contradiction to the international community's
professed determined resistance to this evil.

We must never allow ourselves to ignore the fact
that we have no idea of what is going on in the areas
that are still controlled by terrorists or how hundreds
of thousands of people are living. Neither the United
Nations nor most of its partners have access to these
areas. We are not talking just about Deir ez-Zor, where
at least humanitarian assistance is being provided via air
drops. We have to point out here that the humanitarian
reports on Syria sometimes retouch facts that support
criticism of the fighters of armed groups. Unverified
information circulates. The Syrian Government trusts
external participants very little, for obvious reasons,
since against the backdrop of an anti-Damascus
campaign all they see is provocation. Why would we
want to aggravate that feeling rather than restore the
prospects for cooperation with Damascus?

It is disappointing that there is once again a lack
of data about the stocks of medicines used to support
terrorist fighters that were discovered in eastern
Aleppo after it was liberated. We demanded that the
circumstances be investigated and brought to light
and for more than a month now have been waiting for
results that were supposed to be officially reported to
the Security Council. Incidentally, similar stocks of
medicines were discovered in Zabadani and Madaya
after they were liberated.

We call attention once again to the urgent issue of
demining Syria, including its cultural heritage sites.
While the Russian and Syrian specialists have worked
well together and have demined thousands of hectares
of residential areas in Aleppo and done major sapper
work in Palmyra, we need a united effort in this area.
In that regard, we call for establishing an international
demining coalition for Syria from among the interested
countries and hope to includ\\ the relevant United
Nations agencies in that. We also believe that it would
be appropriate to create a fund to finance commercial
companies that could participate in the demining.

The United Nations humanitarian bodies, the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the
Syria Red Crescent have been working furiously for
the past two weeks to restore normal life to the people.
We should not forget that despite unfair externally
imposed sanctions, the Syrian Government has also
been making massive efforts - a fact about which the
reports are usually silent. Help is also being provided by
international and local non-governmental organizations
(NGOs). However, we should emphasize that we take
a critical view of certain NGOs that are obeying the
orders of their foreign sponsors and violating Syria's
sovereignty by working exclusively in areas that are
not controlled by the Government. The White Helmets,
who have been heaped with praise in Western capitals,
are a prime example, frequently displaying a lack of
conscience in publishing false information and staging
film footage designed to blacken the Syrian Government
and army's reputation. There are multiple examples of
evidence of their direct ties to terrorists and extremists.

Russia is providing Syrians with humanitarian
assistance on an almost daily basis, in some cases
with the participation of our foreign partners. Medical
assistance is being provided, and more than 12,000
Syrians have received care from qualified personnel.

We underscore our unstinting support for a
peaceful solution in Syria, guided by the idea that the
country's fate should be decided by Syrians themselves.
Furthermore, Russia in in the front lines ofthose efforts.
We do not see any reason to diverge from agreed-upon
parameters for the political process guided by the United
Nations. Syrian sides have already taken on board the
United Nations-formulated proposal on the basis of
the four baskets, including building a constitution and
counter-terrorism activities. The processes in Astana
and Geneva are vital working forums that complement

one another. Progress on all negotiating tracks is the
best way to improve the humanitarian situation.

