The Secretary-General: We should all be
grateful to you, Mr. President, and to your country's
admirable Permanent Representative for convening this
second open debate of the Security Council on conflict
prevention.

Interest in this subject is on the rise - and with
good reason. In the last decade alone, 5 million people
lost their lives in wars - mainly internal ones - and
great suffering was inflicted on countless others, most
of them civilians. We struggle to relieve the suffering
and to resolve the conflicts. But everyone agrees that it
would be far better to prevent them.

We can do better. Indeed, the Charter requires us
to do better. In Article 1, paragraph 1, the founding
fathers made it one of the primary purposes of the
Organization

"to take effective collective measures for the
prevention and removal of threats to the peace,
and for the suppression of acts of aggression or
other breaches of the peace".

It is high time we gave prevention the primacy, in all
our work, that those words imply.

But how? There is by now a consensus that
prevention strategies must address the root causes of
conflicts, not simply their violent symptoms. It is also
widely understood that, since no two wars are alike, no
single prevention strategy will be effective everywhere.
There is no panacea.

Prevention is multidimensional. It is not just a
matter of putting in place mechanisms such as early
warning, diplomacy, disarmament, preventive
deployment or sanctions - necessary though all these
may be, at one time or another. Effective prevention
has to address the structural faults that predispose a
society to conflict.

A recent study by the United Nations University
suggests that simple inequality between rich and poor
is not enough to cause violent conflict. What is highly
explosive is what the authors of the study call
"horizontal" inequality: when power and resources are
not equally distributed between groups that are also
differentiated in other ways - for instance, by race,
religion or language. So-called ethnic conflicts occur
between groups which are distinct in one or more of
these ways, when one of them feels it is being
discriminated against, or another enjoys privileges
which it fears to lose.

Increasingly, therefore, we see that democracy,
human rights, good governance, justice and the rule of
law are not rewards to be claimed at the end of the
development process, but essential ingredients of
development itself. While we do not see poverty alone
as a sufficient cause of conflict, we consider it no
accident that the majority of wars today are fought
among the poor. Social despair provides fertile soil for
conflict, especially when irrigated with undemocratic
governance and violations of human rights.

As I have said before, the best form of long-term
conflict prevention is healthy and balanced economic
development. Since peace and development are the two
great responsibilities of the United Nations, that gives
this Organization a special role to play.

Since taking office, I have attempted in various
ways to adapt the Organization to play that role.

The Department of Political Affairs, which I have
designated as the focal point for conflict prevention
within the United Nations system, has set up a
Prevention Team that meets regularly to identify
situations where United Nations preventive action
could help. Other United Nations departments and
agencies have taken similar measures to strengthen
their preventive capacity.

I have established a Framework for Coordination
to improve interdepartmental and interagency links. We
are working more closely with regional organizations.
More than 400 staff from throughout the system have
gone through a new training course in prevention and
early warning organized by the United Nations Staff
College in Turin.

I intend to continue to strengthen the information-
gathering and analysis capacity of the Secretariat, and I
look forward to a systematic exchange with members
of the Council on ways to do this.

Of course, all our work in post-conflict peace-
building is in fact prevention, since it is designed to
prevent the resurgence of conflict in countries that have
escaped from it. This can be the hardest form of
prevention, since conflict invariably leaves behind it a
legacy of unavenged wrongs, unassuaged grievances
and unachieved ambitions.

I am pleased to note, however, that the Secretariat
is not alone in taking prevention more seriously. The
Council too is playing its part. A recent and striking
example was its decision to ban all direct or indirect
imports of unlicensed diamonds from Sierra Leone,
following the similar ban imposed on diamonds from
the UNITA-controlled area in Angola and the ground-
breaking investigation led by Ambassador Fowler. It
has also requested me to establish an expert panel on
the illegal exploitation of natural resources and other
forms of wealth of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. I am now in the process of doing so, and I hope
this may soon enable the Council to take action to
restrain such exploitation, as it has done in Angola and
Sierra Leone.

I also hope that the diamond bans will from now
on be more strictly enforced and that the dealers will
respond by cleaning up their business. Greed may be
one of the driving forces behind some of today's armed
conflicts, but we are not helpless in confronting it.

In my statement at the previous open meeting on
prevention, I suggested a number of steps the Council
could take. They include making greater use of fact-
finding missions; encouraging States to bring potential
conflicts to the attention of the Council; and setting up
an informal working group or a subsidiary organ to
study early warning and prevention.

Let me now add a few more suggestions. I
believe, in the light of recent experience, that some of
the Charter's provisions relating to prevention have
been underutilized. Indeed, the Council could hold
periodic meetings at the foreign minister level, as
provided for in Article 28, to discuss thematic or actual
prevention issues.

It could also work more closely with the other
principal organs of the United Nations. For instance,
prevention issues could be put on the agenda of the
monthly meeting between the Presidents of the
Security Council and the General Assembly. This
Council might obtain useful information and other
assistance from the Economic and Social Council, as
envisaged in Article 65. And, under Article 96, the
Council can request an advisory opinion on any legal
question from the International Court of Justice. Could
the Council not make greater use of the Court's
capacity to move conflicts from potential battlefields to
peaceful arbitration rooms?

In the same spirit, the Council could examine
ways of interacting more closely with non-State actors
that have expertise in prevention or can make a
difference to it. Prevention cannot be achieved by
States alone. Civil society, including the corporate
sector, has a vital role to play in defusing or avoiding
conflicts- as we saw, to take just one example, in
South Africa in the 1980s.

I believe the time has come to review all these
proposals, as well as those put forward by the members
of the Council at this and previous debates. Let us
agree on the most practical ideas and then let us act.

There is no shortage of ideas for avoiding the sort
of human suffering, killings and wanton destruction
that has disfigured the twentieth century. But among
Governments, which hold most of the levers of
prevention in their hands, there remains a worrying
lack of political will, either to show political leadership
when it is needed, or to commit the necessary
resources.
Let me thank those Governments that have
contributed generously to the Trust Fund for Preventive
Action. Unfortunately, there are only seven of them -
for a total of $7.4 million in three years.

Yes, prevention costs money. But intervention,
relief and rebuilding broken societies and lives cost far
more. We must move from declarations of intent to real
leadership at the political level. Leaders must recognize
the need for preventive action - sometimes even
before any signs of crisis are evident. They will have to
sell prevention policies to their publics, even if the
costs must be borne today and the benefits do not
arrive for months or even years, and even then not in
tangible form. How does one quantify, or even
recognize, a conflict that does not occur?

Leaders will also have to acknowledge - as
increasingly I believe they do - that the international
community can play a constructive role in internal
situations, and that this can strengthen sovereignty
rather than weaken it. And States will have to give the
institutions that exist for prevention - from the United
Nations to local community relations councils- the
backing they so urgently need.

We must make conflict prevention the
cornerstone of collective security in the twenty-first
century. That will not be achieved by grand gestures or
by short-term thinking. It requires us to change deeply
ingrained attitudes. I trust we will have a fruitful
debate on this most urgent issue, in which this Council
has an essential role to play.

