Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): In
addition to speaking on behalf of France, I am also
speaking on behalf of the European Union and the
countries that have aligned themselves with this
statement: Albania, Croatia, the Republic of Moldova,
Montenegro and Turkey.

I should like at the outset to thank the High
Representative for his statement and to tell him that we
agree with his assessment of the situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. I should also like to assure him of
our confidence in him and of the full support of the
European Union for his efforts to ensure compliance
with the Dayton-Paris accords and to move ahead with
the reforms.

In addition, I should like to welcome the presence
in the Security Council of Mr. Nikola Spirie, Chairman
of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We have noted with satisfaction the commitment of the
Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities to moving forward
on the path of European integration.

Over the past 13 years, Bosnia and Herzegovina
has, with the support of the European Union, carried
out reforms essential to its stability and prosperity. In
June, it took an important step forward by signing a
Stabilization and Association Agreement, which
confirmed its desire to join the European Union.

However, France and the European Union express
their concern at the political atmosphere prevailing in
the country. The use of nationalist rhetoric, arousing
fear and division, and the implementation of unilateral
decisions by certain leaders call into question power-
sharing arrangements and the foundations of the State.
Moreover, such words and deeds jeopardize the
reforms necessary to the country's future. European
Union membership is based on the capacity to
overcome the tragedies of history, to renounce all
forms of discrimination and to share elements of
sovereignty in order to contribute to the common good.
The European Union expects States wishing to join to
demonstrate their full commitment to those values.

The country's leaders, both at the central level
and at the level of the entities, have a responsibility
towards the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina, whose
aspiration to join the European Union cannot be
ignored. Acts and statements likely to call into question
the State's basic structure as defined in the Dayton-
Paris accords - whether directed against Bosnia and
Herzegovina's sovereignty and territorial integrity or
against the existence of Republika Srpska - must
stop. Likewise, attempts to challenge the authority of
the High Representative are totally unacceptable.

It is time that Bosnian leaders demonstrate
through concrete action their willingness to work to
achieve a rapprochement between Europe and Bosnia
and Herzegovina. The European Union notes with
satisfaction the agreement in that regard reached
among three of the main Bosnian parties. We call for
the swift implementation of those proposals and invite
the Bosnian political forces to unite around that
project.

The European Union recalls its support for the
objective of the transition from the Office of the High
Representative to a stronger European Union presence.
The Peace Implementation Council has set forth five
objectives and two conditions necessary for the closure
of the Office, and the European Union calls on the
Bosnian authorities to intensify their efforts to meet all
five objectives and both conditions.

The European Union also remains involved
through Operation Althea, the European Union-led
peacekeeping force - whose mandate was
unanimously renewed by the Security Council on 20
November - and through the European Union Police
Mission.

Finally, I should like to stress the determination
of the European Union to strengthen its involvement in
Bosnia-Herzegovina and to shoulder its responsibilities
by using all the tools at its disposal.

