Mr. Fall (Guinea) (spoke in French): This is the
third time the Security Council has met in less than two
weeks, which demonstrates that, as the Secretary-
General has observed, the situation in the Middle East
remains highly explosive and demands that we address
it with resolve and clear-sightedness. Here, I join all
preceding speakers in expressing concern at what we
are agreed is the unending cycle of violence and
counter-violence that is now the daily lot of the Israeli
and Palestinian populations.

In that region, every passing day brings its train
of misfortune and senseless destruction, futile attacks
and aimless bombings, whose purpose is simply to
draw the parties to the conflict away from the path of
reconciliation, dialogue, understanding and final peace.
The delegation of Guinea is deeply concerned at this
intolerable situation. We reaffirm that blind violence
and reckless disregard for the fundamental principles
of international humanitarian law can lead only to
chaos. We unequivocally condemn these acts, which
cannot be justified on either political or moral grounds.
Guinea urges both parties to renounce confrontation
and thus to protect the last chance to resume
negotiations; hence the need quickly to achieve a
lasting ceasefire.

Israel must put an end to the destruction of
infrastructure and to the closure of autonomous
Palestinian areas; it must end its house arrest of the
Palestinian leader, Yasser Arafat. The comparative
freedom of movement he has recently been permitted
within Ramallah is insufficient. The Palestinian leader
must regain all his rights and full freedom of
movement. Israel must also withdraw from the

S/PV.4478

 

autonomous Palestinian areas and must give up its
exclusively military policy.
Likewise, Hamas and other fringe groups must
cease their suicide attacks against Israeli civilian
populations.

As international bodies, notably the Security
Council, have repeatedly reaffirmed, the only viable
way out of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is through a
cessation of hostilities, a return to a better frame of
mind, and the rapid resumption of negotiations based
on resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and on the
Tenet plan and the recommendations of the Mitchell
report. Otherwise, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict will
slip further into deadlock, inevitably leading to a large-
scale war that will endanger peace and security not
only in the Middle East but internationally.

To lay new groundwork in the search for an
equitable solution to this thorny problem, my
delegation endorses any new initiative - such as the
recent initiative by Crown Prince Abdullah - that can
strengthen the Middle East peace process, because in
the present situation we should overlook no way of
helping the Israeli and Palestinian sides to find a just
and lasting solution to the conflict that has divided
them for so long, and thus to create true peace between
Israel and all its Arab neighbours.

