I thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his briefing. The imperative of an immediate, comprehensive and lasting cessation of hostilities in Syria cannot be overstated if progress is to be made on the political track. We again echo the call of the Secretary-General and Special Envoy Pedersen for a silencing of the guns throughout Syria. United Nations engagement is key to mustering Council members' efforts and sustaining ceasefire initiatives in conflict zones. We remain concerned about persistent tensions, particularly in northern Syria, when focus should remain consistently on curbing the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We call on parties to rise to this critical occasion, maintain calm and exhibit self-restraint so as to put in place the conditions for the true battle of saving lives. The resurgence of Da'esh activities, particularly in southern Syria, is also very concerning. In fact, Da'esh never went away and has adapted quickly to its losses. It is now widely acknowledged that Da'esh sees the COVID-19 outbreak as a timely moment to ramp up its deadly terrorist attacks. Tunisia stresses that collective and determined efforts must be marshalled to eradicate the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham and other Security Council- designated terrorist groups in Syria and beyond. Such efforts are essential for a long-term political solution to the Syrian conflict. We credit the 5 March agreement on Idlib with having introduced a specific reference to terrorists designated by the Security Council. Tunisia welcomes the unlocking of progress in the Syrian political process following the agreement reached among Syrian parties on the agenda for the Constitutional Committee discussions. We express our hope that the third round of the Constitutional Committee will be held as soon as possible. Tunisia extends its renewed support to the Special Envoy and his team for their able facilitation of the Constitutional Committee's work. We urge the Syrian parties to exercise flexibility, seek common ground and engage constructively and without preconditions in the negotiations, while adhering to the terms of reference and core rules of procedure of the Committee. We also reaffirm the importance that the political process be accompanied by progress in releasing detainees and abductees. In the light of the threat of the COVID-19 pandemic spreading among detainees, their release has become more than a confidence-building measure: it is a humanitarian necessity. In conclusion, Tunisia reiterates that there is no military solution to the conflict in Syria. The only viable way forward is through a political settlement with Syrian ownership and leadership, along with United Nations sponsorship, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015), that safeguards Syria's sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity, and meets Syrians' legitimate aspirations for a free and a dignified future.
