Ms. Bolafios Perez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like first to thank the Ambassadors of Australia,
Morocco and the Republic of Korea for their informative
briefings and for the great skill and dedication with
which they lead the subsidiary bodies of the Security
Council under their respective responsibility.

These joint meetings are very useful for examining
terrorist threats from a wider perspective. They also
contribute to strengthening the coordination and
coherence of the activities of the system.

With last year's adoption of resolution 2083 (2012),
we have helped to improve the effectiveness of the United
Nations sanctions regime as a tool to combat terrorism
and to strengthen the Organization's legitimacy.
However, this is an ongoing objective; much remains
to be done and we are confident we will find a way to
harmonize the political processes with the law. We look
forward with interest to the forthcoming negotiations
on renewing the mandate of the Committee established
to resolution 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), which will
offer an opportunity to improve and strengthen the
credibility of the sanctions regime.

The process of including and removing names on
the list should be guided by the same set of principles:
fairness, credibility and transparency. Only thus can
we ensure that sanctions lists are truly effective. We
hope that as we move forward, we will keep this crucial
requirement in mind above all.

It is essential that all sanctions regimes established
by the Security Council be fair and transparent in
their operation. They must ensure due process in their
working procedures and decision-making. Important
steps to tat end include enhancing the powers of the
Ombudsperson and reforms of the delisting procedures.
The Ombudsperson is now better positioned to play an
important role in helping people in the consideration
of their cases. We must ensure that this is done in a
way that strengthens our ability to combat terrorism,
and that it has no impact on the functioning of other
sanctions regimes. Of particular interest to us would be
extend the mandating of the Ombudsperson to cover all
Sanctions Committees. I congratulate Kimberly Prost
for the independence, professionalism and courage with
which she performs your job.

We commend the role of the Monitoring Team of
the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1989 (2011) at a time when the nature of the threat is
evolving, and we recommend seeking ways to update
the sanctions provided for in resolution 1267 (1999).
This regime of sanctions is one of the most important
multilateral tools for combating terrorism available to
the international community. Mr. Evans and his team
have our full support in the effective discharge of its
mandate.

In regard to the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), the terrorist attacks
that have occurred recently are another sad reminder to
us all that we must stay the course towards achieving
the goals we have set in order to combat and ultimately
eliminate terrorism. This work began with the adoption
of resolution 1373 (2001). We note that the United
Nations has made significant progress in the fight
against terrorism since the adoption of that resolution.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate deserves special mention for its contribution
to helping States keep up with the evolution of the risks
and threats posed by terrorism. The close interaction of
the Executive with Member States is a prerequisite for
the effectiveness of the work of the Committee and the
full implementation of the commitments made in the
fight against terrorism.

We also commend the hard work of the Executive
Directorate at the conclusion of the review of
instruments for the assessment of the implementation
of the resolution. The revised evaluation process not
only ensures transparency, consistency and objectivity
in the summaries of the Committee, but also extends
many areas of cooperation between the Committee and
Member States.

We encourage to the Executive Directorate to
pursue its activities in capacity-building and offering
technical assistance to countries that request it. Of
particular importance is the need for greater emphasis
on the conditions conducive to the existence and spread
of terrorism. We believe that the effectiveness of our
efforts in the fight against terrorism is related to our
ability to successfully meet the economic, social and
political that often feed this phenomenon.

Finally, we support the initiatives of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee aimed at promoting the
implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005). We commend the Committee for defining such
thematic issues as the role of central authorities in
improving international cooperation in the fight against
terrorism. We look forward to the scheduled events in
2013.

Finally, regarding the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), there is no doubt that
resolution 1540 (2004) is an important complementary
tool for preventing weapons of mass destruction, their
delivery systems and related materials from falling into
the hands of non-State actors, in particular terrorists.
The Council recognizes the value of the Committee
and the importance of its work, as demonstrated by the
renewal of its mandate until 2021 through resolution
1977 (2011), which also defines the role of the Security
Council in these areas and creates conditions for
promoting related multilateral efforts.
The 1540 Committee plays a key role in coordinating
and increasing the effectiveness of these efforts. As the
tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1540
(2004) approaches, we believe that its chairmanship is
leading the Committee down the right track, inter alia,
by exploring ways to improve the implementation of
the resolution and the number of reports by Member
States. Likewise, it is important that the Committee and
its Group of Experts continue to promote furthering
intensification by the international community of its
activities to combat proliferation risks and threats. In
particular, we believe that cooperation between the
Committee and international organizations, including
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, and
the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism,
must be continued and deepened.

The 1540 Committee is furthermore an indispensible
mechanism for the support and assistance it provides to
Member States in strengthening and developing their
capacities to tackle those threats. Guatemala recognizes
and welcomes that work and we urge the Committee
to continue seeking means to facilitate communication
between donors and States that request assistance.

We accord the highest importance to the work of
the Group of Experts established by resolution 1977
(2011). In that context, we welcome that the Group's
new experts have already taken up their duties, as noted
in the previous briefing. Without the support provided
by those experts to Member States, and to developing
countries in particular, it would be very difficult for us
to establish action plans, produce national reports or
make progress on measures to implement the provisions
of resolution 1540 (2004).

Furthermore, the Group of Experts provides
significant support to the Committee's working groups.
We reiterate that it would be useful to diversify the
Group of Experts, in particular by incorporating experts
from developing countries. Such a decision would be
very helpful in promoting ever greater understanding
and application regarding these important issues among
a great number of Member States.

We reaffirm our unequivocal commitment to
achieving the goals ofa safer world, free of weapons of
mass destruction and nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons. We therefore attach great importance to this
Committee and have, since the beginning of the year,
been honoured to coordinate the working group on
monitoring and national implementation, in which we
hope to make a constructive contribution to the work of
the Committee.

