Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I wish to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. lessen-Petersen, for his
briefing. We also welcome the presence of President
Tadic of the Republic of Serbia and thank him for his
important statement.

We offer our condolences on the passing of
Mr. Rugova. At the same time, we congratulate
Mr. Sejdiu on his election as President of Kosovo.

Although some progress has been made since the
onset of the status process, many problems remain.
Measures should be taken promptly to implement
standards in all fields so as to achieve progress as soon
as possible in such priority areas as dialogue on the
question of returns, outreach to ethnic minorities, and
decentralization, and to carry out comprehensive
reform in local Governments in preparation for the
status talks.

China notes last month's meeting of the foreign
ministers of the Contact Group on the question of
Kosovo. Members of the Group still have major
differences concerning the future status of Kosovo.
Serbia and Montenegro and the Kosovo Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government have expressed their
respective concerns to the Security Council and the
international community as a whole. In those
circumstances, we need both the political will to
accelerate the status talks and safeguards for the rights
and interests of all ethnic groups in Kosovo so as to
enhance mutual trust and to create an environment and
basis conducive to the talks.

It is in the long-term and fundamental interests of
all ethnic groups and parties in Kosovo to reach a
compromise on the status of Kosovo and to establish
peaceful coexistence among all ethnic groups in the
region. It can be assumed that future talks will be
fraught with difficulties and uncertainty that will
require all parties to demonstrate the necessary
flexibility and pragmatism, to avoid haste and not to
prejudge the outcomes of the talks. In the meantime,
Kosovo's unique history must be kept in mind, and the
peace and stability of the entire Balkan region must be
our ultimate objective. Only thus can Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999) be implemented to promote a
lasting solution to the question of Kosovo.

Respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia and Montenegro is of paramount
importance to the status talks. The full and equal
participation of all parties in the process will be
equally important to regional peace and stability. China
welcomes the forthcoming meeting between Serbia and
Montenegro and the Kosovo Albanians in Vienna. It is
our hope that the meeting will contribute to the sound
evolution of the status talks.

