Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
your briefing in your capacity as Chair ofthe Committee
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I would also like to welcome the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mr. Leonard
She Okitundu, and thank him for his participation at
today's meeting. Like my colleagues before me,

I wish to express my special gratitude for the
presence in the Chamber of the mother and father
of Michael Sharp and the mother and sister of Zaida
Catalan, to whom I wish to reiterate and convey
personally the condolences of the Government of
Uruguay. The appalling event that ended the lives of
the two members of the Group of Experts reminds us
of the difficulties and tragedies faced by many victims
of violence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It
also reminds us of the constant sacrifices made by all
United Nations personnel on the ground, whether they
are soldiers, police officers or civilians.

Acts of sacrifice and selflessness, such as those
of Zaida and Michael, are worthy of our constant
remembrance and our utmost gratitude and respect.
Uruguay remains firmly committed to the development
of all necessary investigations to identify those
responsible for such cowardly acts and closely follows
all new developments in the matter. On this point, we
take note of the Executive Summary of the United
Nations Board of Inquiry transmitted to the Council
this week and we encourage Council members to
continue to examine in detail the content of the report,
in particular the recommendations contained therein.

Mr. President, I would like to acknowledge your
outstanding work and the active role you have been
playing as the Chair of the 1533 (2004) Committee.
Of the various Committee activities that you have
mentioned, I would like to highlight in particular its
visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo last year,
meetings with neighbouring countries and meetings
held with the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict. Uruguay encourages
you to continue with this work for the rest of the year,
and we support your plan to organize another visit
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the next
few months.

I would also like to express our gratitude to the
Group of Experts, which, in spite of recently having to
deal with extraordinary and very painful circumstances,
has once again managed to produce a substantive final
report (S/2017/672/Rev.1) that is very helpful for the
work of the Committee and the Council. We share the
various assessments offered by the Group of Experts.
We are concerned about the activity of armed groups,
the violations of human rights and the lack of concrete
progress in the political process.

In conclusion, Uruguay would like to once again
reiterate how urgent it is to fully implement the political
agreement of31 December 2016, in its entirety, in good
faith in order to organize peaceful elections that are
credible, inclusive and timely, by December at the latest.
