Mr. Dang Dinh Quy (Viet Nam): At the outset,
I would like to thank the Chinese presidency for
convening today's open debate on this very important
issue. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
opening remarks.

Viet Nam aligns itself with the statements delivered
earlier by the representatives of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, and the Republic of Singapore,
on behalf ofthe Association of Southeast Asian Nations.

Since the United Nations was founded, history
has shown that unilateral and bilateral measures
alone cannot solve our global security challenges.
On the contrary, multilateral measures, based on the
principles of international law enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations, have been crucial to addressing
them. Nowadays, as peace and security in our world
are facing increasing and unprecedentedly complex
challenges, old and new, traditional and non-traditional,
it is more Vital than ever that we uphold multilateralism
and make it more effective in addressing these issues,
especially the transnational challenges that are beyond
the capacity of any Member State to deal with alone,
regardless ofhow powerful it may be. Viet Nam is doing
its best to promote multilateralism, and we call on the
international community to work together to make it
more effective as a means for achieving peace, security
and sustainable development. We therefore have the
following proposals.

First, all Member States, particularly those with
the greatest capabilities, must maintain a strong
political commitment to pursuing multilateralism
and preserving a rules-based international order that
deals with all issues in a fair, just and equal manner,
and to taking concrete measures to that end. Secondly,
our multilateral mechanisms, and the United Nations
above all, must also change, with a view to becoming
more effective, transparent and accountable to Member
States, and truly relevant to all peoples. In that regard,
Viet Nam fully supports the Secretary-General's reform
initiatives and stresses how crucial it is that we now
set up and implement an appropriate plan of action for
realizing those reforms.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Viet Nam's
support to the central role of the United Nations in
maintaining peace, security and promoting sustainable
development, and to reaffirm our strong commitment to
fostering multilateralism, with the United Nations at its
heart. As an active, responsible and committed member
of the international community, Viet Nam will continue
to strive for a peaceful, prosperous, sustainable and
equitable world.

