Mr. Dacie (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; English interpretation provided by the delegation): Allow me
to greet you, Mr. President, and the members of the
Security Council, as well as to thank you for your
ongoing attention to the question of Kosovo and
Metohija. I am very pleased to be presented another
opportunity to address this body in connection with
the efforts that have been made under United Nations
auspices to find a lasting and sustainable solution to the
question of Kosovo and Metohija for 15 years now.

I am convinced that we all agree with the assessment
that the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) has a key role to play in the creation
of conditions for peaceful coexistence for the residents
of Kosovo and Metohija, a safe and secure life for all its
communities and respect for their human rights. Serbia
cooperates in good faith with the United Nations in
Kosovo and Metohija and wishes to further strengthen,
enrich and promote that cooperation. We appreciate the
efforts invested by Mr. F arid Zarif in the implementation
of the UNMIK mandate and the coordination of
international civil and security presences. We also
appreciate the contributions of UNMIK and other
international organizations - the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), the Kosovo
Force (KFOR) and specialized agencies like the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees - which, through their missions and under
the United Nations auspices and resolution 1244 (1999),
are constituent parts of those presences in Serbia's
southern province.

The dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina, within
which the First Agreement of Principles Governing the
Normalization of Relations was reached in Brussels on
19 April last year, was initiated with the aim of finding
practical solutions to questions that hamper the normal
life of the residents of Kosovo and Metohija. Serbia
expects the European Union to continue to facilitate
that dialogue.

We believe that the results achieved by Serbia so
far in the adoption of European values and standards
and its further progress along its European path are
the right context for the creation of a proper living
environment for the people in Kosovo and Metohija. In
that regard, we concur with the assessment presented in
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2014/558) that the
commitment of Belgrade, as well Pristina, to European
integration, coupled with continued active engagement
by the European Union, are critical driving forces for
the normalization of relations between Belgrade and
Pristina.

Serbia is firmly committed to the continuation of
constructive dialogue with Pristina at all levels, as well
as to the implementation of all agreements reached so
far. It has fulfilled in good faith the obligations derived
from the agreements reached in the dialogue.

Regrettably, no such assessment could be made in
connection with the Pristina side. It has not yet taken
the necessary steps to fully implement the agreements
reached in Brussels, including the adoption of an
amnesty law, the budget and local self-government.
Confidence-building is not improved by the problems
encountered by Serbian officials on their trips to
Kosovo and Metohija either. In this reporting period,
for instance, Serbian liaison officer Dejan Pavieevic'
was banned from entering the province on 25 June.

In addition to the consideration of the quarterly
reports at Security Council meetings, true insight into
the situation in Kosovo and Metohija can be gained
only by taking into account the broader picture of the
level of integration of Serbian and other non-Albanian
populations in the economic and social flows of the
province. That picture reveals the existence of a
substantial gap between international standards and the
legal framework and the situation in the field, which
is characterized by inter-ethnic incidents, unresolved
property issues and limited access to the services
of public institutions by members of non-Albanian
communities, as well as their mistrust in the work of
those institutions.

The situation in Kosovo and Metohija continues
to be difficult. Serbs live in constant fear, while
unemployment in Serbian communities is at levels
higher than ever in the past. Those are all obstacles
to the normalization of relations and to inter-ethnic
confidence-building and are a potential threat to
stability and security in a broader regional context.

Four houses of Serbian returnees were broken into
and looted in the village of Ljevosa, in the municipality
of Pee, during the night of 18 to 19 June. About 20 Serbs
returned to the village in 2005 and 2006. That was not
the first time that returning Serbs were intimidated
with the aim of discouraging them from returning to
their homes. Nor is the amelioration of the atmosphere
of mistrust helped by arbitrary arrests of local Serbs,
such as Jovica Dejanovie from Priluzje and Dorde
Bojkovic from Babin Most, near Obiliq.

I would like to make special mention of the case of
Oliver Ivanovic', the leader ofthe civic initiative Serbia,
Democracy, Justice, who was remanded into custody in
January on suspicion of participating in alleged crimes
committed during 1999 and 2000. Oliver Ivanovie
continues to be detained, while he was indicted only
in mid-August. The Government of Serbia has given
guarantees that he will attend the trial, so the refusal
to release him from detention is disrespectful of the
Government of Serbia, which has contributed so much
to the normalization of relations. We demand that
Oliver lvanovie be released from detention.

The data on the number of ethnically motivated
crimes against members of non-Albanian communities
remains incomplete, without explanation, as no
investigation of the attacks on Serbs and their property
has been successfully brought to an end. The percentage
of perpetrators of attacks on members of Serbian and

other non-Albanian communities discovered and tried
in the past 15 years is well nigh zero. The persons who
took part in the ethnically motivated violence in March
2004 - the only pogrom committed on European soil
in the twenty-first century - were tried for offences
against public peace and order under the civil procedure.
At the same time, no public records are available
on ethnically motivated attacks on members of Serbian
and other non-Albanian communities. The scope and
type of those attacks are concealed by being catalogued
as general crimes. The message thus sent to Serbs and
other non-Albanians, in particular the returning ones,
is that they are not welcome. The ethnically motivated
crime is thus de-personalized, while offences against
members of non-Albanian communities are tolerated.

The perpetrators of killings, abductions and attacks
on Serbs committed since June of 1999 have not yet
been discovered and tried. Serbia has therefore followed
attentively the investigation of the EULEX Special
Investigative Task Force and its Chief Prosecutor Clint
Williamson of the allegations of the 2010 report of
Swiss Senator Dick Marty, adopted in the Parliamentary
Assembly of the Council of Europe, entitled "Inhuman
treatment of people and illicit trafficking in human
organs in Kosovo".

First of all, let me recognize the efforts of Chief
Prosecutor Williamson and all other members of the
Special Investigative Task Force invested in the detailed
investigation of the allegations from the report of
Senator Marty regarding the crimes committed against
the Serbs, Roma and Albanians of Kosovo and Metohija
by the members of the so-called Kosovo Liberation
Army (KLA). We are not surprised by the fact that they
faced numerous obstacles during their work, mostly
the intimidation of Witnesses and the destruction of
evidence.

It is with appreciation that we accept the conclusion
of Chief Prosecutor Williamson that enough evidence
has been gathered to indict the KLA leaders responsible
for the persecution of Serbs, Roma and members of other
non-Albanian communities, as well as the Albanians
of Kosovo and Metohija. As we understand from the
statement of the Chief Prosecutor (S/2014/558, annex II), the campaign of persecution included killings,
abductions, enforced disappearances, illegal detentions
in camps both in Kosovo and Metohija and in Albania,
sexual violence and other forms of inhuman treatment
such as forced displacement, and the destruction of
churches and other religious sites. That resulted in a
large-scale ethnic cleansing of the Serbian and Roma
populations from parts of Kosovo and Metohija south
of the Ibar River. We concur with the assessment that
the widespread and systematic nature of those crimes
constitutes a basis for the prosecution of crimes against
humanity and war crimes.

Surely, the statement of the Chief Prosecutor
(S/2014/558, annex II) on the results of the investigation
so far is an immense contribution to the establishment
of the responsibility of the KLA leaders for the crimes
committed against the population, particularly the
non-Albanian population of Kosovo and Metohija.
However, justice will be served only if those who
committed and ordered the heineous crimes - the
KLA commanders who still walk free today - are tried
in courts. Serbia therefore expects that a special court
be established soon - not later than the beginning of
2015 - in which it will be possible to indict the leaders
of the KLA suspected of, among other things, crimes
against humanity and war crimes. We are convinced
that all countries that respect international law will
insist on it.

The widespread nature and magnitude ofthe crimes
mentioned in the statement (S/2014/558, annex II) of
the Chief Prosecutor call for a judicial epilogue, for
only that can bring justice and peace to a great number
of victims and their families. In that connection, we
address a strong appeal to key actors in the international
community to do, for their part, all that is necessary so
that a special court is established by the beginning of
the next year. It must not be allowed, as has been the
case in court proceedings so far, that because of the
intimidation of witnesses, responsible individuals are
acquitted due to the lack of evidence. All those involved
in the intimidation must also be tried.

At the same time, we must join forces to establish
the fate of the missing persons. As stated in the
statement (S/2014/558, annex II) of Chief Prosecutor
Williamson, not enough has been done in that regard,
and additional efforts must be made.

As it has done in the past, Serbia will do its utmost
so that additional evidence can be provided with
regard to organ trafficking. It is necessary that other
countries too make efforts in order to make it possible
for evidence of organ trafficking to find its way to the
special court.

Since beginning the work of the special court
depends in part on the decisions that ought to be taken
in Pristina, we call on all political actors in Kosovo and
Metohija to bear in mind that their conscientious work
will be a linchpin to the service ofjustice for the crimes
that have been committed.

It is with concern that we have followed the trial
of the so-called "Drenica Group" initiated last May
before the Basic Court in Kosovska, Mitrovica, for
reasons stated in the report before us. Three out of
seven indicted members of the former KLA managed to
run away from the institution in which they were being
given medical treatment. EULEX assessed the results
of the internal investigation in this case as bad and
without information of key importance.

I would like to point to another question raised in
the report relating to the adoption of the law amending
the laws on the mandate of the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo. The new law changes
the composition of the chambers of courts that hear
the criminal and civil cases that fall within EULEX
competency, to the effect that the number of judges
of the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government is
always greater than that of EULEX judges. I especially
mention that situation because the cases tried in the
Special Chamber of the Supreme Court of Kosovo in
connection with the Kosovo Privatization Agency and
the cases before appellate panels relating to decisions
of the Kosovo Property Claims Commission have
continued to be cases in which mostly Serbs and
non-Albanians are the aggrieved parties.

Bearing in mind the importance of the
implementation of the EULEX mandate, in particular
the part related to the proper investigation, trial
and enforcement of sentences for war crimes,
terrorism, organized crime, corruption, inter-ethnic
crime, financial-economic fraud and other grievous
offences, the question of the readiness of the judicial
organs to carry out impartially, conscientiously and
professionally the tasks entrusted to them is very
pertinent indeed. I emphasize this because the Kosovo
2013 Progress Report of the European Commission
highlights the need for improved enforcement of
decisions regarding human rights violations and the
many unresolved property cases related precisely to
damage compensation and inter-ethnic disputes, which
have been unjustifiably delayed.

In that connection we stress the importance of the
continued oversight over and assessment of the work of
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government, and the
judicial and other organs, and adequate appraisal of their

readiness to assume the executive competencies that
EULEX currently holds, as provided for by the EULEX
reconfiguration decision of this past June. I would
like to remind the members of the Security Council,
the body that adopted resolution 1244 (1999), which
established UNMIK with the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General at its head, that the competencies
held by the Special Representative may be transferred
to the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government only
with his authorization. The fact that those competencies
were entrusted to EULEX does not diminish the powers
and responsibility of the Special Representative.

The incidents around the bridge in Kosovska
Mitrovica during this past June have served as a
reminder of the distance that the communities in
Kosovo and Metohija still need to traverse to achieve
reconciliation. The removal of the barricades on the
northern side of the bridge over the Ibar River was an act
of goodwill on the part of the local Serbian population.
Unlike that act, the reaction of their Albanian fellow
residents did not show good faith and only added to the
deepening of intolerance.

One of the reasons that Serbia insists on the
unreduced presence and engagement of the United
Nations Mission in Kosovo and Metohija is precisely
because of the volatility of the situation in the province.
The trust that Serbian and other non-Albanian
communities have in the Mission as guarantor of their
survival is of paramount importance. In that context,
we must not allow the role entrusted to the United
Nations Mission, which is the guarantor and the basis
for the activities of all other international missions in
Kosovo and Metohija, to be weakened.

It is with concern that we look at attempts to
marginalize UNMIK - that is, reduce its size, both in
the number of substantive international personnel and
its activities in the field. We hope that, even though the
budget has been reduced compared to that of the past
year, the UNMIK budget adopted this past June will
not negatively affect the realization of the Mission's
concrete tasks, including verification of the number of
returnees and internally displaced persons (IDPs) and
the protection of minority communities.

The Government of the Republic of Serbia is
fully committed to the normalization of relations with
Pristina, which was confirmed by its call addressed
to the Serbs with residences registered in Kosovo and
Metohija to participate in the early general elections
on 8 June. Regrettably, in their attempt to exercise
their voting rights, persons of Serbian nationality, in
particular the IDPs, encountered numerous obstacles
all over again, from a questionable legal interpretation
of electoral provisions to challenges to the recognition
of their right to be entered into voters' lists.

Overall, 30,000 IDPs, 26,000 of them from the
central parts of Serbia, sent their voting applications
to the Central Election Commission. Out of 26,000
applications, less than half were accepted, while the
rejected ones were directed to an appellate procedure.
The Central Election Commission adopted 200 out of
9,000 appeals. The number of Serbs with the right to
vote has diminished in comparison with their number
at the local elections in November 2013. The fact that
as many as 20,000 deceased persons were inscribed on
the voters' lists and that, even after the removal of their
names, the number of registered voters has continued to
be greater than the population of Kosovo and Metohija
is indicative all by itself.

The new general elections law was being discussed
in Parliament at the time that the early elections were
called; the law was not adopted. Absent a new elections
law, the Central Election Commission decided to
invoke the provisions of the constitutional amendments
of 2012, with negative consequences for a number of
the mandates of the Serbian community. Specifically,
the Civic Initiative Serbia list was thus left short of six
additional Parliament seats.

Some provisions of the draft general elections law
downgrade outright the voting rights of members of
the minority communities in Kosovo and Metohija. I
believe that we all can agree that setting conditions for
dialogue and the participation of Serbian community
members in the work ofprovincial institutions in which
the scope of their rights has been reduced cannot be
politically justified.

In the municipalities in the northern part of the
province with a Serbian majority, conditions have
been fulfilled for the establishment of the association/
community of Serbian municipalities, as provided
for in the Brussels Agreement. We expect Pristina to
complete the post-electoral processes in the foreseeable
future in order to make it possible to establish the
community, that is to say, to adopt the legal framework
necessary for the implementation of its competencies.
That would be a true indicator of the commitment of the
Pristina side to the implementation of the agreements
that have been reached, contribute to the strengthening
of confidence in provincial institutions, and represent
an important step in the direction of achieving progress
in mutual dialogue.

Let me particularly draw the Council's attention to
the situation of the IDPs and the fact that the solution to
their situation largely depends on the actions of political
actors in Pristina. In June 2014, Special Rapporteur
on the human rights of internally displaced persons
Chaloka Beyani presented a report to the Human Rights
Council on his visit to Serbia in October 2013. The
Special Rapporteur called on the authorities in Pristina
to invest efforts in ensuring effective implementation
of legal solutions and to increase the political will to
find a lasting solution for the IDPs. He also pointed to
an urgent need to solve property issues.
The creation of real conditions for IDPs to return
to their homes is one of the key factors in the process
of reconciliation. The return of the IDPs to Kosovo
and Metohija has been obstructed by administrative
impediments, to the point that the Administration in
Pristina cannot honestly claim to continue to espouse
democracy and multi-ethnicity. In practice, instead of
facilitating the IDPs' return, the required documents
and procedures constitute insurmountable obstacles
for any returns, let alone sustainable ones. In that way,
implicit pressure is being brought to bear on the IDPs
to integrate into local communities outside Kosovo and
Metohija, the end result of which is a forced change in
the demographic picture of the province.

The Republic of Serbia is the country with
the largest number of IDPs in Europe - 230,000,
with 18,000 of them in Kosovo and Metohija. In our
estimation, between 2,000 and 4,000 IDPs have realized
a sustainable return to Kosovo and Metohija. The low
level of returns is caused preponderantly by the failure
to ensure the basic conditions for return and normal
life, which has also been confirmed by the Secretary-
General's reports to the Security Council. According to
the report before us, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees registered as few
as 49 voluntary individual returns by members of
non-Albanian communities in the period from April to
June.

This has been taking place despite the presence
of the international civil administration, one of the
main responsibilities of which under resolution 1244
(1999) is to assure the safe and unimpeded return of all
refugees and internally displaced persons. The creation
of conditions for Serbian and other non-Albanian
populations to enjoy fundamental human rights and the
rights that belong to them as non-majority populations
would surely contribute to the improvement of the

general atmosphere for the return of IDPs.

The programmes aimed at strengthening
confidence that have been devised by UNMIK and
other missions active in Kosovo and Metohija are,
no doubt, useful in the process of reconciliation
among communities, yet they do not suffice. In order
to create a sustainable atmosphere of tolerance,
political will and a comprehensive approach on the
part of the provisional institutions in Pristina are
needed. Our assumption is that, with the support of
competent international organizations, the authorities
in Pristina will seriously take into consideration the
recommendations contained in the assessment of the
implementation, at the municipal level, of the law on
the use of languages, published by the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) this past
June. The conclusion of the OSCE is that the law has
been implemented only partially because of a lack of
political will and the absence of full understanding of
the obligation.

In the Kosovo 2013 Progress Report ofthe European
Commission, special mention is made, inter alia, of the
problem of continued attacks on religious heritage,
particularly that of the Serbian Orthodox Church and its
graveyards. The report also points to the unsatisfactory
implementation of the anti-discrimination law, the
numerous unresolved property cases before the courts
related to damage compensation, and inter-ethnic
disputes. It also highlights the problem of sustainable
return and reintegration, which has continued to worsen,
owing to persistent incidents targeting returnees, their
property, their religious and cultural heritage and the
lack of suitable economic opportunities.

It is not only the property rights of returnees that
are impossible to exercise and protect in Kosovo and
Metohija. Nothing is being done about cases of forged
purchase and sale agreements of real estate legally
owned by Serbs. Only one report has been published
on this issue, the 2009 OSCE Mission in Kosovo report
on fraudulent transactions in the Pec' region, the only
systematic and detailed review of violations of Serbs'
property rights, and that in only one region. The
statistical reviews of court decisions and cases conceal
the real picture of a large number of decisions that strike
down property-damage claims filed by Serbs. That
is an enormous problem and appears to be ethnically
motivated in view of the fact that the damaged property
belongs exclusively to Serbs.

I would be remiss ifI failed to note that the report
mentions only the number of cases closed. It discusses
only the decisions adjudicated by the Kosovo Property
Agency and not the number of decisions that have been
enforced, which would, practically speaking, reflect
the number of owners who have gained possession
of their properties. That is only one of the issues that
have affected and continue to affect the process of IDP
returns to Kosovo and Metohija in more ways than one.

An ongoing big problem is the privatization being
carried out by the Kosovo Privatization Agency,
formerly known as the Kosovo Trust Agency, which
contravenes international and European human-rights
conventions by continuing to privatize public and
socially owned companies in Serbian communities.
The sale of such companies to persons of Albanian
nationality leads to a loss of economic resources in
Serbian communities and also influences the exodus
of the Serbian population. The latest in a series of
such events took place on 9 June, when officials of the
Kosovo Privatization Agency entered the FDK Lola
plant in Strpce, seized its documentation, keys and
seals, put in their own security and banned Serbian
workers and management from entering the premises.
Similarly, the Kosovo Privatization Agency has decided
to liquidate the Hotel Junior in Strpce, which houses a
group accommodation centre for 85 lDPs, who would
be further displaced if the hotel were privatized.

I would like to point out once again that one of the
Republic of Serbia's top priorities is to find a lasting
solution for the question of Kosovo and Metohija
through negotiations and dialogue with the provisional
institutions of self-government in Pristina, with the
recognition of the legitimate interests of the Albanian,
Serbian and other populations of Kosovo and Metohija
and full respect for the mandate of the United Nations
set out in resolution 1244 (1999).

Serbia is open to dialogue for the purpose of finding
a comprehensive solution to the question of Kosovo and
Metohija, first and foremost in the interests of its own
citizens. Let us not forget that behind all our speeches,
reports and statements are people whose only desire
is to have normal living conditions for their families,
who want to work, educate their children, provide them
a happy childhood and a safe and secure future and
enjoy all the rights belonging to them according to the
European standards to which our entire region aspires.
This is nothing less or more than what we all want
for ourselves. Our reports on the situation in Kosovo
and Metohija must therefore not be turned into mere
numbers. As we consider each and every situation report
on the province, we should ask ourselves how much we
have helped the local population live better lives. I am
not sure that the conditions are there for lessening the
Security Council's interest in this topic. Regrettably,
this has also been confirmed by an incident that took
place yesterday in the Ground Safety Zone, in which
Stevan Sindelie, a member of the Serbian Gendarmerie,
was killed.

Great progress has been made, but we are far from
being close to our goal. The Republic of Serbia is
ready to do everything in its power to contribute, as a
responsible United Nations Member State and not just
as an interested party, to improving the situation in the
province. Serbia is also ready to put its maximum effort
into further stabilizing and normalizing the situation,
for peace is its primary goal.

