Mr. Gambari (Nigeria): The former Socialist Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia was a friendly country with which
Nigeria enjoyed years of fruitful and mutually beneficial
relations. We have therefore supported all the peace efforts
and diplomatic initiatives that have been aimed at reaching
a comprehensive resolution of the crisis in the country. As
testimony to that concern, my country was one of the very
first to contribute a battalion of troops to the initial United
Nations peace-keeping operation deployed in Croatia in
1992; even now our personnel are part of the military
observer component of the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR). Furthermore, since joining the Security
Council my delegation has supported all well-meaning
proposals, either in the form of resolutions or presidential
statements, that have been adopted by the Council with the
aim of moving the peace process forward.

It was in this context that we supported the proximity
talks that were recently concluded in Dayton, Ohio, here in
the United States. And today my delegation is happy to join
in welcoming the initialling, on 21 November 1995, of the
General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Annexes thereto by the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Republic of Croatia, the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the other parties
thereto. We are particularly delighted that the three
leaders did not allow the opportunity offered by the
Dayton talks to slip away, despite enormous difficulties
and hurdles to transcend.

This development, in our View, represents an
important breakthrough in the peace process. Although it
is just one step in what undoubtedly remains a long and
difficult journey to peace, we none the less believe it
represents the best opportunity thus far to end the
conflict. We therefore call upon all the parties to sign the
General Peace Agreement, when the signing takes place,
as expected, in Paris in a few weeks' time. In the
meantime, we urge them to refrain from any activities
that could destabilize the fragile truce on the ground.

My delegation would also like to pay deserved
tribute to all the States and Governments that have
worked assiduously for peace in the region. We must pay
special tribute to our Secretary-General and the Secretariat
for their tireless efforts in the cause of peace.

The General Peace Agreement requires a lot more
work and painstaking negotiations in the weeks and
months ahead if we are to make the peace process truly
irreversible. We therefore hope that all parties will deploy
the necessary efforts in this regard.

The two draft resolutions before us are testimony to
the Security Council's concern for the situation in the
former Yugoslavia as well as the readiness of its
members to give all the necessary assistance and support
to the parties by creating an enabling environment that
will assist them to implement the Agreement. To this
extent, and consistent with my Government's position, my
delegation is able to go along with the thrust of the draft
resolutions as a package that is meant to underpin the
Peace Agreement and thus promote the overriding goal of
peace and stability in a region that has recently been
ravaged by war. Let me, however, make the following
specific comments with regard to each of the draft
resolutions.

Concerning the draft resolution on the lifting of the
arms embargo, my delegation hopes that none of the
parties will View this as a license to relaunch any military
campaign. We would like to hope that the lifting of the
arms embargo will play a positive and reassuring role by
ensuring that all the States of the region will have the
means to defend their respective sovereignty and

 

territorial integrity. In this regard, Annex 1 B of the
Agreement, concerning regional stabilization, is a necessary
and important corollary to the lifting of the arms embargo,
and we urge all those concerned to abide by the spirit as
well as the letter of that Annex.

With respect to the suspension of the sanctions against
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro), this is consistent with our belief that
sanctions should not be punitive in and of themselves, but
should be designed to modify the behaviour of
Governments. We would hope that this flexible approach to
the question of sanctions would be applied to other
sanctions regimes, as objective conditions on the ground do
change.

Later today we shall, hopefully, be adopting a draft
resolution on the Basic Agreement on the Region of
Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirrnium, which was
signed on 12 November 1995, between the Government of
the Republic of Croatia and the local Serb representatives.
Let me say that my delegation welcomes the Agreement
and calls upon the parties to it to implement fully their
commitments thereunder.

As we look ahead to the next crucial phase of the
peace process - that of the actual implementation on the
ground of the various aspects of the agreement, which will
entail a reconfiguration of the force that will oversee its
implementation - my delegation at this stage would like
to thank all those who have served under UNPROFOR for
their tireless sacrifice in stabilizing the situation and saving
perhaps thousands of lives. Without their efforts, the
conditions in the Balkans could have been worse, and
would have been worse, and a conducive climate for the
recent peace talks may not have been created.

In concluding, my delegation hopes that the parties in
conflict in the former Yugoslavia will now give peace a
chance. They must translate the promise of peace on paper
into peace in action, and it is only in this way that the
international community will be in a better position to help
concretely in building lasting peace in that region.

