Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): Let me begin, Sir, by
congratulating your Ambassador on his assumption of the

 

presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February and by expressing my delegation's deep
satisfaction at seeing you, Mr. Minister, presiding over the
Council today. We have every confidence that, given your
long experience, you will guide the work of the Council
most effectively.

I should also like to express to the Ambassador of
Argentina our appreciation for the skilful way in which he
conducted the work of the Council in the month of January.
His presidency last month marked an efficient beginning of
our work for 1995.

Furthermore, my delegation would like to welcome the
Foreign Ministers of the States members of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) to our meeting.
Indonesia commends His Excellency Mr. Venancio de
Moura, Minister of External Relations of the Republic of
Angola, for his valuable remarks this morning. The
presence here of all those Ministers emphasizes the need
for the immediate establishment and deployment of a
United Nations peace-keeping operation while the search
for peace in Angola is intensified.

With regard to the question under consideration, my
Government wishes to convey its thanks to the Secretary-
General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, for his comprehensive
and detailed report (S/1995/97) on the United Nations
Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. II). In particular,
we welcome the very good prospects and solid logistical
planning for the future work of UNAVEM. III, contained in
that document.

Furthermore, my delegation wishes to express its
appreciation to the Secretary-General's Special
Representative in Angola, Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye,
especially for his efforts to improve the political climate in
Angola and to prepare the way for a meeting between
President dos Santos and Mr. Jonas Savimbi.

We take note of the positive developments indicated
by the agreement of the Government of Angola and of
UNITA to meet, and also by the signing of the Lusaka
Protocol on 20 November 1994. We especially welcome
reports that the parties have been observing a cease-fire
which is generally holding. This encouraging process was
also reflected clearly in the insightful statement made by
His Excellency Mr. Venancio de Moura this morning.
Hence, we hope that the concrete evidence of the
acceptance of the Lusaka Protocol by the Government of
Angola and UNITA will soon be manifested in the full
implementation of the accord. We further hope that the
parties will take all the decisive and necessary steps to
assure the accord's implementation, for through such an
undertaking an atmosphere conducive to attaining peace
will be created, thus giving impetus to national
reconciliation.

In this regard, I should also like to bring to the
Council's attention the fact that certain constitutive
elements of the Lusaka Protocol, such as de-mining and
the quartering, disarming and demobilization of troops,
under UNAVEM. I and UNAVEM. II, have yet to be
implemented. This would seem to indicate that there is a
greater time lag in operations in the field than the report
on UNAVEM. II may suggest. This pertains to a recent
increase in the number of military observers, deployment
of United Nations military and police elements country-
wide and the setting up of outstations in some critical
areas.

Indonesia urges that those operations be carried out
immediately and that the Mission's pace be quickened. To
do so, it is imperative that the international community
lend its active support and enable such features of the
Mission to be successfully carried out in keeping with the
agreed timetable of the Lusaka Protocol.

We wish to stress that substantial additional funds
remain to be obtained from the donor community. In this
connection, my Government would like to thank the
Secretary-General for the addendum to his report,
containing cost estimates for the enlargement of the
United Nations operation in Angola, while we also
appreciate the continued support of the Government of
Angola for all elements of UNAVEM. II.

My delegation voted in favour of the resolution
establishing UNAVEM. III, expressly for the purpose of
keeping to the agreed timetable leading to long-lasting
peace and development in Angola. We support the
Secretary-General's proposal to establish a further
enlarged United Nations operation in Angola, because we
find it to be a practical tactical action which would assist
the parties in restoring peace, achieving national
reconciliation and beginning the restoration of the
economy and infrastructure.

Therefore, my Government would like to stress the
importance of the Secretary-General's recommendation
that UNAVEM. III should immediately take over from
UNAVEM. II. The speed with which UNAVEM. III is
deployed will be crucial for maintaining the momentum
towards peace in Angola. In this regard, the commitments

 

of both the Angolan Government and UNITA to implement
the "Acordos de Paz", the Lusaka Protocol and the relevant
Security Council resolutions are essential to that effort.

Although my Government is aware that
implementation has fallen behind schedule, this must not
allow any party even to hope to renew the conflict. We
were encouraged to hear the Honourable Mr. Bwanali,
Foreign Minister of Malawi, say this morning, as leader of
the OAU Council of Ministers delegation to this meeting,

"that the situation is different this time around and
that the Angolan people are tired of war."
(S/PV.3499, p. 6)

We therefore recommend that all the parties concerned
cooperate in expediting the electoral process which was
disrupted in 1992. The holding of the second round of
presidential elections, which will take place after the United
Nations has declared that the requisite conditions have been
met, ought to be seen as a cherished symbol of the
normalization of Angola's national life, a goal which can be
realized if the people of Angola so decide.

