Mr. Holbrooke (United States of America): I
thank Ambassador Lancry and Ambassador Al-Kidwa
for their statements today.

For over 50 years, this great historic institution,
the Security Council, has been the site of many
important debates on the Middle East. The history of
the Middle East has been written not only in the region
but in this Chamber, sometimes productively,
sometimes less so. I do not feel that we are making a
contribution to peace with the kind of discussion we
are having here today, and I must say so quite frankly. I
do not view this kind of meeting as responsive to the
mandate of the Security Council to be a forum for
conflict resolution. I believe that this is much more in
the nature of a meeting designed to exchange verbal
barbs which are best left to different forums, and I am
saddened to see the Security Council, a historic
organization with a historic role, diminished in this
way. Nonetheless, we participate in this meeting, as we
always do, because the United Nations is the central
Organization of the world, and the Security Council is
its most important organ.

The cycle of violence in the Middle East has
tragically escalated again today with the bombing of
another busload of Israeli citizens, this time in Israel
itself, between Tel Aviv and Haifa. This morning in
Gaza, a number of Palestinians were killed by the
Israel Defence Forces (IDF) in circumstances that, in
the words of Secretary Albright this morning in
Washington, are still unclear.

We continue to believe that the parties must take
action to end the violence, to maintain calm and to
return to negotiations. This is the only viable path to
peace, as Chairman Arafat and Prime Minister Barak
have repeated time and time again.

At the start of this crisis, the Security Council
met in extended sessions and called for an immediate
end to the violence and a return to negotiations. Our
Government disagreed with the one-sided tenor of that
resolution and registered its disapproval by abstaining
on resolution 1322 (2000). We did, however, certainly
concur with those portions of the resolution that called
for an end to violence and stated that that was of
paramount importance in maintaining the peace
process.

To that end, our valiant Secretary-General, Kofi
Annan, President Clinton and other world leaders
worked hard to bring the parties to Sharm el-Sheikh to
reach agreement on ending the violence. In this regard,
President Mubarak of Egypt played an especially
important role.

Members of the Council called on the parties to
implement the obligations they accepted at the Sharm
el-Sheikh summit without delay to end the violence, to
set up a fact-finding committee and to discuss how to
best resume negotiations. There has been some
progress in implementing Sharm el-Sheikh, and we
must continue to urge follow-through by both parties
on their commitments.

We have reported to the Council on our efforts,
undertaken in consultation with the Secretary-General,
to establish the fact-finding committee agreed to at
Sharm el-Sheikh, and we note with approval that
Secretary-General Annan has already met with Senator
Mitchell and plans to meet with the entire committee in
the very near future.

In that meeting, Senator Mitchell outlined the
committee's intended plan of action and the committee
will gather here in New York this weekend to begin its
work. The committee's mandate is to investigate the
recent violence, with the objective of preventing its
recurrence. I urge the Council and all United Nations
Members to extend unambiguous support to this
committee.

Today is a sad day as well for the United Nations.
Instead of lending support for efforts undertaken at
Sharm el-Sheikh by both parties, the United Nations
has taken actions that undermine bilateral efforts at
reaching peace. This morning, the Economic and
Social Council narrowly endorsed a resolution
condemning Israel and calling for the creation of a
redundant inquiry commission and the dispatch of
rapporteurs, who will contribute little to ending the
violence that has gripped the region in the past two
months. That measure was not necessary and it was
supported by less than half the members of the
Economic and Social Council. In fact, only 21
members of the Economic and Social Council voted for
the resolution, out of a membership of 53, if I am not
mistaken.

We have made clear our View in Geneva, in the
General Assembly and in this Chamber that rhetoric
and unbalanced criticism diminish the role of the
United Nations and the United Nations opportunity to
play a constructive role at conflict resolution. The
Security Council will continue to follow events in the
region closely and has already directed the Secretary-
General to explore ways in which the United Nations
could assist the parties.

Regarding the proposal for a United Nations
observer or military presence, I repeat our position -
and I cannot state this too clearly - that any proposal
to introduce outside observers, peacekeepers or any
other form of United Nations-sponsored presence in the
region requires the agreement of the parties to the
conflict. They are in this room here today; they have
met; they know each other well; I believe they respect
each other as diplomats. Let them work it out and let
us, the Security Council, help them get there and then
endorse it, rather than participate in attempts to impose
something that is opposed by one side or the other.

Let me add also and be very clear, because
several people have made the analogy to East Timor a
year ago, that when we met on East Timor 14 months
ago, we did not impose a solution on Indonesia. It was
negotiated by the Security Council on behalf of the
world community and accepted by the Indonesians.
That is how we got there and Ambassador Andjaba
deserves great credit for his role in that, as did his
colleagues, many of whom are in this room. The
analogy to East Timor is correct and that is the analogy
we should follow, but let us not misapply it or misstate
it.

We must stand ready to help the parties in the
Middle East to implement the decisions they reached to
restore calm and return to negotiations. Engaging in
one-sided discussions is of no value and will aggravate
rather than reduce the tensions in the Middle East.

In conclusion, allow me, on instructions, to quote
briefly from Secretary Albright's press statements this
morning in Washington:

"Both Israelis and Palestinians need to
accept the reality that there is no place for
violence, incitement and economic pressure in a
genuine search for Israel-Palestinian peace.
Whatever their differences on permanent status
issues, the only place for the parties to resolve
them is around a negotiating table, not through
unilateral actions designed to pressure, to
intimidate and to create facts on the ground.
There is no unilateral answer to this conflict and
there is no way to reconcile violence with
negotiations.

"Clearly, both Israelis and Palestinians feel
they are the aggrieved party and each feels the
other has failed to live up to its commitments, but
now is not the time for trading accusations. Now
is the time for both to make good on
commitments to take the practical steps agreed to
and to work to repair the damage to a negotiating
process and a partnership that still holds great
potential and promise.

"Fulfilling commitments and creating a
structure of accountability is essential. In this
regard, we" - that is, the United States - "will
be talking to Prime Minister Barak and Chairman
Arafat about creating a mechanism which will
allow Israelis and Palestinians to carry out these
commitments. The United States, for our part,
will continue to help Israel and Palestine as they
help themselves to turn the current situation
around and to move forward to an Israeli-
Palestinian agreement."

That is how Secretary Albright concluded. Once
again, I would ask the people who care about peace not
to begin the issue by calling for public meetings in the
Security Council, but to end it with public meetings in
the Security Council and to approach these issues in
the spirit of quiet diplomacy which is going to be
necessary to reduce the growing tension in the region.

