Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic):
Madam President, I should like, at the outset, to
express the appreciation of the Egyptian delegation to
you and your friendly country for having convened this
important meeting. I should also like to thank the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative,
Mr. Olara Otunnu, for their efforts and their precious
contribution to promoting and protecting the rights of
children in armed conflicts. I should also like to pay
tribute to Ms. Carol Bellamy, the Executive Director of
United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), for the
efforts she continues to make in promoting and
protecting the rights of the child. My country is fully
committed to supporting all efforts in that regard.

For a number of years now, the Security Council
has been paying particular attention to the issue of
refugee children, internally displaced children forced to
flee their homes and those who have been forcefully
recruited or sexually abused, with particular attention
to girls, because they are most vulnerable to threats,
particularly sexual violence. This is a commendable
effort that we support and look forward to continuing.
However, I should like to draw the attention of this
Council to a category of children who seem to have
been forgotten, that is, children under foreign
occupation, particularly those children in occupied
Palestinian territory who die daily because of
continuing violations of their human rights and the
brutal use of force. It is sufficient to quickly look at the
numbers of child victims of the conflict to see the
importance of taking up this issue and shedding light
on it. We therefore call on the Security Council to take
up the issue of children under foreign occupation. We
call on the Council not to politicize the issue and to
deal with this category of children with the same
attention that it devoted to other groups of children in
armed conflicts.

I should like to express my appreciation for the
call for the deployment of advisors on child protection
and for increasing their role in peacekeeping operations
in order to effectively incorporate the rights of children
and their protection and welfare in those operations.
The experience of advisors in peacekeeping operations
in Sierra Leone, in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and in C6te d'Ivoire has shown their
effectiveness. We hope that this will continue, that
more advisors will be deployed to confront the issues
of children. Experience shows that they are most
effective in awareness-raising regarding children's
rights and the need to protect children in peacekeeping
operations, as well as in training personnel, both
military and civilian, in peacekeeping operations. Their
presence has been most effective in giving priority to
children's issues through better monitoring and
reporting, through the provision of services and by
facilitating the flow of information between various
elements of peacekeeping operations.

Perhaps one of the most important steps taken by
the Security Council since the issuance of the
Secretary-General's report last year on the issue of
children and armed conflict (S/2002/1299) was the
setting up of a list of particular countries and parties
that violate the rights of children. This issue requires
further study in order to ascertain the way to deal with
those parties that violate the rights of children, how to
prosecute such parties and how to ensure that such
violations do not occur in the future.

We regret the continuing violations of the rights
of children in Burundi, in Cote d'Ivoire, in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in Liberia and in
other countries. This proves the importance of further
intensifying efforts in the future to eradicate such
violations. In this regard, we would stress the
importance of the recommendations made by the
Secretary-General in his report as well as the measures
proposed, including mainstreaming the issues of
children in a systematic manner in all peace
negotiations and agreements and rendering them
essential in all post-conflict programmes. We would
also stress the need for a systematic mechanism for
monitoring and reporting for the presentation of
objective, accurate and regular reports on violations of
the rights of children by parties to conflicts.

