Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): We join others in
congratulating Mr. Kai Eide of Norway on his
appointment as the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan and Head of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). We are confident that under his leadership
the United Nations will continue to intensify its leading
role in coordinating the efforts of the international
community in support of the Government of
Afghanistan.

We also wish to thank Mr. J can-Marie Guehenno,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
for presenting the latest report (S/2008/ 159) of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan.

Afghanistan has made some strides in the past
few years, but it continues to face serious challenges.
The Secretary-General's report describes the current
state of affairs in the country in all its complexity. The
serious challenges facing Afghanistan, which are
detailed in the latest report of the Secretary-General,
should not be underestimated. Among other things,
those challenges include the high level of insurgent and
terrorist activities, the alarming increase in the
cultivation and production of opium, the widespread
problem of corruption and the slow pace of social and
economic development.

We believe that the process that began with the
Bonn Agreement, and which is continuing under the
Afghanistan Compact, is largely on track and should
further be improved. In that regard, South Africa is
pleased that the Secretary-General acknowledges in his
report the continuing engagement of the international
community in Afghanistan. For our part, we support a
common approach that will integrate security,
governance, the rule of law, human rights and social
and economic development in the country. We also call
for full respect for human rights in Afghanistan.

The persistent threat to security posed by
insurgent and terrorist activities is the main challenge
to Afghanistan's nation-building efforts and stability.
Paragraph 19 of the Secretary-General's report clearly
illustrates the deteriorating security situation in
Afghanistan, especially in recent months. In that
context, we deplore any attempts to destabilize the
country, in particular terrorist attacks on innocent
civilians and children.

The report of the Secretary-General once again
mentions the challenges associated with the narcotics
issue in Afghanistan. While the country continues to
face the problem of narcotics, we are pleased that
counter-narcotics efforts have gained significant
momentum since the last report. We applaud the
Government of Afghanistan, supported by its
international partners - in particular the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, for reaching
agreement on priority actions to be taken on counter-
narcotics efforts. We encourage them to fully
implement the National Drug Control Strategy and to
strengthen enforcement activities. We further
encourage the Government of Afghanistan to improve
its institutional capacity for service delivery and
development in support of viable alternatives to poppy
cultivation.
South Africa reaffirms its support for the
implementation of the Afghanistan Compact and the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy, under the
ownership of the Afghan people. We also commend the
central role played by the Joint Coordination and
Monitoring Board in facilitating and monitoring the
implementation of the Afghan Compact.

We would like to stress the importance of
regional cooperation as an effective means to promote
security, governance and development in Afghanistan.
In that context, my delegation welcomes the improved
relations between Afghanistan and its neighbours, in
particular Pakistan. We commend the resolve both
countries have expressed to combat extremism and
terrorism by further improving existing mechanisms
for the exchange of information.

In conclusion, South Africa supports the central
and impartial role of UNAMA and its activities in
leading the efforts of the international community. We
support the need to strengthen UNAMA's coordination
capacity to enable the Mission to make a significant
difference on the ground. We call upon UNAMA to
support the Government of Afghanistan in its
preparations for the upcoming elections, to be held
next year.

We commend the Italian delegation on its good
work as a lead nation on the issue of Afghanistan, and
for preparing the draft resolution on the mandate of
UNAMA. For our part, we will constructively work
with our partners during the discussions on UNAMA's
mandate renewal.

