Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I wish
to begin by telling the delegation of C6te d'Ivoire how
deeply moved I have been by the letter that hasjust been
read out and how profoundly present our late colleague
remains in our memory and our hearts. His wisdom, as
reported by his spouse, is and will remain a source of
inspiration to us.

France welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2423 (2018), renewing the mandate of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) for a period
of one year.
Let us be blunt - this renewal is not like the
previous ones. It is accompanied by a strong political
message to the Malian parties that maintaining the
current configuration of a mission as important
and exposed as MINUSMA must necessarily be
accompanied by substantial progress in the peace
process. The resolution we have just adopted therefore
sets out a precise list of priority measures - taken
directly from the road map approved by the Malian
parties - whose implementation will be followed with
the greatest attention. It asks the Secretary-General to
provide an update on that implementation in a specific
report six months after the inauguration of the next
President of Mali. It expresses the Council's intention
to seek options for a possible significant adaptation of
MINUSMA in the absence of substantial progress in
the implementation of these priority measures. Lastly,
it emphasizes that the non-implementation of the road
map provisions by the announced deadline would also
lead the Council to consider sanctions against those
responsible for setting up those obstacles.

Everyone must therefore assume their
responsibilities for creating conditions conducive to
maintaining the exceptional level of international
commitment enjoyed by Mali. That will be possible
only with the urgent and unprecedented mobilization
of the Malian parties for the implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. The
progress made in recent weeks is encouraging, but it
must imperatively be continued and amplified.

In accordance with the recommendations of the
Secretary-General and the conclusions of the strategic
review, resolution 2423 (2018) provides MINUSMA
with a clearer and more realistic mandate through
greater prioritization of its tasks. It recognizes that the
Mission is intended to interact with the other security
presence deployed in the Malian theatre - the Malian
armed forces, the Joint Force, of the Group of Five
for the Sahel, the European missions and Operation
Barkhane -whose actions are mutually reinforcing.
It asks MINUSMA to better inform local actors about
the characteristics and specificities of its mandate. It
invites the Secretary-General to take further steps to
strengthen the security of the Mission, which is our
shared priority, while welcoming the progress made in
recent months in implementing the recommendations
of the report prepared by Lieutenant General (Retired)
Carlos Alberto dos Santos Cruz, entitled "Improving
Security of United Nations Peacekeepers". Finally, it
calls on MINUSMA and the Malian Government to take
fully into account in their actions the security impacts
of climate change and other environmental factors.

The text we have just adopted also expresses the
Council's collective concern with regard to the ongoing
deterioration of the situation in the centre and the threats
it poses to the protection of civilians. It recalls that only
a balanced approach, combining security response and
development and governance efforts, can create the
conditions for sustainable stabilization. It expresses
serious concern about the allegations of human rights
violations attributed to the Malian armed forces and
notes with satisfaction the measures announced by the
Malian authorities in this regard, while underlining the
importance of their rapid and full implementation.

Finally, resolution 2243 (2018) recalls the need for
future elections to be held in ways that guarantee the
credibility of their results. It lends its full support to
the good offices played by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General in recent weeks, and calls for
the continuation of a constructive dialogue between the
Government and the opposition on all of these issues.

Before concluding, I wish to reaffirm here our
unwavering support for the irreplaceable role played
by the International Criminal Court in favour of peace
and security in Mali. The conviction of the jihadist
Al-Mahdi for attacks on the cultural and religious
heritage of Timbuktu, as well as the forthcoming
trial of Al Hassan Ag Abdoul Aziz Ag Mohamed Ag
Mahmoud for crimes committed during the occupation
of northern Mali by jihadist groups, testify to the
concrete contribution of the Court to the fight against
impunity in Mali. The resolution that we have adopted
today calls on the Malian authorities to pursue their
righteous cooperation with the Court, in accordance
with their obligations under the Rome Statute. That
is an absolutely essential point on the road to lasting
stability in Mali.

Finally, I want to warmly thank all members of the
Security Council for the open and constructive spirit
they demonstrated throughout the negotiations. The
unity that traditionally characterizes the Council on the
Malian file is a major asset, enabling us to continue to
play a decisive role in favour of peace and security in
that country. We must do everything we can to maintain
and make the most of it. That is the logic with which the
resolution we adopted today is fully in line.

