Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): Before I speak on
today's debate, I wish to express our heartfelt
condolences to the bereaved families, as well as to the
Government and people of the Republic of Korea, for
the brutal execution of their fellow countryman. The
news was so sad and shocking. We join you, Madam, in
condemning this barbaric act of terrorism.

I would like to commend you, Madam, for your
leadership in convening this open debate on the role of
civil society in post-conflict peace-building in the
Security Council. It is particularly timely in the light of
the fact that the report of the Secretary-General's Panel
Of Eminent Persons on United Nations-Civil Society
Relations was just released yesterday.

The report States that Governments alone cannot
resolve today's global challenges. This is also true with
regard to post-conflict peace-building. It is not realistic
to expect that Governments and international
organizations alone can respond fully and effectively to
everything the process of peace-building requires in
such broad and varied fields as the repatriation and
resettlement of refugees, the restoration of public
security based on the rule of law, economic
reconstruction, rehabilitation of local communities,
national reconciliation and so on. Civil society
organizations which have been engaging for a long
time and with strong commitments in those fields of
activities have an important role to play in the peace-
building process. Not only are they precious additional
assistance forces, but they oftentimes have intimate
knowledge and valuable experience that can be useful
for effectively carrying out aid activity. I believe that
cooperative interaction between those civil society
organizations and humanitarian and resident
coordinators of the United Nations agencies makes it
easier to achieve our common objective: to create an
environment in which the people of a post-conflict
country can have the hope that they will be able to
enjoy better lives tomorrow.

As we speak of the role of civil society
organizations in the post-conflict peace-building
process, I wish to emphasize two additional points
which I consider important. The first point is that civil
society organizations can serve as educational forums
for the members to deepen understanding of their
relations to the international community. Through
participation in the activities of such civil society
organizations, ordinary people come to realize how
deeply they are connected to the international
community and develop stronger commitment to
international cooperation. Thus, civil society
organizations can be reliable supporters and valuable
partners of the Governments which are promoting
peace-building in a post-conflict society. Where there
is not much history of civil society organizations,
therefore, it is sometimes appropriate to nurture and
strengthen their local civil society organizations, while
respecting their status as non-governmental
organizations.

As an example, I would like to mention our
experience with the Japan Platform, a system to
provide more efficient and quick emergency relief, in
which non-governmental organizations (NGOs),
business, and the Government participate in an equal
partnership.

In 1999, some Japanese NGOs began considering
assistance to Kosovo refugees. However, they soon
realized that they lacked sufficient financial resources
and personnel with experience on the ground.
Therefore, four NGOs planned a joint project to
construct refugee camps, searching for ways to
overcome their weak points through cooperation with
the Japanese Government. In the process, it became
widely recognized that it is better to broaden
cooperation not only between NGOs and government
but also with other actors such as business, media and
academia.

This recognition led to the creation of the Japan
Platform, through which the parties concerned
coordinate and cooperate for quick and effective
implementation of emergency relief, making full use in
an equal partnership of the strengths and resources of
each party. In this new system, the Government makes
financial contributions, business and individuals make
donations, the business circle provides technology,
equipment, personnel and information, and relevant
actors in the media, private foundations and academia
participate and cooperate in order to enhance
accountability. The NGOs participating in the Japan
Platform are vigorously engaging in humanitarian
assistance activities aimed at post-conflict peace-
building in Afghanistan, Iraq, Iran, Liberia and other
countries.

The second point I wish to mention is the unique
and important role that local civil society organizations
can play. Peace-building cannot succeed without the
ownership by the people of a post-conflict country. The
activities of the civil society organizations of that
country are nothing but an eloquent expression of such
ownership, in our view. They are often very effective in
the peace-building process as well, since they know
their local situation best. For example, a group of
traditionally respected figures in a society may be able
to persuade perpetrators of human right abuses to admit
their guilt and to apologize publicly to the victims for
their past wrongdoings. This can be a direct
contribution to national reconciliation. I understand
that the Bashingantahe of Burundi used to effectively
play such a role. Another example is a case in which
child soldiers gradually accepted disarmament in
response to repeated appeals from a women's
association in the community.

The promotion of local civil society organizations
also enhances the sense of ownership of the people in a
country by providing them with the means to rebuild
their society by themselves. Fostering a sense of
ownership is also essential for the empowerment of
individuals and local communities, and, as a
consequence, for the promotion of human security. It is
thus important that local civil society organizations
develop their activities in post-conflict countries; I
believe that the United Nations and the international
community should provide assistance to that end. For
its part, Japan intends to work together with local civil
society organizations in the implementation of projects
through the United Nations Trust Fund for Human
Security, as well as Japan's grass-roots human security
grant aid.

In establishing the panel on United Nations
relations with civil society organizations, the
Secretary-General pointed out that there was less
participation in United Nations affairs by NGOs from
developing countries than from those from the North.
The difference in participation may be a reflection of
countries' differing appreciation of the role of civil
society organizations. I do hope, however, that today's
open debate will contribute to the creation of a
common recognition of the important role that civil
society organizations can play in the post-conflict
peace-building process.

