The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by the lead of the Security Council mission to
Afghanistan from 12 to 15 January, namely, Kazakhstan.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Kazakhstan.

To begin with, I would like to thank, on behalf of
us all, the Government of Afghanistan, as well as the
Special Representative of the the Secretary-General,
Mr. Yamamoto, and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), for their full
support and assistance during the preparations for and
actual visit to Afghanistan.

I also wish to thank all Security Council members
who accompanied me on that very quick but very rich
visit to Kabul. We managed to talk with more than 120
people during 15 meetings in the span of one and a half
days. I thank them for keeping up with the fast pace.

During the visit to Kabul, the delegation met with the
President, the Chief Executive of Afghanistan and other
senior Afghan officials, including the National Security
Advisor, the Chairman of the High Peace Council, and
the Ministers of Foreign Affairs, Defence, Interior,
Agriculture, Economy, Energy and Water, and Trade and
Commerce, among others. We also met with members of
Parliament, women's non-governmental organizations,
civil society organizations, representatives of political
parties and the electoral management bodies, as well
as the leadership of UNAMA and NATO's Resolute
Support Mission.

The lightning visit was an opportunity for Security
Council members to gain a first-hand understanding of
the country's needs and priorities, and to show solidarity
with the people and the Government of Afghanistan.
As Council members know, this was the first Security
Council visit since 2010. It was important for the
Security Council to reiterate its support for continued
efforts to establish peace, stability and progress in
Afghanistan. In essence, a number of challenges that
were apparent during the Council's last visit persist, but
new challenges and new opportunities have arisen in the
meantime. Allow me to make a few main preliminary
observations. A full report of the mission is being
prepared and will be released with further details.

A first observation is that persisting insecurity
continues to be the main obstacle to stabilization
efforts. The security situation remains highly volatile.
The mission noted with concern the increasing number
of casualties as terrorist groups, including newcomers,
are adopting increasingly violent tactics. One worrying
trend is the presence and activity of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province (ISIL-KP)
in the East and North of the country. Members of this
group have intensified attacks on Shia populations
and their places of worship, exposing the potential for
deepening sectarian and ethnic tensions in the country.

To this are added the challenges posed by the return
of foreign terrorist fighters (FTFs) from Syria and Iraq
who are regrouping in Afghanistan. There are concerns
about the potential use of the territory of Afghanistan
to destabilize countries of the region. In that regard,
interlocutors from the Afghan Government stressed
the need to increase regional cooperation in fighting
and preventing terrorism and countering the movement
of FTFs.

Our interlocutors also stressed the linkages between
violent extremism, well-organized transnational
terrorist groups and criminal networks related to drug
production and trafficking and the exploitation of
natural resources. When war is funded by the narcotics
trade, insecurity has the potential to negatively impact
stability in the region. But insecurity is also impacting
domestic politics, which was identified as one of the
greatest challenges to the conduct of elections. In turn,
the main obstacle to peace, according to a number of
interlocutors within the Government and Parliament,
is the existence of safe havens and sanctuaries for
the Taliban abroad. The Government reiterated its
readiness to engage constructively with neighbouring
countries to curb terrorism and negotiate.

Secondly, more tangible results are needed as
the peace process seems to be making little progress.
The visit came ahead of the Kabul process meeting
scheduled for February, at which the Government is
expected to present its strategy for reaching a settlement
with the armed opposition. There was unanimity that
the conflict had to end and that it would take more
than a purely military solution. Only comprehensive
efforts would defeat the armed opposition. There is no
military solution in Afghanistan in the absence of a
political process.

The mission was briefed about the structure and
work of the High Peace Council and its plans for
2017 to 2020. Building on the positive experience of
the 2016 peace agreement with Hizb-i Islami, led
by Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, the High Peace Council
plans to in initiate talks with the Taliban. Yet, some
interlocutors were not too optimistic, claiming that
the Taliban had taken no significant steps towards
establishing a peace process, despite the overtures of
the Government. At the same time, working with the
Taliban as a fragmented movement and not as a political
party complicates prospects for constructive dialogue.
Government officials and parliamentarians underlined
the importance of an inclusive Afghan-led and owned
peace process to long-term stability and prosperity.

The third observation is that the peace process
is being pursued in tandem with efforts to advance
inclusive and transparent governance, elections
and reforms. Members of the Independent Election
Commission and the Electoral Complaints Commission
briefed the delegation on the preparations for the
upcoming parliamentary and district council elections
in 2018, including the development of an improved
voter registry. They outlined measures to address
the lack of trust in the electoral management bodies
by convening regular meetings with political parties
and civil society, and stressed their commitment to
organizing transparent elections this year. The need for
donor and Government support was noted, as was the
challenging security environment.

Council members reiterated the need to hold
elections this year that are transparent, timely,
inclusive and impartial so as to ensure the credibility
of the Government, rebuild the people's trust in their
institutions, and prevent further destabilization. While
plans for elections are ongoing, the National Unity
Government also continues to prioritize its reform
agenda, with an emphasis on anti-corruption measures,
the rule of law and security sector reforms. At the same
time, a number of political groups expressed growing
concerns about factionalism within the Government,
which has created political tensions. They noted
the need to restore constructive dialogue between
political forces.

Visiting Council members further heard about
the enduring socioeconomic challenges that are
undermining progress in governance. These include
especially the lack of education among the population,
the 400,000 young people whojoin an already stretched
labour market every year, and the 39 per cent of the
population that live below the poverty line. Government
officials reiterated the need to intensify development
efforts in order to help achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals for the population.

The mission was further briefed on progress and
challenges with regard to the human rights situation in
the country. The Chair of the Afghanistan Independent
Human Rights Commission focused in particular on
the rights of children, protection issues and civilian
casualties. The First Lady further discussed the
empowerment of women with mission members.

Fourthly, international assistance remains essential
to peace and reconciliation The Kabul process
foresees a transition to greater Afghan responsibility
and ownership in both the security and the civilian
areas, but that does not mean that Afghanistan
does not need more support from the international
community. In most of the meetings, Security Council
members heard about the importance of continuing
support to Afghanistan, be it by extending support to
counterterrorism through cooperation on borders, data-
sharing and capacity-building, or through development
assistance to the reconstruction process, including to
the region. Afghanistan, they heard, should lead these
processes and play the central role in coordinating aid.
In this regard, President Ghani reiterated his request for
increased on-budget assistance and the implementation
of the one United Nations process so as to ensure
coherence among United Nations organizations. Others
mentioned the need for donor support to be better
coordinated in order to reach those in need.

The Government also reiterated its support for
various regional processes that strengthen prospects
for an Afghan-owned peace process. References were
made to a variety of bilateral, trilateral or regional
formats and strategies, such as the new United States
strategy on South and Central Asia, which was widely
welcomed, as were such forums as the Heart of
Asia-Istanbul Process. President Ghani stressed the
importance of Security Council unity and consensus
on Afghanistan. Together with high-level Cabinet
members, he expressed appreciation for the support of
the Security Council, and especially of Kazakhstan, for
keeping Afghanistan on the agenda.

Allow me to make a final observation. Peace
and stability can be intensified through economic
integration and connectivity with the region. While
the Afghan Government emphasized the importance
of development assistance in promoting Afghanistan's
stability, discussions revealed a preference for a
new paradigm based not just on aid but especially
on increasing investment opportunities for trade,
infrastructure, energy exchanges, market solutions and
connectivity. President Ghani and ministers emphasized
the investment possibilities of Afghanistan and how the
interdependence of markets and transportation roads
between countries could create incentives for peace and
development in the region.

In this vision, economic development and greater
regional cooperation are important factors in achieving
security in Afghanistan. President Ghani emphasized
his country's assets, such as geographic location, human
capital and national resources, which can facilitate the
integration of Afghanistan into regional processes.
In turn, regional initiatives would contribute to long-
term stability in Afghanistan. Cabinet members spoke
about the potential of several projects, ranging from
the One Belt One Road initiative to the Turkmenistan-
Afghanistan-Pakistan-India pipeline and the Central
Asia South Asia Electricity Transmission and Trade
Project, as well as plans for a fibre-optics corridor to
China. They also counted on the rapid development
of railway corridors from Central Asian countries,
China and Iran to South Asia through the territory of
Afghanistan, as well as the development of the ports
of Gwadar and Chabahar to provide the landlocked
countries of Central Asia with access to warm waters.

Strong cooperation among neighbours is critical
to promoting stability and prosperity in and around
Afghanistan. This is the model of economic integration
and stabilization that any subregion can use for the
prevention of conflicts and the restoration of peace.

At this point, I would like to take this opportunity
to mention that this message is precisely the subject of
a ministerial debate that the delegation of Kazakhstan
has scheduled for Friday, 19 January, to be chaired by
the Foreign Minister.

I resume my functions as President of the Council.

On behalf of the Council, I should like to express
appreciation to all the members of the Security
Council and the Secretariat who participated in the
mission for the manner in which they discharged their
important responsibilities.

The meeting rose at 9.50 am.
