Mr. Burleigh (United States of America): In our vote
today we have taken an important step forward in the
search for peace in Kosovo. The agreements which the
Security Council has endorsed were negotiated by
representatives of the Contact Group and signed by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) in the hope that their full implementation,
including full compliance by Belgrade, would create an
environment in which a peaceful solution could be found.

For too long the voices of reason and moderation in
Kosovo have been muffled by repressive political, military
and police actions and by those who advocate violence and
the use of force over negotiation. Recently, Belgrade has
taken steps to silence the independent media, further
depriving the people of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
of the capacity to make their own judgements about events
in Kosovo and to accurately assess the actions of their
leaders. In this context, we regret that not all members of
the Council were able to support this resolution, and in
particular its language about the importance of free media
to a peaceful resolution of the Kosovo crisis.

The resolution we have adopted demands swift and
full compliance by Belgrade with resolutions 1160 (1998)
and 1199 (1998) and full cooperation with the OSCE and
NATO Verification Missions. It also demands such
compliance by the Kosovo Albanians with those resolutions
and with the OSCE Verification Mission. We believe this
is key to the creation of a climate of trust, which is
indispensable to the return of refugees and displaced
persons.

The investigations of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia into Kosovo are
essential to restoring peace and security and must continue
with the cooperation of everyone. The Tribunal's
jurisdiction over Kosovo was established in resolution 827
(1993) of 25 May 1993 and has been reaffirmed by the
Council, most recently in today's resolution. The Council
has long been on record as demanding full cooperation with
all of the Tribunal's orders, requests for information and
investigations.

We must acknowledge that a credible threat of force
was key to achieving the OSCE and NATO agreements and
remains key to ensuring their full implementation. In
addition, no party should be under the misapprehension that
it can take any action that would hinder or endanger
international verifiers or the personnel of humanitarian
organizations.

The NATO allies, in agreeing on 13 October to the
use of force, made it clear that they had the authority, the
will and the means to resolve this issue. We retain that
authority. We will not tolerate the continued violence that
has resulted in nearly a quarter of a million refugees and
displaced persons and thousands of deaths, and has
jeopardized the prospects for peace in the wider Balkans.
We reiterate that primary responsibility for the current
crisis lies with Belgrade, although we expect full
compliance by all parties.

The authorities in Belgrade and the Kosovo
Albanians must now take full advantage of the
opportunities being created. Neither violence nor
repression can achieve a durable settlement. The crisis in
Kosovo can and should be resolved through peaceful
dialogue and negotiation. A foundation for a settlement
now has been laid through the political discussions and
shuttle diplomacy endorsed by the Contact Group. All that
is required is the political will to move ahead. In our
view, that is the only answer. The alternative is more of
the same - a constant state of conflict, suffering and
growing bitterness, which serves only to threaten peace
and stability in the wider Balkan region and beyond.

