Mr. Perovic' (Montenegro): We thank you, Madam
President, for holding this important and timely debate
today on the protection ofj ournalist in conflict situations
and commend Lithuania's strong commitment to this
issue. We also thank today's briefers for their valuable
statements.

Montenegro aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
I would like, however, to highlight some points of

particular importance to my country.

When something such as the death of a journalist
happens, people always ask what motivates journalists
to risk their lives to tell the story. Journalists are in a
position to experience world events first-hand and to
make a difference. They help us understand what is
happening around us.

Restrictions on media freedom deprive us of the
information we need to engage in informed debates,
assess our Governments' policies and practices, and
hold them to account. That is particularly important
in conflict areas, where access to information is
challenging and often inconsistent. The protection
of journalists is a building block of an open society
and effective democracy. Journalists should have the
freedom to report the news without fear of reprisal or
being targeted as criminals. However, much remains to
be done in this regard, and unfortunately journalists,
human rights defenders and non-governmental
organizations promoting freedom of expression
continue to face significant danger in conflict zones
and around the world.

Journalists and media workers are subjected
to physical violence and assault, abduction and
disappearances, threats, intimidation and harassment.
For many countries around the world, murder is the
most brutal form of censorship. We express concern
regarding and condemn the killings of journalists in
the line of duty. We also welcome the press statements
issued by the Security Council in response to such
killings.

Montenegro is deeply committed to the protection of
civilians in conflict situations, including the protection
ofjournalists, and fully supports resolution 1738 (2006)
and presidential statement S/PRST/2013/2, adopted in
February 2013. During armed conflict, journalists,
media professionals and associated personnel should be
considered as civilians and respected and protected as
such under relevant international law.

Today, we are all witnessing rising number of
killings and increasing risks and threats to journalists
and media workers. At the same time, there is a
significant increase in the international awareness of
this issue. Parties to an armed conflict bear the primary
responsibility to take all feasible steps to ensure the
protection of affected civilians. They should prevent
abuses againstjournalists and respect their professional
independence and rights, as they are risking their lives
to bring the public an independent and professional
view of what is really happening in the area of conflict.

The culture of impunity surrounding violence
against journalists must end. We should keep in
mind that every act of violence that goes unpunished
or uninvestigated is an open invitation for further
violence. Therefore, States should ensure that there are
adequate and effective mechanisms to bring to justice
those responsible for crimes against journalists, which
are violations of international law.

The efforts of the international community to
prevent and reduce risks and threats to journalists
and media workers must be strengthened. We strongly
support the United Nations Plan of Action on the Safety
of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity, which helps
States to develop legislation and mechanisms to create
a free and safe environment for journalists and media
workers in both conflict and non-conflict situations.
We encourage all Member States to work together with
the United Nations to implement its provisions. Also,
we encourage greater consistency at the country-level
in implementing safety measures and emphasize the
importance in achieving awareness ofthe Plan ofAction
among United Nations entities and Member States.

Given the critical importance of the freedom of
the press, we must continue to take steps to protect
journalists and enable them to report. We should not
allow the further erosion of freedom of expression,
as it constitutes one of the essential foundations of
a democratic society and one of the basic conditions
for its progress and the development of every man.
Protecting journalists is a vital part of the Security
Council's work, and the adoption of today's resolution
is an important step in that regard.

