Mr. D'Alotto (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation wishes to explain its vote in favour of
resolution 1680 (2006), which the Council has just
adopted.

My delegation supports the implementation of all
the provisions of resolution 1559 (2004), which
remains the basic text to guide the work of the Security
Council on this issue. In that regard, my country does
not believe it necessary to reinterpret the operative
paragraphs of that resolution or to keep saddling the
parties with additional obligations. In our opinion, we
must pursue the implementation of that resolution and
find a satisfactory solution to such issues as the
disarmament and disbanding of the Lebanese militias
and the extension of Lebanese authority throughout the
territory of the country. For us, the best way to resolve
those problems is through the Lebanese national
dialogue that began last March.

My delegation believes that the language of
paragraph 4 of today's resolution should be interpreted
in the light of the relevant provisions of international
law on diplomatic affairs. The Vienna Convention on
Diplomatic Relations is specific in its determination
that the establishment of diplomatic relations and
mutual diplomatic representation must take place
through mutual consent of the States involved. My
country does not believe that the Security Council
should become involved in these matters, which are
solely of a bilateral nature. Argentina believes that
paragraph 4 of today's resolution does not establish a
precedent that could be invoked in the future on this
issue or on other agenda items of the Council. We shall
continue to affirm that the establishment of diplomatic
relations and the delimitation of borders are matters
which should be decided by the States involved
through dialogue and negotiation without external
interference.

We encourage Lebanon and Syria to move
forward in the coming months along this path, and we
welcome the statement of high-level Syrian officials in
that regard.

In the process of negotiating this draft resolution,
my delegation put forward a number of amendments in
order to spell out the aforementioned position. A
number of our suggestions were accepted by the
sponsors and my country was therefore able to vote in
favour of the draft resolution. Let me emphasize,
however, that my delegation will insist that any future
Security Council action on the basis of this resolution
should be fully consistent with the relevant provisions
of international law. It should not exceed the
framework defined in the operative part of resolution
1559 (2004).

