Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): 1 must touch upon events that preceded
today's adoption of resolution 2319 (2016). I stress that
we are very concerned by the actions of a number of
States, seeking to shift consideration of the issue of the
competence of the Security Council to the forum of a
purely technical international mechanism in the sphere
of armaments and non-proliferation, the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW).

I am referring to the anti-Syrian decision of
11 November, pushed through the back door of the
OPCW Executive Council of the anti-Syrian decision
of 11 November, which will inevitably have a
negative impact, both on the integrity of the Chemical
Weapons Convention (CWC) and the prospects for its
universalization, as well as on the authority of OPCW.
All of that took place prior to substantive consideration
of the outcomes of the work in the last year of the Joint
Investigation Mechanism looking into cases of the use
of chemical weapons in Syria. The Council, which of
course created the Mechanism, is accountable to it. It is
hard to call that circumstance anything but disrespect
for the competencies of the Security Council.

The decision we have just adopted to extend the
mandate of the Joint Investigation Mechanism for a
year was the outcome of difficult, complex work with
the United States on the content of the resolution, and
the result of an extensive negotiating marathon between
the representatives of the United States and Russia.
The document, in view of our priorities of giving the
Mechanism mandate broader geographical scope and
a clear counter-terrorist direction, was far from self-
evident, yet we agreed to adopt it because we also see
its strengths.

Russia's sceptical position on the conclusions
presented in the Joint InvestigationMechanism's
reports, particularly regarding the modalities of its
work, is well known. We intend to continue flagging the
technical, logistical, legal and procedural aspects of the
Mechanism's activities. Without calling into question
the professionalism of the members of Ms. Gamba's
team, we trust that they will continue to remember their
own responsibility and ensure impartial, objective work.
We call on the leadership and personnel of the Joint
Investigative Mechanism to not bend to what we expect
will be vast amounts of pressure from States guided
purely by their own geopolitical interests in the Middle
East. Our support of the Council's decision to extend
the Mechanism's mandate is dictated by the recognition
of the acuteness of those increasing challenges, threats
and manifestations of chemical terrorism in Syria and
neighbouring Iraq, which, if not today or tomorrow,
could soon spill over into and beyond the Middle East.

Over the past two years, the Russian Federation
has repeatedly drawn the attention of the international
community to the abundant evidence of the use
of chemical weapons by terrorists and extremist
organizations. We have urged our colleagues in the
Council to respond appropriately to the resurgence of
chemical terrorism in the Middle East. Sadly, all of our
initiatives in that respect, including our corresponding
draft resolution with our Chinese partners, have been
repeatedly blocked. We see the result. Everyone,
even the Mechanism, recognizes that terrorists and
militants from the armed opposition in that conflict-
torn region of the world are making active use of toxic
chemicals against Syrian and Iraqi Government troops
and peaceful civilians. The terrorists have developed
genuine military chemical capabilities, to the extent
that they have the technology to synthesize military-
grade poisonous substances such as sarin and mustard
gas. Former military chemists and foreign specialists
are involved in that work. Such facts are even confirmed
by the United States intelligence community.

The Mechanism needs to focus fully on the
chemical activities of non-State actors, in particular the
Islamic State, J abhat Al-Nusra, the Harakat Nour al-Din
al-Zenki movement, Jaysh Al-Islam, Jaysh Al-Fatah
and other armed opposition groups operating in Syria
and adjacent countries - which has been highlighted
by Damascus in its statements to the Security Council
and the OPCW.

Today's resolution gives the necessary mandate to
investigate those crimes. What we have on our hands
is international terrorism that has already acquired
a taste for using nuclear weapons, often with the
clearly provocative goal of politically discrediting
the Syrian Government. Sadly, once again today
we have heard anti-regime statements. The terrorist
threat has already acquired global proportions. We
once again call on Council members to set aside our
political differences and join forces as part of a broad
counter-terrorist coalition in order to eradicate this
devastating phenomenon.

