Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Let me, like others, to
thank Special Envoy Xia for his briefing this morning.
We look forward to continuing to work closely with him
to support efforts to achieve greater peace, stability and
development in the Great Lakes region.

The Great Lakes region, historically characterized
by internal conflict and tensions between neighbours,
is experiencing a new momentum towards regional
cooperation on peace and security. I think it is important
to note and appreciate President Tshisekedi's efforts
to revive the Democratic Republic of the Congo's
diplomatic relations with its neighbours and enhance
regional cooperation. The United Kingdom very
much welcomes this new momentum, in particular the
signing of a memorandum of understanding intended
to ease tensions and restore friendly relations between
Rwanda and Uganda, facilitated by the Presidents of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Angola. We also
very much welcome the holding of confidence-building
meetings between regional security and intelligence
actors aimed at enhancing efforts to neutralize armed
groups in the east of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

Alongside this positive and welcome diplomatic
momentum within the region, the security, human
rights, development and economic challenges that
persist are immense. In this regard, let me say that I
strongly agree with the Ambassador of Equatorial
Guinea on the importance of taking a coordinated
approach to Ebola, but not just Ebola - to cholera and
to measles as well. I also agree, of course, with the
Ambassador of France on the importance of properly
funding the humanitarian response plan.

Of particular concern is the situation in and along
the borders of the east of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, where illegal armed groups continue to commit
atrocities against the civilian population and present a
major threat to regional security. It is important that
President Tshisekedi have full control of the security
forces and that senior figures within the Armed Forces
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo are not
allowed to act independently and foster insecurity.

The problems in the east of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the wider Great Lakes
region cannot be resolved solely through military
means. As the Secretary-General notes in his report
(S/20l9/783), regional actors must work together to
address the underlying drivers of conflict. That will
require cooperation and concerted pressure to prevent
armed groups from receiving financing and support
from within and beyond the region. Armed groups
and other security actors control significant flows of
resources, including gold, minerals and charcoal, from
the east of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
neighbouring countries. It is clearly in the interests not
only ofthe countries ofthe region, but more specifically
the peoples of those countries, to turn those illicit flows
of resources into legitimate trade flows, contributing
thereby both to economic development and, crucially
for the Council, to stability. In that regard, I would like
to say how much we encourage Special Envoy Xia's
efforts to support the establishment of responsible
mineral supply chains and to promote economic
integration in the region.

There can be no lasting stability without good
governance and the protection and promotion of human
rights. Restrictions on political space in Burundi,
including harassment of opposition parties and
restrictions on media freedom, are deeply concerning.
As we look ahead to elections next year in Burundi and
the Central African Republic, the United Kingdom calls
upon all relevant actors in those countries to ensure that
elections are safe and credible, uphold human rights
and fundamental freedoms and properly reflect the
aspirations of the populations.

In conclusion, the United Kingdom encourages all
countries of the Great Lakes region to seize the positive
momentum that is emerging and to fully commit
themselves to enhancing regional peace, stability
and development and, as they do so, the support of
the United Kingdom - and, I believe, of the entire
Council - is with them.

