Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Despite the efforts made by the parties
during negotiations to broker an agreement, Equatorial
Guinea simply cannot support the draft resolution
(S/20lS/515)submitted by the United States. We believe
that the annex to the draft resolution, which includes a
list of individuals on whom sanctions will be imposed,
will hinder the negotiations taking place on the ground.

The Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) was mandated to mediate between the parties
to the South Sudanese conflict. Until the African Union
decides otherwise, we will maintain our trust in that
organization as the most appropriate body for finding a
negotiated political solution to the situation. Although
we acknowledge the deadlock, we firmly believe that
progress could be made in the coming months.

In a communique issued today, IGAD calls for
additional time to conduct its work. We believe that it
is important to grant that request. The commitment by
the parties to holding a face-to-face meeting between
President Salva Kiir and Mr. Machar just before the
next African Union Summit, to be held in Mauritania,
is a major achievement. The measures outlined in
the text could leave the international community
without valid interlocutors with whom to negotiate,
which would inevitably have an adverse impact on the
political process. We believe that dialogue must be
given another opportunity.

With regard to the South Sudanese conflict, it
must be stressed that we all agree that it is important
to exert pressure on the parties to sit at the negotiating
table and reach an agreement. The only difference is
how and when. Equatorial Guinea asks our colleagues
in the Security Council, as well as the international
community, to be a bit more patient, for we recognize
that the situation will not be resolved overnight. It is
important to make optimal use of our time and not
interfere in or disregard the legitimacy of the regional
organizations the Security Council has continued
to support.

Ifno progress is made in the coming months, IGAD

has promised to submit specific proposals in an effort
to put pressure on uncooperative parties and impose
possible sanctions. We ask that IGAD be given a chance.

