Mr. Barro (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I extend the condolences of Senegal to the
Government and the people of Egypt following the
violent terrorist attack targeting Egyptian soldiers on
7 July, killing 23.

We also welcome the presence among us of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia.

I further wish to thank the delegation of the United
Kingdom for its excellent work as penholder and for
introducing resolution 2366 (2017), which we have
just adopted. We welcome the unity of the Council,
which must remain active in helping Colombia in this
crucial phase and in consolidating its gains. Senegal
welcomes the important progress that has been made in
the implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace
between the Government and the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC), ending a conflict
that lasted more than 50 years.

The people of Colombia owe this progress above
all to the commitment of the Government of Colombia,
as well as to the leaders of FARC, in particular in
the framework of the disarmament process. Through
these actions, both parties have shown their deep
commitment and devotion to peace. They deserve our
support and encouragement, particularly in overcoming
the few obstacles that remain on the long road to
sustainable peace.

I believe that the Security Council's visit from 3 to
5 May made a significant contribution to establishing
a climate of trust between the parties. It is very
important that, at this stage of the implementation
process of the Peace Agreement, efforts be redoubled
with respect to building the FARC camps within the
relevant communities, while ensuring the security of
former FARC combatants and their reintegration into
society, not only as a political force but also as active
participants in economic life. Senegal reiterates its
full and unwavering support for the deployment of the
new United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia,
whose ultimate objective is the follow-up of the
Peace Agreement.

In conclusion, I reaffirm Senegal's support for
peace in Colombia, in the reasonable hope that, with
the Final Peace Agreement and the support of the
international community, Colombia will put an end to a
conflict that lasted too long.

