Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): I also wish
to warmly welcome Senator Biden to this Security
Council meeting. I took note of and appreciate the fact
that today, as in January, when the members of the
Security Council visited the Senate, Senator Biden
echoed the concerns that we all share.

On the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, I
wish to make the following brief comments.

First, my delegation highly appreciates the report
of the Secretary-General of 30 November. I also wish
to thank Mr. Jacques Paul Klein, Special
Representative and Coordinator of United Nations
Operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his
complementary and very detailed statement.

Secondly, my delegation highly appreciates the
progress made by the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) with a view to
building a modern, democratic, tolerant society in that
country as mentioned by all the speakers following Mr.
Klein's presentation. I want to commend the positive
contribution made by the United Nations Mission to
implement peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

In this respect, my delegation is pleased at the
establishment of effective, democratic and lasting
institutions. Likewise, we welcome the remarkable and
resolute work of the International Police Task Force.
Along the same lines, we are pleased at the presence of
the Stabilization Force (SFOR).

Thirdly, the considerable progress made deserves
to be consolidated. In this connection, we invite the
international community to continue to provide
financial support to UNMIBH until the expiration of its
mandate in December 2002.

Fourthly, I wish to comment on the prospects of
the region at large. In this respect, we are pleased with
the climate of detente that now prevails in that region
following the historic changes in the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia and the changes in Croatia at the
beginning of this year. We invite the parties to avail
themselves of this improvement in order to establish
strong relations of confidence, and we hope that the
recent visit of President Kostunica to Sarajevo will
have contributed to the establishment of such relations.

