Mr. Corr (Ireland): My delegation too very much
appreciates today's briefing from the Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Guehenno,
and the opportunity provided by this meeting to review
recent developments, particularly in the light of the
forthcoming Kosovo-wide elections.
The Permanent Representative of Belgium will
later deliver a statement on behalf of the European
Union. As Ireland subscribes fully to the views
expressed therein, I will limit myself to a few brief
comments, especially in the context of the election and
security.

Mr. Guehenno's briefing shows that preparations
for the elections are proceeding at pace. My delegation
commends the hard work of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Haekkerup, and of
everyone else involved in the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in that
regard and in implementing other aspects of resolution
1244 (1999). The elections on 17 November clearly
represent a unique opportunity for the people of
Kosovo, and, along with others here today, we very
much urge all citizens to participate fully in the
political process. As has been said before in the
Council, all communities must realize that the only
possible future for Kosovo is as a multi-ethnic society
based on respect for minority rights and human rights.
The Kosovar Albanians must respect the rights of
minorities, and those minorities accept, in that context,
the challenge of participation.

We note with satisfaction the support of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia for the registration of
Serbs in Kosovo. We welcome efforts undertaken by
the Serb parties in that regard, and we hope that the
difficulties over certification that we have heard will be
resolved soon. The number of Kosovo Serbs that have
registered to vote is, as has been said, disappointing.
Ireland very much hopes that they will register in
larger numbers and urges them to do so, and we urge
their leaders to continue to show full support for such
participation. Kosovar parties and civic leaders must do
everything possible to encourage a positive climate for
Serb participation. As part of such a climate, terrorist
activity must cease, and all ethnic Albanian
representatives must clearly distance themselves from
violence. Further early and quantifiable progress in the
security area must also be achieved.

In that regard, my delegation welcomes, as others
have today, the recent detention by KFOR of a number
of suspected terrorists trying to cross illegally into
Kosovo. We also welcome the establishment of the
police and justice pillar and the information provided
today by the Under-Secretary-General about detention
facilities, witness protection programmes, and so on.

Ireland welcomes the intensification of relations
between UNMIK and Belgrade and, in particular, the
recent progress achieved regarding missing persons.
Further cooperation by Serbs and by ethnic Albanians
on this extremely sensitive issue will help to create a
favourable climate for change. We appreciate the
information given by Mr. Guehenno about
developments relating to the points raised by President
Kostunica during the Security Council mission's visit
to the region in June, and we hope that further progress
can be achieved. We believe that UNMIK should liaise
ever more closely with the administration in Belgrade,
including in relation to refugee returns, and we hope
that further meetings, such as those recently held
between Mr. Haekkerup and Serbian Deputy Prime
Minister Covic, will be held. Ireland hopes that, in
order to facilitate such liaison, the guidelines for the
entry of officials from the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia into Kosovo will be used pragmatically and
flexibly.

The Council has already issued a presidential
statement, which welcomed the signing of the
Framework Agreement in Skopje on 13 August. We
hope that the Agreement will prove to be the basis for a
stable political settlement. Ireland urges the parties to
implement all aspects of the agreement in good faith
and to honour all of their commitments. We call on
KFOR to continue its efforts to further strengthen
controls along the border with the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and to contain cross-border
activities by extremist groups.

