Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank you, Madam President, for organizing this debate.
Our respect and appreciation go to Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process Serry for his briefing.
I recognize and extend my respect to the Permanent
Representative of Israel and the Permanent Observer of
the State of Palestine for their contributions.

This open debate, as others have said, takes place
on an important date, and one that is fraught with
paradox. A valuable opportunity seems to be slipping
away from us, and yet we have come here to hear the
actual voices of the international community, which is
not resigned to repeated failure.

I would like to repeat here what my Minister for
Foreign Affairs said yesterday, representing Argentina
in remembering the victims of the Holocaust at the Yad
Vashem Museum. He said that we would like to see an
Israel living in peace and friendship with its neighbours
and in safety. That is the dream pursued not just by the
founders of Israel, but also by the Palestinian people.
The Minister also stated that we recognize Palestine
as an independent State. We have therefore always
supported, and will continue to support, the inclusion
of Palestine in the various international organizations.

Knowing that the door to the two-State solution
would not stay open for long, exactly nine months ago the
international community received with hope - the same
hope that we have today 4 the news that Palestinians
and Israelis were returning to negotiations. Following
that period, which the parties had established as the
period in which to reach a final agreement to resolve all
outstanding final status issues in order to achieve ajust
and lasting peace, the outlook is not very encouraging,
as we can see for ourselves. Not only did they not reach
a final agreement, but they did not reach the more
modest goal of a framework agreement and, as of a few
days, they had not successfully concluded talks aimed
at extending the negotiation period.

During that period, rather than shrink, the gap
between the parties' positions seems to have grown
wider, and the situation on the ground has evolved in
the opposite direction from that needed to establish
the conditions necessary for peace. There has been an
intensification of the illegal settlements campaign; a
sustained increase in the displacements and demolitions
in East Jerusalem and Area C; an increase in settler
violence; an increase in tensions in places ofworship in
Jerusalem; and continued clashes between the security
forces of Israel and Palestinian civilians in the West
Bank. Meanwhile, the indiscriminate firing of rockets
from Gaza into Israel has exposed the fragility of the
ceasefire between Israel and Hamas that was reached
in November 2012.

Argentina supports continued dialogue. There is
no other way to overcome the conflict. But dialogue
cannot be the excuse nor provide the framework with
which to consolidate a status quo that is unsustainable.
Negotiations have to be substantial, with the clear
objective of putting an end to the occupation and
achieving full independence for the Palestinian State,
living in peace with Israel on the basis of the parameters
that enjoy broad consensus among the international
community, including the pre-1967 borders.

We are convinced that this is the result that
will provide the best security guarantees for Israel,
because the failure of negotiations will benefit only
the extremists on both sides. Argentina furthermore
believes that achieving an agreement fundamentally
depends on the decisions taken by the parties and the
support received from those outside who are genuinely
pursuing peace.

We must be conscious of the fact that we must
speak in good faith in our interpretation of what has
happened and of what we have failed to do. However,
the victims understand full well what has happened
and what we have not done. In that respect, we
believe that, in addition to providing the necessary
incentives, the international community should speak
clearly when acts that are not conducive to peace are
committed. Therefore, Argentina stresses that the
Security Council, in compliance with its institutional
responsibilities, must take a more active role in support
of the two-State solution, react clearly when attacks
occur against Israel, reaffirm the illegal nature of the
settlements, and discuss Palestine's request to become
a State Member of the United Nations and follow up on
General Assembly resolution 67/19.

Finally, Argentina believes that Gaza should be
an essential part of the two-State solution. Therefore,
we believe that the peace process and intra-Palestinian
reconciliation are not mutually exclusive, but rather
mutually reinforcing to the extent that the latter takes
place under the leadership of President Abbas and
in line with the Palestine Liberation Organization's
commitments, including the recognition of Israel and a
renunciation of violence.

Unfortunately, the diplomatic opportunity available
in Geneva on 22 January to find an answer to the
Syrian tragedy has not yielded the results that we hoped
for and the Syrian people need. It is undeniable that,
despite having agreed to sit at the negotiating table, the
parties and their supporters from outside still believe
they can win the war and that they can solve the crisis
by military force.

It is therefore not surprising that the successive
reports of the Independent International Commission
of Inquiry of the Human Rights Council and the two
reports of the Secretary-General (S/2014/208 and S/2014/295) on the implementation of resolution 2139
(2014) confirm that, in their struggle to maintain or
gain power, the parties have sought to achieve the
military advantage even by violating the fundamental
rules governing conflicts.

As a result, it has been noted that more than 100,000
lives have already been lost in Syria and the number of
victims of torture, forced disappearances, extrajudicial
executions, sexual violence, arbitrary detentions,
hunger, thirst and fear continues to rise. Millions of
Syrians have been displaced within and outside the
country, while arbitrary and illegal obstacles deny
them of the very basic means for subsistence and ethnic
and religious minorities watch with growing fear the
growing threat from extremist groups.

Against that backdrop, we cannot allow the reports
of the commission and the Secretary-General to
become bureaucratic routine or ritual. We cannot resign
ourselves to the massacres or become accustomed
to these massive violations of human rights as if we
were at the theatre and allowing the performance on
the stage to become an ongoing topic of discussion.
On the contrary, every new report we receive is a
cruel reminder of the Council's inability to respond
collectively, as well as a sign of hope and of a renewed
call for action. Therefore, despite the differences
prevailing in the Security Council, which are well
known and have been expressed, I have the duty to
reiterate Argentina's convictions.

First, we must seriously consider referring the
situation in Syria to the International Criminal Court,
with its corresponding financing, because the magnitude
and nature of the violations that have been committed
are due to a great extent to the climate of impunity
reigning in Syria. Secondly, since January 2013 we
have been saying that we must consider measures to
restrict the transfer of weapons to all parties because it
is clear that weapons in Syria are being used to commit
crimes against humanity and war crimes. Thirdly, we
must explicitly support Mr. Brahimi as the mediator
accepted by the parties so as to contribute to his efforts
to help the Syrians find a political solution to the crisis.

We have spoken about reports of presumed new
attacks with chemical weapons in Syria. We believe
that if these reports are well founded they must
be investigated, recalling the provisions Chemical
Weapons Convention, to which Syria is now party. At
the same time, and although they are not yet complete,
we welcome the ongoing efforts to remove chemical
weapons from Syria, despite the extremely difficult
circumstances. We trust in the sustained commitment
of the Syrian Government to meeting its obligations.
We hope that the mission will conclude successfully
and that its achievement will be a catalyst for ongoing
efforts to achieve peace in Syria.

The solidarity of Jordan deserves recognition, and
the future of Lebanon also deserves our support and
cooperation.

