Mr. Daunivalu (Fiji): Let me thank you, Madam
President, and the Kingdom of the Netherlands for
organizing this open debate on peacekeeping operations.

We pay tribute to all United Nations peacekeepers,
and particularly to those who have lost their lives in the
service of global peace.

As a troop- and police-contributing country for
around 40 years, Fiji takes great pride in its participation
in United Nations peacekeeping missions. For a small
island developing State, the Fijian men and women
deployed to the various peacekeeping missions globally
represent our contribution to the goal of achieving
international peace and security, as stipulated under
the Charter of the United Nations. I would like to make
three key points as our contribution to the discussion
on ways to collectively improve United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

The first concerns adequate resources and support.
We believe that there is a need to provide peacekeeping
forces with adequate resources in order to deliver
effectively on their mandate. We accept that targeted
training, capacity-building and proper equipment
are vital to support United Nations peacekeepers in
the various peacekeeping missions. While budgetary
considerations are relevant, they should not be the
primary factor for determining the participation of
a country that provides peacekeepers to a mission.
Indeed, it should not be relied upon at the expense of
the lives of United Nations peacekeepers.

The lack of funding to support a United Nations
peacekeeping mission also should not be used to
disadvantage a troop- or police-contributing country.
Rather, an overall review of the mission mandate should
be the basis of determining the size, operation, focus
and objectives of a mission. In this regard, we do not
believe that independent mission reviews commissioned
by the Secretary-General give the Secretariat a
blanket approval or unilateral scope to determine
the participation of a troop- or police-contributing
country in a mission. As Member States and troop-
contributing countries, we expect the Secretariat to
provide us with options and recommendations that
are holistic in nature and take into account the overall
objectives of the mission and the interests of troop- and
police-contributing countries.

Secondly, we underline the importance of an
effective political process as a key factor in achieving
the goal of a peacekeeping mission. This is essential in
order to effectively resolve conflicts and bring a swift
and successful conclusion to a peacekeeping mission.
The important role that the Secretary-General plays in
engaging with all parties to a conflict, and the efforts
of regional and subregional organizations through
dialogue, negotiations and national reconciliation, are
all necessary to support peace operations.

Thirdly, as has already been mentioned today,
peace is best pursued in partnership. Cooperation
among the host country, Member States, troop- and
police-contributing countries, the Security Council
and the Secretariat is necessary. As a troop- and
police-contributing country, we expect to be fully
consulted by the Secretariat on the work that it does to
support Member States and troop- or police-contributing
countries in delivering on peacekeeping mandates,
especially where it affects our ongoing participation
in a mission. Host countries should also be consulted
closely to ensure that any operational or strategic change
in a mission does not hamper the swift achievement of
peacekeeping goals for that mission.

I close by assuring members of the Council
that Fiji will continue to work closely with all
relevant stakeholders to ensure the effectiveness
and success of the Blue Helmets and United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

