The President (spoke in Russian): I will now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.

Our delegation closely monitors the work of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, particularly the judicial proceedings
conducted within its framework, and we are grateful to
the Mechanism's leaders for their detailed information
and reports on that. We pay close attention to the extent
to which it has been able to learn from the activities
of the International Criminal Tribunals established
by the Security Council. As we know, the history of
one of them, the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), was marred by a selective approach
to justice, numerous delays in its criminal proceedings
and violations of the rights of the accused to a fair trial.

The Mechanism's current two-year mandate ends
on 30 June, as we are all aware. This month the Security
Council has to finish reviewing the Mechanism's
activities to date and reflect the results in an appropriate
resolution, whose adoption is an essential condition for
extending the work of the Mechanism for another two
years. By the end of June, the terms of office of the
members of the Register of Judges, the President and
the Prosecutor of the Mechanism will expire.

Unfortunately, our analysis of the Mechanism's
practice in specific cases confirms that it has inherited
the ICTY's flawed working methods. The verdict in
the case of Vojislav Seselj is another confirmation
of that. Rewriting an acquittal as a guilty verdict
with a sentence to time served only underlines the
shortcomings of the justice model in the ICTY and
Residual Mechanism's format.

Similarly, very typical conclusions about what is
going on with the Mechanism can be drawn from the
report (8/2018/206) of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services (OIOS) prepared for the Security Council's
review. Judging by the OIOS report, the Mechanism
seems to be taking the same line as the ICTY with
regard to to both internal administration and personnel
policy issues. As a result, the Office indicates that there
has been friction between management and workers
and a deteriorating atmosphere and low morale among
the staff, and Council members have discussed that this
morning. We warned of the danger ofthis as long as two
years ago when a proposal was made to automatically
reassign the ICTY leadership to the corresponding
posts in the Mechanism. Incidentally, for some reason
the extent of the judicial workload came as a surprise
to the Mechanism.

We are concerned about the OIOS report's assertions
that the Mechanism's Arusha branch is perceived by
some of the staff in The Hague as a field office. We
believe that the Prosecutor and Secretary's move to
Arusha, announced in the report of the President of the
Mechanism, will improve administrative harmonization
and unity in both branches of the Mechanism as one
entity. We also hope that the move will enable the
Mechanism's leadership to concentrate on its mandated
activities. Up to now the Prosecutor's report is still
making too much of the issue of combating impunity
in the countries of the former Yugoslavia. It again
includes irrelevant evaluations of the prospects for
European integration with respect to those countries,
including in the context of the related strategy of the
European Union.

We would like to remind the Council that the
Mechanism should not overstep the limits of its mandate
and functions. As we have frequently noted, the Residual
Mechanism was established in accordance with Security
Council resolution 1966 (2010) as a temporary body,
with strictly limited powers for completing processes
that the ICTY and the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda were unable to finish. That is why its official
title includes the word "residual". The temporary nature
of the Mechanism's mandate requires that its residual
functions - including legal proceedings, whose delay
on the pretext of reduced funding is unacceptable - be
completed as quickly as possible.

We would also like to point out that the Mechanism,
according to its Statute, does not have the authority to
analyse the quality of national judicial systems. The
staff of the Mechanism should not be distracted by
any kinds of educational activities or events such as
seminars and training sessions, particularly for third
countries that are not part of the relevant region.

We would especially like to emphasize the
importance of protecting the right of the accused to
timely, appropriate and high-quality medical care.
Among other things, that right requires using reliable,
unembellished information about defendants' health.
The ICTY's mistakes in that regard must not be repeated
in any circumstances. Its legacy is marred by the
negligence that led to an entire roster ofpeople dying in
custody. In general, we believe that at this stage, when
we have guiding estimates of how long it will take to
complete the proceedings in the cases of Ratko Mladie,
Jovica Stanisie and Franco Simatovie, it is time for
the Council to think objectively about winding up the
Mechanism's activities in the foreseeable future.

In conclusion, I want to say that we hope that the
Mechanism's leadership will produce a well-thought-
out plan for the course ofits legal proceedings and other
statutory activities. We expect reliable projections,
maximum efficiency and transparency, as well as
strict adherence to judicial standards, including trial
timelines. In our view, the Security Council has already
provided all procedural and other opportunities for that
to the Mechanism.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the Minister of Justice of Serbia.

