Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): We join
other delegations in thanking the Secretary-General for
his latest report on the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) (S/2010/522). In
addition, we extend our thanks to Ms. Ameerah Haq,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Timor-Leste, and express our appreciation for her
important contribution and tireless work. We would
also like to welcome the Permanent Representative of
Timor-Leste and thank her for her contribution to this
debate.

In addition, we commend the crucial role that the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
plays in support of Timor-Leste's efforts to achieve
progress in many different areas, including in the
security, political, institutional and socio-economic
fields. Moreover, Bosnia and Herzegovina would like
to commend the Timorese people, Government and
political parties, as the overall situation during the
reporting period remained calm and stable.

We are encouraged to learn that President Ramos-
Horta has continued his dialogue initiative on the
theme "Road to peace and national unity", thus
supporting reconciliation and peace initiatives in urban
and rural communities. We believe that such efforts
may serve as an important step, which we hope will
have a positive impact on the lives of many in Timor-
Leste.

Strengthening security-sector reform is crucial for
sustainable peace and security in Timor-Leste. While
we welcome the resumption by the Policia Nacional de
Timor-Leste (PNTL) of primary responsibilities for
police operations in several districts since May 2009,
we are also hopeful that the process will be finalized
by the end of this year in all districts and all units. In
order to achieve this goal, further institutional
development and capacity-building within the PNTL
are of particular importance. There must be a clear
delineation of responsibility between the PNTL and the
Falintil Forcas de Defesa de Timor-Leste. A
comprehensive reform process for both should be
carefully developed and completed.

As stated by the Secretary-General in his report,
the Timorese authorities have taken significant steps to
strengthen national capacities and to enhance the
effectiveness of the justice sector. We therefore
particularly welcome the launch of the Justice Sector
Strategic Plan for Timor-Leste.

Bosnia and Herzegovina firmly believes that the
reintegration of internally displaced persons is
inextricably linked with both achieving and
maintaining lasting peace and strengthening
democratic institutions and processes. In that context,
we warmly welcome the closure of the last transitional
shelter for internally displaced persons.

We firmly believe that only truth and justice can
lead the country towards full reconciliation and
prosperity. In that regard, we commend the submission
of draft laws on the Commission for Reception, Truth
and Reconciliation and the Commission of Truth and
Friendship to the President of the Timorese Parliament.
The more successful the fight against impunity is, the
better the prospects for true reconciliation and national
unity.

Socio-economic problems must be addressed in
an effective and coordinated manner, with all
stakeholders onboard, including the private sector, civil
society and foreign donors. Infrastructure projects,
foreign investment and improvements in youth
employment will contribute to poverty reduction and
promote sustainable economic growth.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is of the opinion that the
general elections to be organized in 2012 will be of
critical importance and a true test of Timorese
democratic progress. We welcome the role of UNMIT
and the United Nations Development Programme in
assisting electoral management bodies to consolidate
institutional capacities in order to enable them to
conduct the upcoming elections with limited
international support.

In conclusion, we reiterate our full support for the
continued and steady progress Timor-Leste is making
on its path to a stable, secure and democratic society
while simultaneously strengthening both its economic
and developmental capacities. Bosnia and Herzegovina
supports the efforts of the people and the Government
of Timor-Leste and encourages them to proceed with
the same determination towards a better future - a
future of peace, security and prosperity.

