Mr. Gallegos Chiriboga (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I thank the Permanent Mission of France for
holding this open debate, and I welcomed the presence
in the Security Council this morning of France's
Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs, Mr. J ean-Yves
Le Drian, to whom I extend my greetings.

We consider it essential for all States to be able to
express their concerns in the Security Council about
the threat that terrorism poses to international peace
and security and, above all, about the importance of
preventing it and combating its financing. No State is
immune to terrorism, but neither can any State respond
to it alone, which is why we are convinced that joint
measures and concerted actions are required to counter
terrorism and its pernicious effects.

The Republic of Ecuador reaffirms that terrorism
is a serious threat to the international community as a
whole. That is why we unequivocally condemn all acts
of terrorism, regardless of their form or manifestation
and regardless of their purpose, their origin or the entity
that carries them out.

Preventing terrorism is as important as suppressing
it, which is why it is essential to identify and eliminate
the causes and factors that may promote terrorist acts,
including their financing, political, ethnic, religious
and racial intolerance, corruption and the social and
economic gap between peoples and nations. Ecuador has
taken important steps to address and combat the threat

of terrorism by criminalizing the financing of terrorism
and associated money-laundering through preventive
measures and international judicial cooperation. I
would like to mention a few examples in that regard.

The Ecuadorian Comprehensive Organic Criminal
Code, adopted in 2014, expressly criminalizes
terrorism and its financing by recognizing the direct
relationship between the crime of money-laundering
and the financing of terrorism and shows progress in
controlling those crimes. The law on the prevention,
detection and eradication of the crime of money-
laundering and the financing of offences is aimed at
preventing, detecting in a timely manner, punishing
and eradicating money-laundering and the financing
of offences in their various forms. With the same
objective, the ongoing action plan for the prevention of
money-laundering and the financing of terrorism was
approved. The report of the International Cooperation
Review Group recognized that Ecuador

"has made significant progress in consolidating
its anti-money-laundering regime against the
financing of terrorism."

That shows that Ecuador is taking concrete action
to comply with the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy and the Secretary-General's Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism.

It is also essential to highlight the link between
the financing and support of terrorist groups and
transnational organized crime groups, whose acts
affect civilians and innocent people in a similar way. At
the beginning of 2018, my country reported violent acts
resulting from the actions of irregular armed groups
linked to transnational organized crime, including
a dozen terrorist attacks that resulted in a number
of injuries, deaths and displacements and damaged
State infrastructure.

As an immediate response, the Government
of Ecuador established its national committee on
comprehensive border security as the body responsible
for coordinating and developing policies, guidelines,
procedures and actions in the area of comprehensive
border security and implemented a defence plan for
security along its northern border, which provides
guidelines for the strategic planning of comprehensive
defence, security and development policies to address
the complex transnational threat of terrorism in all
its dimensions.

It is also important to point out the connection
between terrorism and corruption. For that reason,
Ecuador unequivocally condemns acts of corruption,
the networks of which seriously undermine the stability
of States and entire regions and jeopardize the peace
and development of our peoples in the Americas and the
world. The United Nations is the only global platform
to carry out an effective fight against terrorism. Before
concluding, I would therefore like to reiterate Ecuador's
commitment to work towards strengthening the
international fight against terrorism and put an end to
that serious threat to international peace and security.

