Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank our briefers of today - Ms. DiCarlo, Under-
Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs; Mr. Lamamra, African Union High
Representative for Silencing the Guns in Africa; and
Mr. Vasu Gounden - for their valuable insights.
The United Kingdom warmly welcomes Equatorial
Guinea's initiative to schedule a high-level debate on
this important issue.

I was particularly struck by Mr. Gounden's thought-
provoking briefing. I very much agree with him that
we all need to take action to tackle good governance
and other structural causes of conflict if we are to turn
this aspiration into reality. I was also struck by the
comments of my United States colleague, who focused
on a number of country-specific issues. I also agree with
him that we need to prioritize those country-specific
issues - whether it is Zimbabwe, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Sudan or Cameroon - if we
are to move towards this ambitious goal.

The United Kingdom believes that it is vital that
we translate the noble goal of silencing the guns into
concrete initiatives that will make a tangible difference
in the lives of ordinary people across Africa. With that
in mind, I would like to highlight four priorities to
follow up on.

The first is strong and effective partnerships.
Those are crucial in ensuring that the sum of our
efforts is greater than its parts. The United Kingdom is
committed to our strategic partnership with the African
Union to support peace, stability and development. In
doing, so we will continue to take a holistic approach,
recognizing that there is a mutually reinforcing link
between security and prosperity. We will also continue
to support efforts to strengthen and deepen the
partnership between the Council and African regional
and subregional organizations.

As the Secretary-General sets out in his sustaining
peace agenda, effective early warning and conflict
prevention mechanisms require close cooperation
among all relevant stakeholders. Together, we can and
should scan the horizon for signs of emerging conflicts
and crises in Africa, sharing our insights and analysis,
and we should collaborate to take meaningful action
at an early stage whenever opportunities arise to
de-escalate violence and advance political solutions.

Secondly - and a number of Council members
have referred to this today - we should give our full
backing to effective preventative diplomacy, good
offices and mediation as indispensable elements of
regional and subregional efforts to promote peace and
stability. The value of this work has been demonstrated
in the African context, for example in the efforts of the
Economic Community of West African States to enable
a peaceful transition of power in The Gambia in 2017,
or the support of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development for the revitalization of the peace process
in South Sudan. That is why the United Kingdom is
partnering with the African Union to support the
development of continental early warning capabilities
in order to enhance preventative diplomacy efforts.

Thirdly, as the representatives of Germany and
Poland have already highlighted today, and as the
Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative rightly recognizes,
strengthening women's participation is another vital
element of effective conflict prevention and resolution.
ThatisreflectedintheUnitedKingdom's currentnational
action plan on women and peace and security, which
includes a commitment to support the implementation
of national action plans in a range of partner countries,
including Nigeria, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and South Sudan. The United Kingdom is also
a proud member of the Friends of FemWise group,
supporting the African Union's FemWise initiative to
strengthen the network of African women involved in
conflict prevention and mediation. We also attach great
importance to the role of civil society and community
initiatives to advance women's participation in conflict
prevention and peacemaking. The example of Liberian
Nobel Peace Prize laureate Leymah Gbowee and her
fellow activists shows that when women campaign for
peace at the grass-roots level, their activism can have a
truly catalytic effect.

Finally, and as many other speakers have mentioned
this morning, peacemaking and peacebuilding efforts
should be complemented by a robust approach to
countering the proliferation of weapons, especially small
arms and light weapons. Small arms and light weapons
have a role to play in ensuring legitimate defence and
security, but their misuse costs hundreds of thousands of
lives every year, undermines security and development,
and fuels conflict, crime and terrorism. That cannot be
achieved without the effective functioning of peace and
security institutions at the national level, but it also
relies on strong cross-border and regional cooperation.
The United Kingdom looks forward to continuing to
work with the African Union on improving management
of small arms and light weapons and ammunition in
Africa. That should support and complement existing
work through the United Nations, as well as other arms
control treaties, conventions and regimes, including the
Arms Trade Treaty. We urge all States in the region that
have not yet done so to become party to the relevant
international arms control instruments, demonstrating
their commitment to countering the proliferation of
illicit weapons.

The United Kingdom will remain a staunch
supporter of African initiatives to foster peace and
security across the African continent. We look forward
to hearing from other Member States in the course of
today's debate about efforts in hand to deliver progress
against the road map for silencing the guns to 2020
and beyond.

