Mr. Gadio (Senegal) (spoke in French): As
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), it is my
pleasure, first of all, to convey to you our great pride and
to express our heartfelt congratulations on the outstanding
manner in which you have been discharging your
mandate, with, of course, the valuable support of all of
our colleagues from the Security Council.

Allow me also to say how greatly ECOWAS and
my country appreciate the Council's kind and generous
decision to devote a special meeting to the situation in
Africa.

Indeed, this initiative is all the more
commendable in view of the fact that, at the dawn of
this new millennium, the African continent continues
to face major challenges in three areas: peace,
development and good governance.

The quest for lasting peace in Africa has always
been at the heart of the concerns of the United Nations.
Clear testimony of this fact is the outstanding report of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, entitled
"Causes of conflict and the promotion of sustainable
peace and durable development in Africa". We fully
share his conviction of the need to tackle the roots of
this evil, and we believe that careful follow-up of the
processes of political normalization is an imperative
need, in particular in countries such as Guinea-Bissau
and Sierra Leone, where peace remains fragile.

Allow us here at the outset to refer to the highly
instructive example of Guinea-Bissau in terms of
conflict prevention. This is a typical case, in which the
international community, as it sometimes does, is
standing by without taking urgent action while the
seeds of a potential conflict are sown. This is akin to
trying to save the few billion CFA francs which might
be necessary tomorrow to save Guinea-Bissau, and
then investing 10 times more once it is too late -
when the tensions that are gripping that key West
African country have done their damage.

Let me say that Mr. Abdoulaye Wade, President
of the Republic of Senegal - together, of course, with
the Secretary-General of the United Nations - is
continuing to appeal to the international community for
urgent assistance to Guinea-Bissau, in order to help it
pay salaries and to resolve its disarmament problems.
Indeed, to require that small African country - whose
soldiers are believed to number between 35,000 and
45,000 and which has experienced numerous conflicts
and civil wars - to meet the criteria of good
governance and transparent administration, inter alia,
before receiving international assistance could lead to a
catastrophic situation. If the concept of conflict
prevention has any meaning, it should be applied as
quickly as possible, and in the best possible way, to
Guinea-Bissau.

I should like to reiterate, however, that Secretary-
General Kofi Annan has repeatedly demonstrated his
deep concern and his personal interest in resolving the
crisis in Guinea-Bissau. To that end, he needs the
involvement of the international community. In the
case of Guinea-Bissau, and in other cases in our
subregion and our subcontinent, we deem equally
important the continued strengthening of cooperation
between the United Nations on the one hand and the
Organization of African Unity and subregional
organizations on the other in the area of conflict
prevention, management and resolution.

In this respect, we are gratified to see the
upcoming establishment in Dakar, following the
relevant recommendation of the report of Ibrahima
Fall, of a United Nations Office in West Africa. I am
convinced that this will, inter alia, help us better to
address the problem of peace and security in our
subregion.

Here I should like to assure the Council of the
readiness, determination and commitment of Mr.
Abdoulaye Wade, President of Senegal and the current
Chairman of ECOWAS, who, as a dedicated and loyal
champion of political compromise and social peace,
will spare no effort in working towards these
objectives. In this framework, together with his
brothers from the Mano River Union, he intends to
pursue his initiatives so that peace and stability
ultimately win the day in this region.

As the Council is aware, the three heads of
State- President Tejan Kabbah of Sierra Leone,
President Taylor of Liberia and President Conte of
Guinea 4 have confidence in the mediating efforts of
President Abdoulaye Wade. They believe that they all
can meet very soon to engage in confidence-building,
to develop their personal relationship and to overcome
the tensions and conflict situations we have seen in this
part of Africa. We therefore have high hopes in this
respect.

While the efforts made by the Africans
themselves are important, it is worth noting that a
determined commitment by the international
community on our side, recognizing the role of poverty
and a certain type of political culture as latent causes of
conflict, could help find a comprehensive solution for
this scourge.

I also wish to appeal to friendly countries and the
donor community to actively participate in renewing
the continent through consistent support for the New
Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD). By
opting for a strategy of breaking with aid and debt, our
leaders have recalculated the continent's priorities and
have brought out pragmatic and realistic objectives
aimed at, inter alia, filling the gap in resources,
increasing domestic savings and attracting private
foreign capital to ensure financing of infrastructures,
agriculture, education and health, and drastically
reducing the digital divide with the North.

If you will allow me a very brief parenthesis here,
Mr. President, I wish to say that increasingly in the
speeches of country development partners, we have
noted that in their listing of NEPAD priority sectors the
infrastructure sector often is not mentioned, and that
concerns us greatly. Africa considers the infrastructure
sector as a high priority; indeed, as NEPAD's highest
priority. We are expecting, in discussion with our
partners, to show that the playing field is not level; if
Africa does not resolve the infrastructure gap, Africa
will not have a chance. It will remain marginalized, and
that is what NEPAD was intended to prevent.

It is within the framework of this struggle for the
rebirth of our continent that His Excellency
Mr. Abdoulaye Wade, President of Senegal, called for
regional sectoral meetings in Dakar yesterday, 28
January 2002, in order to identify in each region of
Africa projects in various priority sectors -
infrastructure, the environment, new information and
communication technologies, energy - before their
consideration by the next NEPAD conference on
financing, to be held at Dakar from 15 to 17 April, and
by the G-8 Summit in Ottawa from 26 to 28 June.

Indeed, the prospects for peace, stability and
economic prosperity could well turn out to be illusory
without genuine democracy and real rule of law in the
African countries. Because of this concern, the heads
of State and Government of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), meeting in Dakar
on 20 and 21 December 2001, at the twenty-fifth
session of the Summit Conference, reaffirmed their
commitment to promote a more calm political and
social environment based on democracy, tolerance and
the acceptance of differences and political
compromises. They also decided to advance the
concept of border countries, based on continuing
dialogue at the highest level, and the implementation of
joint programmes for social and economic
development, as well as the establishment of basic
infrastructure with a collective plan.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate, and emphasize,
the readiness of ECOWAS and of Senegal to cooperate
fully with the United Nations for the eradication of
conflicts and the economic flourishing of our continent.

In renewing our profound gratitude to the
Security Council for its wise and timely decision to
devote this meeting to Africa, I would like to nourish
the hope that the international community will take an
active part in the efforts of the sons and daughters of
our continent for the advent of an Africa reconciled
with itself and freed from the yoke of poverty. The
African renaissance is surely under way. It is possible
if we Africans, first of all, and the Council along with
us, firmly believe in it.

