Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I,
too, would like to condemn as strongly as possible this
morning's attack on the United Nations compound in
Mogadishu, and to express my sincere condolences to
the families of the victims of that cowardly attack.

I would like to thank the British presidency of
the Security Council for choosing the subject of the
prevention of conflict and natural resources for this
debate, - a highly pertinent topic, as the Council's
work regularly demonstrates.

My delegation associates itself fully with the
statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union.

I would like to thank Deputy Secretary-Genera Jan
Eliasson, Director General of the World Bank Caroline
Anstey and Associate Administrator of the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) Rebeca
Grynspan for their briefings. I also thank former
Secretary-General Kofi Annan for his briefing and
his leadership on improving equity in the extractive
industries in Africa.

Just as intra- or inter-State competition for natural
resources can be a cause of armed conflict, so their
illegal exploitation and commercialization can often
help to finance and prolong those same conflicts. At the
local level, conflicts between communities and mining
enterprises can lead to violent encounters, whether
over issues of property rights or sharing in the benefits
of the exploitation of resources. At the national level,
revenue losses from such exploitation can mortgage
development dividends and thus undermine the
possibility of achieving lasting peace.

In order to effectively combat instability and
violence in countries rich in natural resources, it is
essential to use a comprehensive approach that links
instruments of preventive diplomacy, sustainable
development, responsible trade and security that
respects human rights. The Security Council has an
unquestionable role to play in that process. Among
the tools available to it are, first and foremost, United
Nations missions. In our view, giving support to States,
depending on the situation, with a View to combating
armed groups and criminal networks that profit from
the illegal exploitation of natural resources is most
relevant. The same could be said of support given
to States to help them strengthen their capacity to
manage public finances and combat corruption, using
the framework of United Nations special political
missions and integrated offices. Close coordination
with all relevant actors in the field - namely, the
United Nations, the international financial institutions
and other international partners - is necessary in that
regard.

A coherent approach would make it possible to
strengthen the capacities of the State to prevent the loss
of revenue needed for the development of the country,
which could result from illegal mining operations or
from dishonest accounting practices. In order to prevent
conflicts, the Council should give priority to such
issues when it establishes or renews mandates. Such
an integrated and coherent approach should also be
taken into account when drawing up sanctions regimes.
We feel it would be appropriate for the sanctions
committees, and the panels of experts assisting them, to
exchange information on how to best cooperate actively
on those matters.
Finally, good management of natural resources is
a national priority for countries that are on the agenda
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). We feel that
greater interaction between the Council and the PBC
country configurations would be appropriate.

We welcome the progress made towards greater
transparency under such voluntary initiatives as
the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative or
the United Nations Global Compact. However, such
voluntary initiatives by themselves are insufficient;
hence the importance of having a legal framework in
place to ensure that extractive industries make public
all information relating to amounts paid to national
Governments. European directives on accountancy and
transparency follow that approach. We also welcome
the declaration adopted yesterday by the Group of Eight
stressing that transparency must be the catchword for
State revenue and land transactions and that minerals
must be extracted from legitimate sources, not pillaged
from conflict areas.

For its part, the African Union adopted its Africa
Mining Vision in 2009, which promises

"equitable and optimal exploitation of mineral
resources to underpin broad-based sustainable
growth and socioeconomic development."

African leaders who are prepared to implement the
vision in their respective countries deserve our full
support. We also welcome the commitment of civil
society, particularly in areas of conflict, for the
formulation of transparent and responsible policies.

Finally, Luxembourg welcomes the trend in the
discussions of the High-level Panel of Eminent Persons
on the Post-2015 Development Agenda, which accords
central importance to peace, the creation of effective,
transparent and responsible institutions for everyone,
and the fight against inequality. My country will
continue to support our partners' efforts, particularly in
Africa, aimed at an equitable distribution of resources,
which is indispensable for just and lasting peace.

I would like to thank the President for placing
this subject on the Council's agenda, and we regret
that no agreement was reached on a draft presidential
statement, despite the efforts of the presidency.

