Mr. Feltman: Yesterday, as you mentioned before
the meeting, Mr. President, the world witnessed a
sobering reminder of the challenges faced not only
by the Libyans but by those in the international
community who are committed to supporting Libya's
ongoing transformation. In Benghazi, the United States
diplomatic presence was deliberately attacked and
burned; those claiming responsibility cited a video
insulting to Islam as their motivation. Four United
States diplomats were killed in the attack, including the
United States Ambassador to Libya, John Christopher
Stevens. I have seen reports that Libyan security
personnel were also killed.

The United Nations rejects the defamation of
religion in any form, but there is no justification for
violence such as that which occurred in Benghazi
yesterday. We condemn in the strongest terms this attack
on a diplomatic facility, and we offer our condolences
to the families of those killed, Libyan and American,
and our wishes for a speedy and full recovery to the
injured.

The Organization, under the direction of the
Secretary-General, is committed to doing its best
to support Libya's ongoing transition and help the
Libyan people achieve their aspirations for a secure,
democratic, united and prosperous Libya. We work in
partnership first and foremost with the Libyan people
and Government, but also with other governmental and
non-governmental partners. The Secretary-General
reminds the Libyan authorities of their obligation to
protect diplomatic facilities and personnel. We welcome
statements by Libyan authorities confirming that they
will bring those who killed the diplomatic personnel to
justice.

The United States Ambassador Chris Stevens was a
close colleague and dear friend; we had worked together
for years during my tenure at the State Department. I
would like to add my own words of condolence to his
family and the wide circle of friends he had around the
world.

This attack, together with a spate of assassinations
of security personnel in Benghazi, a series of explosive
devices in Tripoli and attacks on Sufi shrines,
further emphasizes the security challenges facing the
authorities in Libya, a major theme of the Secretary-
General's report before the Council (8/2012/675).
While the Secretary-General's report was prepared
before the news of the attack on the United States office
in Benghazi, it details some of the most important
milestones in Libya's democratic transition since the
last briefing to the Council, on 18 July (see S/PV.6807).
I will focus on the most significant developments
since the report was prepared and outline some of the
challenges facing the new Libyan authorities, and the
way forward.

The transfer of authority from the National
Transitional Council to the 200-member General
National Congress on 8 August marked a historic
moment. For the first time in more than four decades,
Libya now has a democratically elected body. On
9 August, reflecting the sense of public trust and
expectation that accompanied its assumption of office,
the General National Congress moved quickly to
elect a President and two Vice-Presidents, as per the
Constitutional Declaration. The use of secret balloting
and the fact that the proceedings were broadcast live
on television reflect the Congress's commitment to
the democratic process. In his meetings with President
Al-Magariaf of the General National Congress and his
two Vice-Presidents, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ian Martin, was assured of
their commitment to making a clean break with the
past by upholding the principles of transparency and
accountability.

The General National Congress will now need to
address several urgent priorities. High among them are
the need to initiate a national dialogue on reconciliation;
to strengthen its capacity to exercise oversight over the
Government, a daunting task in view of the country's
lack of parliamentary experience; to prevent the
persistence of systemic corruption; and to adopt local
governance legislation. Progress on local governance
issues will constitute a first step towards addressing
the legitimate and urgent need for decentralized
Government. It is also crucial that the Congress create
mechanisms by which civil society is assured a voice
and is adequately consulted on all important matters.

On 30 August, the General National Congress
provisionally adopted internal rules of procedure
following intense discussions and amendments in
the plenary. These rules will be critical for shaping
Libya's political system, including the authority of
the presidency, the voting requirements for decision-
making within the Congress and the delineation of
powers between the legislative and the executive
branches.

At the request of the Libyan authorities, the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL)
and the United Nations Development Programme
provided various forms of technical assistance to the
preparations for the transfer of authority from the
National Transitional Council to the General National
Congress, and then to the Congress' consideration of
its internal rules ofprocedure and models for a possible
secretariat structure. The United Nations also began
induction training for the 200 members on issues
related to the roles and functions of parliaments and
members. The United Nations will continue to provide
technical support to the Congress and to coordinate,
with the international community, offers of assistance
and technical support.

Later today, the General National Congress will
vote to appoint a Prime Minister, who will be tasked
with presenting a cabinet to the Congress for its
approval within two weeks. Today's appointment
follows lengthy deliberations within the Congress
over eligibility criteria and internal mechanisms
for the appointment of the Prime Minister. Each of
eight candidates, nominated by at least 15 members,
presented their platform and answered questions in
televised proceedings. The transparency of this process
is a testament to Libya's nascent democracy and sets
new standards for the region.

The formation of a Government of national
consensus that is inclusive and enjoys widespread
support will be key to the ability of the new Prime
Minister to effectively address the formidable
challenges facing Libya. So too will be the ability of
the new Government to work in partnership with the
General National Congress.

On the eve of the election, an amendment to article
30 of the Constitutional Declaration by the National
Transitional Council changed what was to have been
an appointed constitutional commission into an elected
constituent assembly. This change has triggered much
debate, and the General National Congress has yet to
consider how it will respond. This amendment was part
of an effort to defuse tensions arising from a perception
of marginalization and underrepresentation, mainly
in the east, that threatened the security of the national
elections. These issues remain a serious concern.

The United Nations continues to encourage the
adoption of transparent, inclusive and consultative
mechanisms to manage the entire constitutional
development process. The United Nations is prepared
to offer a broad spectrum of support should the
Libyans request it, including on the formation of the
constitutional commission's secretariat, draft rules
of procedure, public outreach and civic education,
induction seminars and ongoing substantive expert
assistance. UNSMIL has begun efforts to help
coordinate support among other international partners.

The United Nations has encouraged the Libyan
authorities to consolidate the knowledge gained from
the holding of elections and to preserve an institutional
infrastructure to serve future elections. The United
Nations has also begun to implement plans designed to
increase awareness and knowledge of electoral issues
among decision-makers and the public at large.

I discussed at the beginning of this briefing the
attack against the United States diplomatic facility in
Benghazi. This is one example, but not the only one,
demonstrating that security is foremost among the
challenges and expectations facing the Libyan people
and authorities. In his remarks marking the dissolution
of the National Transitional Council, Chairman
Mustafa Abdul Jalil acknowledged shortcomings in
addressing these issues, a sentiment echoed by the
General National Congress leadership and political
leaders. These challenges are manifested by the
presence of arms outside State control, lack of clarity
and competition over security responsibilities between
and within relevant ministries and institutions, and the
continued prevalence of armed brigades. In addition to
these concerns, border security remains a top national
priority in the efforts to combat the smuggling of arms,
drugs, human trafficking and illegal migration, as well
as the spread of transnational organized crime.

Leaders from across the political spectrum have
voiced their intention to make security their highest
priority. It is clear that the General National Congress
expects the new cabinet to move quickly to announce
immediate measures to begin to remedy these
shortcomings as part of a longer-term national security
vision and plan.

To assist the Government, UNSMIL is focusing its
advisory and coordination efforts on six key interrelated
areas: the national security architecture; police reform;
defence reform; arms and ammunition management;
border security; and disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration. Accordingly, UNSMIL has increased its
advisory capacity and stepped up efforts to strengthen
international coordination for support to security sector
governance.

The urgency with which the security vacuum in
Libya needs to be addressed was also highlighted by
the spate of attacks on Sufi shrines over the past few
weeks. These include the destruction on 24 August
of one of Libya's most revered shrines in the city of
Zliten, in which bombs and a bulldozer were used.
Further attacks were reported in Tripoli, Benghazi and
Misratah. These attacks elicited strong condemnation
from the Libyan authorities, including General National
Congress President Mr. Mohammad Al-Magariaf, and
from Libya's Grand Mufti Al-Sadiq Al-Ghiryani, who
stressed that such attacks had no basis in Islam.

The issue of conflict-related detentions in Libya
has been particularly salient in briefings and reports
to the Council. During August, the prosecutor's
office commenced the screening of detainees held in
various detention centres in Misratah, leading to the
subsequent release of 130 detainees. While this is a
positive step, the Ministry of Justice needs to continue
its efforts to implement a more systematic, accelerated
approach to the screening of all remaining detainees.
UNSMIL continues to urge Libyan authorities to put in
place measures to prevent and investigate torture and
mistreatment and to devise a prosecutorial strategy to
deal with the trials of senior former regime members.

UNSMIL is working closely with the Libyan
authorities in the area of judicial reform and is assisting
in the re-establishment of the prison system, which
is essential for bringing all conflict-related detainees
under the authority of the Ministry of Justice, an
area where progress has been limited. An effective
transitional justice strategy will help consolidate
democracy and rebuild trust in State institutions in
order to address crimes of the past while promoting
effective truth-seeking processes.

As the General National Congress assumes its
functions, UNSMIL has begun informal consultations
on views regarding United Nations support for Libya's
needs based on the principles of national ownership.
It appears unlikely that there will be any request for
adjustment to the mandate as outlined in resolution
2040 (2012). However, there may be additional requests
for support within the mandated areas. UNSMIL and
the United Nations country team will continue to use
a range of modalities to mobilize a surge capacity of
technical expertise to respond accordingly, in line with
the mission concept of flexibility.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
staff of UNSMIL and particularly the outgoing Special
Representative for his commitment, leadership and
outstanding service in this critical period for the Libyan
people. As noted, a great deal ofwork remains to be done,
so as we express our appreciation and bid farewell to
Ian Martin, the Secretary-General will announce today
the appointment of Mr. Tarek Mitri as his replacement.
With the support ofthe Council, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Martin worked tirelessly and
courageously in building a strong foundation of United
Nations-Libyan cooperation. I am confident that we
can count on the Council's strong support for Mr. Mitri
and UNSMIL in their work to assist the Libyan people
in consolidating and strengthening their democratic
transformation.

