Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I
commend my brother Mr. Reik Machar Teny-Dhurgon,
Vice-President of the Republic of South Sudan, and my
brothers the members of delegations, ministers and
representatives of members of the Security Council. I
would like at the outset to express my great esteem and
appreciation to the head of the delegation of the
Republic of South Sudan and to extend my
congratulations on the independence of his State. As
was pointed out by His Excellency President Al-Bashir
of the Sudan in his historic statement in Juba during
the celebration of the independence of the State of
South Sudan,
11-41279

"our participation with our brothers and sisters
from the South in sharing this joyous occasion is
a celebration of stability and unity, the shared
values we hold most clear, the labours of our
founding fathers and the leaders of the liberation
of Africa, who worked to achieve the dream of
unity in Africa. This occasion confirms that unity
is not achieved by force or war. The will of the
peoples of the South must be respected."

Those are the principles on which we stand in
accepting the right to self-determination of the South
and in striving to strengthen peaceful ties. The Sudan
was one of the first States to recognize the results of
the referendum in January, and we were also the first
State to recognize the new State of South Sudan, as
officially declared on 8 July in Khartoum. We are now
in a state of peaceful coexistence and good-
neighbourly relations, in conformity with the four
principles outlined by the President of the Republic in
his speech in Juba:

"What we have achieved in recent years is a
reflection of our common commitment to peace
and respect for the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement. That Agreement must be respected
and protected by sustaining and consolidating
peace through good-neighbourly relations,
honouring our common interests in trade and
economic relations, and nurturing our shared
psychological bonds."

Finally, we would like to reiterate our
congratulations to our brothers and sisters in the
Republic of South Sudan, and reaffirm our joint
responsibility to guarantee a prosperous, flourishing
future for the two States. I must also address my thanks
on this occasion to all international partners - the
African Union, the League of Arab States, the
European Union, the United Nations and the Security
Council - that have offered us their gracious aid in
order to enable us to achieve the objectives of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement. I also thank the
African Union High-Level Implementation Panel, led
by President Thabo Mbeki, and Mr. Haile Menkerios
for their work.

I would also like to predict that the coming time
will see a new impetus in South Sudan to play its
pioneering role and make its contribution as part of the
international family, holding its head high. We assure
the international community that we shall strive to
strengthen relations based on joint mutual interests. We
are proud to have kept our promises to our brothers and
sisters in the South, and we ask the international
community to reconsider the situation overall. We call
on the European Union and the United States to help
the Republic of South Sudan. A page has been turned,
leaving behind the bitterness and war of the past.

At the same time, the commitments made in the
past must be honoured and implemented as we seek to
reinforce trust and reciprocity between States. We hope
that all promises will be kept. In this regard, we call for
the end of unilateral sanctions, for the forgiveness of
debt and for aid to areas in conflict.

Finally, we would like to assure our brothers and
sisters in the South that we have moved beyond the
history of war and bitterness that was part of the past.
We now look towards a future in which we will
cooperate in order to bear witness to our common
heritage and history so as to guarantee the future.
Separation is not a disconnection. The ties that bind us
are stronger than ever, and we will work with our
brothers and sisters in South Sudan to achieve
prosperity, establish the new State and ensure the
prosperity of the peoples of both the North and the
South. We are all Sudanese. As we say in the Sudan,
when a family gets bigger, it lives in more than one
house. Now we have two houses - one in the North
and one in the South.

