Mrs. Nufiez Mordoche (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): I have the honour to participate in this debate
on behalf of the 118 members of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM).

The Movement reaffirms that the United Nations,
its Charter and international law remain indispensable
tools and central elements in the preservation and
maintenance of international peace and security. NAM
supports the strengthening, within the framework of
the Charter, of the capacity and efficiency of the
United Nations in its efforts to prevent, control and
peacefully resolve conflicts and disputes. Improving
the capacity of the United Nations to prevent and settle
disputes is more effective than having to deal with the
costly aftermath of wars and armed conflicts. The
pacific settlement of disputes is key to the
Organization's Charter obligation to maintain
international peace and security.

In acknowledging the relationship between
economic and social development and peace and
security, NAM. considers important to ensure that any
effort to transform the United Nations into a more
effective instrument for preventing conflict should take
into account the need for a balanced, coherent and
comprehensive approach, in accordance with the
Charter and international law, in order to enhance
conflict prevention and resolution and post-conflict
peacebuilding strategies with the aim of achieving
sustained economic growth and sustainable
development.

In this context, it is critical that all of the
principal organs of the United Nations play an active
role in evolving and implementing a more effective
collective security system, in accordance with their
respective functions and powers, without upsetting the
balance as established by the Charter.

The Non-Aligned Movement regrets that in
recent years the Security Council has been too quick to
threaten or authorize enforcement action in some cases
while being silent and inactive in others. Furthermore,
the Council has increasingly resorted to Chapter VII of
the Charter as an umbrella for addressing issues that do
not necessarily pose an immediate threat to
international peace and security.

A careful review of these trends indicates that the
Council could have opted for alternative measures to
respond more appropriately to particular cases. Instead
of excessive and hasty use of Chapter VII, efforts
should be made to fully utilize the provisions of
Chapters VI and VIII for the pacific settlement of
disputes.

In accordance with Chapter VI, Article 33, the
Security Council should call upon the parties to any
dispute, when it deems necessary, to settle their dispute
by means such as negotiation, enquiry, mediation,
conciliation, arbitration, judicial settlement, resort to
regional agencies or arrangements, or other peaceful
means of their own choice.

The Non-Aligned Movement stresses that
Chapter VII should be invoked, as intended, as a
measure of last resort. Unfortunately, in some cases
provisions of Articles 41 and 42 have been too quickly
resorted to, while the other options, including
mediation, had not been fully exhausted.

Sanctions imposed by the Security Council
remain an issue of serious concern to the non-aligned
countries. In accordance with the United Nations
Charter, the imposition of sanctions should be
considered only after all means of peaceful settlement
of disputes under Chapter VI of the Charter have been
exhausted and a thorough consideration undertaken of
the short-term and long-term effects of such sanctions.

Historically, the Non-Aligned Movement has
given much to the process of pacific settlement of
disputes, and has yet more to offer. To the search for
solutions to disputes and conflicts, the Movement
brings its long-standing commitment to the peaceful
settlement of disputes, as well as its partnerships with
the United Nations and regional organizations.

The Movement reaffirms its principled positions
concerning peaceful settlement of disputes, which
include, among others, the following:

First, it is incumbent upon all States to defend,
preserve and promote the purposes and principles of
the United Nations Charter and the principles of
international law, including the pacific settlement of
disputes and the non-use or threat of use of force.

Secondly, all States shall refrain in their
international relations from the threat or use of force
against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State, or in any other manner
inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations.
Resort to Chapter VII of the Charter as an umbrella for
addressing issues that do not pose a threat to
international peace and security must be avoided. In
that regard, the Security Council should fully utilize
the relevant Charter provisions, where appropriate,
including those of Chapters VI and VIII.

Thirdly, all States should promote the principle of
the non-use of force and the peaceful settlement of
disputes, rather than the threat of force or use of force,
as a means of achieving collective security, bearing in
mind "that armed force shall not be used, save in the
common interest", as stipulated in the Charter.
Allow me to conclude by reaffirming the
Non-Aligned Movement's strong commitment to
defending the principles of the United Nations Charter
and international law, as well as the means envisaged
in the Charter for the pacific settlement of disputes and
non-resort to the threat or use of force.

