Mr. Duval (Canada): Allow me first to commend
the Council's Working Group for a remarkable
cooperative effort and constructive approach to a
difficult task. I would like in particular to congratulate
our Chairman, Ambassador Ward, whose skills,
experience and wisdom enabled the group to produce a
set of measures that will contribute significantly to
strengthening the capacity of the United Nations and its
Member States to carry out effective peace operations.
The work achieved here today is also a validation of
the Secretary-General's creation of the Panel, as well
as of the efforts of the Panel itself. We once again
commend both the Secretary-General for taking this
initiative, and Ambassador Lakhdar Brahimi for
producing such an excellent report.

The work we have accomplished gives substance
to the high hopes that were expressed at the
Millennium Summit. The Group's resolve to work
towards a common, action-oriented goal enabled it to
discuss and develop a pragmatic and practical
framework to improve the effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations.

The annex of the resolution is our checklist of
measures focused not only on politics and strategy, but
also, and perhaps even more importantly, on
operational and organizational areas of need. This
encompasses mandates, doctrine, information analysis,
rapid deployment, conflict prevention, peace-building
and transitional civilian administration.

(spoke in French)

We would like to highlight some particular
recommendations consistent with long-standing
Canadian concerns. These include the need for clear
and achievable mandates and matching mandates with
appropriate resources and rapid deployment. We are
gratified to note that these priorities are now addressed
and that the document includes throughout provisions
for protecting affected civilian populations.

Canada attaches particular importance to the
Council's having consultations with troop and civilian
police contributing countries at every stage of the
development and evolution of a peacekeeping mission,
as outlined in paragraphs 15 and 16 of the annex to the
resolution. This is essential to ensuring the continued
engagement of these nations at both the military and
political levels. We also believe it to be vitally
important that the Council receive timely military
advice, when considering the establishment of a
peacekeeping force, from those who are directly
involved in the military dimension of a peacekeeping
mission. We therefore welcome the call for regular
military briefings from the Secretariat, the Force
Commander or the Military Adviser.

In conclusion, Canada would like, once again, to
thank the Working Group for their efforts in developing
this comprehensive framework for peacekeeping,
within which the Council will now work. These are the
first and very important steps in implementing the
report. We accordingly lend our full support to the
resolution.

