Ms. Lintonen (Finland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The following
countries - Bulgaria, Romania, Turkey, Croatia, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia, Iceland, Ukraine and
the Republic of Moldova - align themselves with this
statement.

The European Union is acutely concerned at the
situation in the Middle East. In particular, we are
concerned at the deteriorating humanitarian situation
and the destruction of civilian infrastructure. The
European Union deplores the loss of civilian lives on
all sides. These developments pose a serious threat to
peace and security in the region. The European Union
calls for the release of the abducted soldiers and an
immediate cessation of hostilities.

The European Union recognizes Israel's
legitimate right to self-defence, but it urges Israel to
exercise utmost restraint and not to resort to
disproportionate action. All parties must do everything
possible to protect civilian populations and to refrain
from actions that violate international humanitarian
law.

It is urgent to stop the violence and return to
diplomacy. Only a political process of negotiation can
bring lasting peace to the region. It is urgent that the
international community engage actively in this
process. We express our full support for the efforts of
the Secretary-General and of actors in the region. The
European Union welcomes an active role on the part of
the Security Council, including through considering the
possibility of an international monitoring presence. We
support the agenda set out in the G-8 statement. The
European Union's High Representative, Mr. Solana, is
also actively engaged in the region.

Concerning the developments in Lebanon and
Israel, the European Union condemns the attacks by
Hizbollah on Israel and the abduction of two Israeli
soldiers. The European Union calls for their immediate
and unconditional release and for the cessation of all
attacks on Israeli towns and cities.

The European Union recalls the need for the
Lebanese State to restore its sovereignty over the
whole of its national territory and to do its utmost to

prevent such attacks. The European Union expresses its
support for Lebanese Prime Minister Fouad Siniora.
The European Union urges the full implementation of
resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1680 (2006), including the
disbanding and disarming of all Lebanese and non-
Lebanese militias, and strict respect of the sovereignty,
unity, territorial integrity and political independence of
Lebanon. Continued escalation will only aggravate the
vicious circle of violence and retribution.

The European Union appeals to all parties to
ensure the safe and speedy passage from Lebanon of
all those citizens of European Union member States, as
well as other expatriates, who wish to leave Lebanon in
the current situation. The European Union calls on
Israel not to hinder shipping in international waters.

Concerning the situation in Gaza, the European
Union remains deeply concerned at the deteriorating
situation between Israel and the Palestinians and
deplores the resulting loss of civilian life. The
European Union reiterates its call for the immediate
and unconditional release of the abducted Israeli
soldier. It calls on the Palestinian leadership to bring an
end to violence and terrorist activities, including the
firing of rockets into Israeli territory.

The European Union calls on both parties to
alleviate the desperate humanitarian situation of the
civilian population and urges Israel to engage in the
restoration of the destroyed civilian infrastructure. The
Israeli air strikes on Gaza's only power plant have had
a far-reaching impact on Gaza's hospitals, food
production facilities, water and sanitation systems. The
Rafah crossing was open for passage from Egypt to
Gaza on 18 July. In addition to the Rafah crossing, the
European Union urges that other border crossings such
as Karni be opened and remain open to allow at least
the passage of humanitarian aid and basic products to
Gaza and the safe return of Palestinians currently on
the Egyptian side of the border.

The European Union remains particularly
concerned about the detention of elected members of
the Palestinian Government and legislature and calls
for their immediate release.

The European Union commends the efforts of
President Abbas to create the widest possible
consensus in support of the objectives of the road map.
The European Union reiterates that it stands ready to
work with a Palestinian Government that meets and
implements the three principles of non-violence,
recognition of Israel's right to exist and acceptance of
existing agreements and obligations, including the road
map. The European Union encourages progress in the
Palestinian national dialogue to that end.

The European Union is committed to pressing
ahead with the further expansion of the proposed
temporary international mechanism in order to channel
humanitarian aid directly to the Palestinians. The
European Union and its member States have
contributed significantly. The European Union
encourages donors and others in the region to make full
use of the mechanism. The European Union urges
Israel to resume transfers of withheld Palestinian tax
and customs revenues.

This crisis underlines the need for the negotiation
of a just and lasting settlement. The European Union
calls on both parties to demonstrate urgently an active
commitment to the search for a negotiated two-State
solution. The European Union supports the central role
of the Quartet in that process.

