Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I _ thank Mrs. Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, and Ambassador Zlauvinen for their briefings. Over the past 50 years, the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) has minimized the proliferation of nuclear weapons, provided the framework to enable significant levels of nuclear disarmament and allowed States to develop secure, safe and peaceful uses of nuclear energy. It has played a crucial role in providing the basis for our discussions on Iran and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. The United Kingdom is committed to the NPT review process and will work with all partners for a positive outcome. We want to ensure that the upcoming 2020 Review Conference of the Parties to the NPT allows us to hold full and frank discussions with the greatest number of States parties on all pillars of the NPT, reflects on the successes made so far, and sets a collective direction for the future. Our ambition is that the State parties agree a consensus outcome. Let me highlight four of the United Kingdom's contributions to a successful Review Conference. First, we will submit a final national report, setting out how we have implemented the NPT across all three pillars during this cycle. We submitted a draft version during the 2019 NPT Preparatory Committee and have hosted a series of feedback sessions with a wide range of State and civil society representatives and academics. Secondly, we have coordinated the process involving the Council's five permanent members (P-5) since the Preparatory Committee, continuing the excellent work that took place under the Chinese leadership. The United Kingdom hosted a P-5 Directors General conference in London from 12 to 13 February and welcomed there Ambassador Gustavo Zlauvinen and other members of the Bureau for a fruitful exchange of views. P-5 discussions at that conference covered all three pillars of the NPT and included improving transparency and P-5 cooperation on a range of initiatives. Thirdly, in the light of our focus on transparency, the conference included a day for civil society and think tanks to engage with P-5 officials and discuss those important issues. Fourthly, with regard to peaceful uses, P-5 States have been working together to enhance the peaceful uses of nuclear technology. We all fully support the Technical Cooperation Programme of the International Atomic Energy Agency to ensure that the benefits of nuclear technology are accessible to those who need them most. Nevertheless, we do not underestimate the challenges surrounding the Review Conference. We know that some States feel that progress on nuclear disarmament has been slow. The United Kingdom continuously engages with a wide range of States and takes those concerns seriously. The United Kingdom's view is that any meaningful discussion on disarmament must take into account the wider security environment, which is increasingly difficult. We all have a responsibility to work towards a safer, more stable world in which States with nuclear weapons feel able to relinquish them. Concerning the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, which others have raised, the United Kingdom has been clear that we will not sign or ratify the Treaty. Instead, the United Kingdom will continue to promote the step-by-step approach, work for the universalization of the NPT and the early entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, and promote the early commencement and conclusions of negotiations on a fissile material cut-off treaty in the Conference on Disarmament. We must also ensure that the NPT Review Conference gives proper regard to the achievements that it has made possible under its second and third pillars. With regard to its second pillar, the NPT hasplayed an unparalleled role in curtailing the nuclear arms race. Historic predictions were made of 10 or even 20 nuclear-armed States. Today, there remain fewer than 10. Concerning the third pillar, the global peaceful use of nuclear energy allows us to address some of the biggest challenges, from climate change to economic growth. As a direct result of the NPT, we have been able to harness nuclear power to improve the lives of our citizens, for example, in the areas of food, agriculture, health care and, as I mentioned, climate change. For those and other reasons, the United Kingdom continues to believe that the non-proliferation Treaty, approaching its fiftieth anniversary, remains essential to the maintenance of a safe and secure world. We look forward to engaging with all Security Council members and all States parties to achieve a successful outcome at this year's Review Conference and help ensure that the non-proliferation Treaty remains effective and central to ensuring our collective security for many years to come.
