Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I thank you, Sir,
for presiding over this important debate today. I also
wish to acknowledge the presence of the other Ministers.

The Secretary-General, Cabinet Secretary
Mohamed and Commissioner Chergui have each
thoughtfully laid out important issues that we must
address as we seek to give life to the United Nations
peacebuilding efforts in Africa. Many of those themes
are addressed in presidential statement S/PRST/2016/12,
which we have adopted today under Japan's leadership.
I want to now comment on a few of those themes.

The peacebuilding architecture was established a
decade ago to address what former Secretary-General
Kofi Annan described as a gaping hole in the United
Nations capacity to support countries transitioning
from violent conflict to sustainable peace. There
has been progress since then, including through the
recognition that peacebuilding must underlie the
whole of the conflict cycle and this year's resolutions
on sustaining peace. But, as last year's review by the
Advisory Group of Experts found, there continue to be
serious systemic shortcomings.

We recognize that peacebuilding is a task that
extends well beyond the mandate and responsibility
of the Security Council, but supporting effective
peacebuilding is core to the Council's role ofmaintaining
international peace and security. And what the Council
does in this area is critical to the success of work of
the other actors in peacebuilding. Yet fragmentation
of approaches across the United Nations and the wider
international effort continues to be a major obstacle.
We wish to reiterate key areas where we believe the
Council must do better, not just in Africa but especially
in Africa.

First, the Council needs to play a more deliberate
and active role in peacebuilding. Council-mandated
missions contribute directly to creating an enabling
environment for peacebuilding by providing security
and political stability, by facilitating reconciliation and
accountability, and by supporting governance. These
mutually reinforcing peacekeeping and peacebuilding
efforts are most effective when they are planned and
considered from the very earliest stages of a mission.
What the Council does in mandating and ensuring
the implementation of peacebuilding tasks and in
mobilizing the necessary resources is critical to the
success of post-conflict efforts. Making the peace stick
is key to avoiding another conflict spiral.

Secondly, the Council needs to do its part to
ensure that the institutions of governance, security, and
economy that are central to peacebuilding are supported
by a wide range of organizations. Better coordination
with other peacebuilding contributors - including
United Nations agencies, international financial
institutions, regional and bilateral partners, and
donors - is crucial. This is especially the case as
operating environments change. We welcome the
inclusion of language encouraging such cooperation in
the recent resolution 2301 (2016), renewing the mandate
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic.
We hope to see similar provisions included in other
relevant peacekeeping missions.

Even when they are well coordinated, peacebuilding
efforts suffer when the Mission's activities are unable
to be sustained beyond the life of the mission. As we
have seen in countries like Guinea-Bissau, emerging
from conflict and fragility is a long process; it requires
equally long-term engagement by the international
community. If we look at South Sudan or other
situations, too often we focus on a fragile and conflict-
affected State only as long as it takes to resolve the
immediate crisis. Too often, our attention and resources
are pulled to the next crisis.

Thirdly, the Council needs to ensure that the host
State in particular takes early joint ownership and
leadership of relevant peacebuilding activities. That
does not mean that host Governments can dictate
the course of the peacebuilding effort, for all of the
reasons identified by Ambassador Power. The horrific
problems we are seeing in South Sudan only reinforce
the point that national ownership is the greatest
determinant of the success or failure of peacebuilding
efforts. As a means of building public confidence in the
State, United Nations missions should aim to reinforce
national ownership by assisting but not displacing
the delivery of critical services. They should plan for
peacebuilding activities to transition to the host State
as soon as possible. In this context, we also reiterate
our support for resident coordinators to focus on
ensuring the continuity of peacebuilding efforts during
such transitions.
Additionally, ongoing national commitments to
peacebuilding and political stability require the vocal
support of the Council and regional organizations and
ensuring that local leaders deliver on their promises.
The African Union and the regional economic
communities, such as the Economic Community ofWest
African States and the Southern African Development
Community, have demonstrated the important role they
can play in encouraging political leaders to maintain
their commitments to peacebuilding. The Security
Council should support these efforts and more actively
seek the Views of regional organizations on African
peacebuilding. In so doing, we should seek to enhance
regional ownership of peacebuilding in Africa.

Finally, the peacebuilding architecture is a valuable
framework for sustaining peace in Africa. As we have
emphasized regularly, there is room for improving
interaction between the Peacebuilding Commission and
the Security Council. We need to be much more joined
up. Maintaining a significant disconnect between our
respective efforts because of artificial ideological
constructs about the respective roles of the Council and
the Peacebuilding Commission is a major impediment
to our shared objective of sustainable peace.

We reiterate our strong support for close Council
engagement and meaningful dialogue with country
configurations, moving beyond the briefings to which we
are currently constrained. This could be accomplished
through informal formats if necessary, similar to
informal consultations with troop-contributing
countries. We also believe that it makes sense for
country configuration chairs to participate in Council
missions where feasible and where interests overlap.

The themes I have covered are not new. Our task
is to translate them into a greater and clearer sense of
purpose in the way the Council and other stakeholders
support peacebuilding. The Council's readiness to
tackle the challenges of peacebuilding in Africa will
be judged by the results; in our willingness to prioritize
the long-term sustainability of peacebuilding efforts;
in our willingness to work more closely with regional
organizations and the Peacebuilding Commission; and
in our willingness to encourage greater coordination
and longer-term planning of the peacebuilding activities
we authorize.

