The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity.

I want to join those who have taken the floor before
me to thank our briefers, Deputy Secretary-General
Jan Eliasson and Ambassador Colin Keating, for
their briefings. They have not only provided profound
insights and fresh perspectives on today's subject
of discussion, but they have also established some
institutional memory for the future. I want to sincerely
thank Ambassador Keating in particular for his
recognition of Nigeria's critical role in condemning the
genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda and reinforcing
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda in
the Security Council in 1994. I thank him very much;
we feel inspired by that recognition.

The concept note for today's briefing (S/20l4/265, annex) invites us to consider various issues related to
the prevention of genocide. I shall attempt to address
the evolution of the preventive capabilities of the United
Nations since the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi in
Rwanda, early warning mechanisms, fighting impunity
through justice, and lessons learned.

On the evolution of the preventive capabilities of
the United Nations since 1994, Nigeria would like to
acknowledge the important steps that the United Nations
has taken, and I want to name them specifically. During
the tenth anniversary of the genocide in 2004, then-
Secretary-General Kofi Annan presented a five-point
plan of action aimed at preventing genocide. The
elements of the plan were designed to, first, prevent
armed conflict which may provide a provide a pretext
for genocide; secondly, protect civilians in armed
conflict, including through the use of United Nations
peacekeepers; thirdly, end impunity through judicial
action in national and international courts; fourthly,
gather information and set up early warning systems;
and fifthly, take swift and decisive action, including
through the use of military force.

One year later, at the 2005 World Summit, leaders
from across the world agreed on the responsibility
to protect populations against the four mass
atrocities - genocide, ethnic cleansing, war crimes
and crimes against humanity. We appreciate the
Secretary-General's past reports on the subject in
which he has proposed tools for genocide prevention,
including the report of January 2009 on "Implementing
the responsibility to protect" (A/63/677), the July
2010 report on "Early warning, assessment and the
responsibility to protect" (A/64/864), and the July 2013
report on "Responsibility to protect: State responsibility
and prevention" (S/2013/399).

In July 2009, the Secretary-General presented his
January 2009 report to the General Assembly, and in
the same month a General Assembly plenary debate
on the responsibility to protect was held (A/63/PV.97).
The debate presented delegations with an opportunity
to demonstrate their support for implementing their
commitments under the 2005 World Summit Outcome
Document (resolution 60/1). Similarly, following the
release of the July 2010 report, the General Assembly,
on 9 August 2010, convened an informal interactive
dialogue on the main themes of the report. Nigeria
was one of the eight countries that participated in that
dialogue.

In addition to the periodic reports, the Secretary-
General has made some significant appointments
since the genocide in Rwanda that will help in the
fight against genocide, which has been mentioned by
various speakers this morning. We therefore commend
the Secretary-General for appointing the Special
Adviser for the Prevention of Genocide and a Special
Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect. We also
commend the Secretary-General for his Rights Up
Front initiative, which contains six critical actions to
help the Secretariat coordinate the Organization's work
in the area of human rights. One of the actions requires
the United Nations to provide Member States with
candid information concerning people at risk of various
violations of human rights.

Nigeria would like to underline the importance of
adherence to the principle of early warning mechanisms
and the need for a timely and decisive response. Today,

there is a plethora of theatres of conflict around the
world, and urgent actions are required to halt those
conflicts and indeed address their root causes. In some
of those places, the situation is reaching a critical
threshold and the risk of mass atrocity crimes is very
high. The benefits of an early warning mechanism is
that it enhances the chances of detecting those signs
that point to the possibility that genocide may indeed
occur. With that comes the added benefit of allowing
for preventive measures to be taken in a timely manner.

Nigeria remains committed to the fight against
impunity. We believe that impunity must be addressed
resolutely wherever it occurs anywhere in world. The
fight against impunity and the prevention of mass
atrocity crimes are national priorities for us, as clearly
demonstrated through the various instruments instituted
to address that menace. Our beliefin the need for global
action against mass atrocity crimes and security threats
to humankind underpins our ratification of the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC), the
Arms Trade Treaty and other relevant international
legal instruments.

Nigeria appreciates the important role of the ICC
in fighting genocide and other mass atrocity crimes.
Perpetrators of genocide must be held accountable
in order to send a strong and unambiguous message
of zero tolerance on the part of the international
community. We recall that at the 27 January New
York launch of Kwibuka20, the commemoration of the
twentieth anniversary of the Rwandan genocide, the
Secretary-General aptly stated that we have learned
important lessons. He also emphasized that genocide is
not a single event but a process that requires planning
and resources to carry out, and that with adequate
information, mobilization, courage and political will,
genocide can indeed be prevented.

Several questions arise from that thesis of the
Secretary-General. How can we obtain information
to prevent genocide? Who needs to be mobilized and
by whom in order to prevent genocide? And how do
we generate the courage and political will to prevent
genocide? Those are key questions to which we are
all collectively responsible to provide adequate and
genuine responses.

Ultimately, it all boils down to the choices that
we all decide to make. The choice of compassion over
hatred, the choice of inclusion over exclusion, and the
choice of peace over war are always ours to make.
Today is an important reminder of the far-reaching
consequences of those choices. Let the memories
of Rwanda be a constant and visible reminder of the
necessity of making the right choice - the choice of
peace. Let us muster the courage that makes us too
strong for fear and too noble for anger or revenge. Let
us eschew neutrality.

In 2010, while we served on the Security Council,
I had occasion at a retreat of the Council to remind
the Council that, according to the great poet Dante,
neutrality is not an option because, again according to
Dante, the hottest corner of hell is reserved for those
who preserve their neutrality in times of moral crisis.

We want to take this opportunity to recognize
the remarkable progress that Rwanda has made over
the past 20 years in healing the wounds of genocide
and advancing the process of reconciliation. We are
greatly inspired by that, and we join the international
community in the adoption of resolution 2150 (2014)
today in the determined chorus of "never again".

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.
