Mr. Antonio (spoke in French): At the outset, allow
me, Sir, to warmly congratulate your country on its
accession to the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. I would also like to thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon and the President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Peter Maurer, for
their very informative briefings this morning.

I would also like to welcome many dignitaries
who are present here today, particularly Mr. Faustin
Archange Touadera, President of the Central African
Republic, who gave us the views of his country and
its priorities, which we believe all partners must listen
to carefully, bearing in mind the principle of national
ownership, if we want our efforts to succeed in the
Central African Republic.

We do not need long speeches or learned references
in order to emphasize the importance of the protection
of civilians, which plays an ever more central role in
United Nations peacekeeping operations and regional
peacekeeping operations.

For the African Union, the protection of civilians
is a problem that is integrated into the perception of
security, and it is a major challenge for peace. That
concept, which the African Union renders as the
principle ofnon-indifference to human suffering, is one
of the most remarkable developments accompanying
the passage of the Organization of African Unity to the
African Union.

In this context, the entire nomenclature of the
founding and regulatory acts of the AU is in line with
this philosophy, which aims primarily to preserve the
peace and security of populations in all circumstances,
the latter being seen as a key factor in social and
economic development. In this regard, for the African
Union, peace and security is a fundamental prerequisite
for any development policy as well as for integration of
the continent. The protection of civilians is understood
within this overall philosophy and is an integral part
of it.

While it is true that the context of peacekeeping
has changed dramatically over the last decade, the same
cannot be said of the concept and practice of United
Nations peacekeeping which, setting aside some notable
exceptions, continues to be underpinned by the formal
principles ofimpartiality, neutrality and the limited use
of force. In contrast, the practice of the African Union
in this area is based on the principle ofnon-indifference
to human suffering, which in practice often leads to
the deployment of robust missions to protect civilians.
Accordingly, since 2003, the AU has mandated the
deployment of more than 70,000 uniformed personnel
and about 1,500 civilians in the framework of nine
deployed operations with robust mandates, which,
most often, have as their main tasks the protection
of civilians, the neutralization of armed or terrorist
groups, and the promotion of State authority.

Alongside the deployment of peacekeeping
operations on the ground, the African Union is striving
to strengthen its long-term capacity through the
operationalization of the African Standby Force, which
provides the capacity for rapid deployment in the event
of genocide, war crimes or crimes against humanity. It
is a matter of the African Union intervening without
delay to save lives. These interventions can be
performed with or without the consent of any member
State whose peoples' lives are threatened.

This approach, which is in tension with United
Nations practice, requires us to think about the model
of cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union with a View to achieving effective and
modern peacekeeping in the service ofthe protection of
civilians. From our perspective, this approach involves,
on the one hand, the search for the right balance
between preserving important aspects of traditional
principles of peacekeeping and, on the other, the need
for increased use of force. It also requires a thorough
review of the limits of peacekeeping, including when it
comes to the fight against terrorist groups.

Instituting a more consolidated model of
cooperation between the United Nations and African
Union could offer appropriate answers to some of these
existential challenges. In this regard, it is essential to
consolidate the shared responsibility that begins to
emerge when the African Union acts as first responder
to stabilize the situation in countries experiencing
conflict, creating conditions for the United Nations to
deploy peacekeeping operations at a later stage.

