Mr. Davide (Philippines): At the outset, the
Philippines wishes to do three things. First, we would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for holding this
meeting to discuss the latest report of the Secretary-
General on Timor-Leste (S/2008/501) and, at the same
time, to congratulate the Belgian presidency on its very
able stewardship of the Council during the month of
August. Secondly, we would like to welcome His
Excellency Mr. Zacarias Albano da Costa, Foreign
Minister of Timor-Leste, and to thank him for
honouring us with his presence today and for his
important statement this morning. Thirdly, we would
also like to thank Mr. Atul Khare, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
briefing and for his major accomplishments.

Regardless of the vicissitudes of time, the
Philippines maintains an excellent relationship with
Timor-Leste. The Philippines participated in the
International Force in East Timor in 1999, as well as in
all succeeding United Nations operations in Timor-
Leste. The Philippines will, in whatever way possible
within its capacity, support Timor Leste's nation-
building efforts. The Philippines' own experience and
current problems in the areas of peace and security
binds it in solidarity with the aspirations of Timor-
Leste.

The Philippines views the positive developments
in Timor-Leste with great satisfaction. In that
connection, the leaders and the people of Timor-Leste
with great satisfaction should be commended for their
demonstrated capacity in recent months to overcome
crises of grave proportions. Their endurance and
resiliency following the events in February of this year
may yet be a model for others in similar circumstances.
As indicated in the Secretary-General's report,
11 February was the first real test of Timor-Leste's
institutions. There can be no doubt at all that Timor-
Leste has thus far passed the test ably and credibly.
7

Nonetheless, there is still a lot more to be done in
many areas. As Timor-Leste courageously and
persistently works to stay on course on the long,
narrow and difficult road to nation-building, it is
imperative for the United Nations and the international
community to continue to invest time, effort and
resources to assist Timor-Leste to ensure that, in the
end, it will be able to proudly stand on its own. The
Philippines very respectfully submits that those
investments may focus on at least three key areas.

First, with regard to security, there should be no
let up in the support for ongoing efforts to reconstitute
the National Police Force of Timor-Leste (PNTL) and
ensure its eventual resumption of policing
responsibilities. The United Nations Mission in Timor-
Leste (UNMIT) should continue its key role in
rebuilding the PNTL, but should consider national
ownership as a central element in that process. It must
facilitate a gradual transition and, at the same time,
continue to provide support in terms of monitoring,
giving advice when requested, offering operational
support and, in extremis, assuming interim law
enforcement responsibilities, if required and requested.

Secondly, on socio-economic development, the
Philippines reiterates that the creation of job
opportunities, especially for young people, and the
alleviation of widespread poverty should remain major
priorities. It has been noted that there has been no
significant progress since independence, in 2002, in the
area of poverty alleviation or in the achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). However,
steps are being taken to proceed in the right direction,
such as including addressing the needs of young people
and the generation of employment in the national
priorities for 2008. The Philippines specifically
welcomes the signing, on 8 August 2008, of the 2009-
2013 United Nations Development Assistance
Framework (UNDAF) between Timor-Leste and the
United Nations. We expect that UNDAF's five-year
$314 million programme will address the lack of
progress in poverty alleviation and in the achievement
of the MDGs. UNDAF will serve to guide the support
provided by the United Nations country team in Timor-
Leste. It is hoped that all concerned will work closely
with the Government of Timor-Leste to support the
implementation of UNDAF.
Thirdly and finally, on judicial reform, there can
be no disagreement at all on the view that no
democratic country can achieve social and political

stability, economic growth and prosperity and justice
and peace unless it has an independent, effective and
efficient judiciary. The judiciary is the last bulwark of
democracy, the guardian of the rule of law and the
protector of the people's rights. That kind of ajudiciary
promotes and strengthens good governance. Having
personally dedicated more than seven years of my
public life to the reform of the judiciary in the
Philippines, I am heartened to hear that attention
continues to be paid to the strengthening of the
judiciary of Timor-Leste, including as regards the
ongoing capacity development of judicial personnel.

The Philippines supports and encourages
UNMIT's involvement in the training courses for
national court actors undertaken by the Legal Training
Centre. It is reported that several persons have been
sworn in as probationary judges, prosecutors and
public defenders. They will receive on-the-job training
and mentoring from international and national mentors
for a one-year period. Thereafter, they will be
evaluated and sworn in officially. We look forward to
more reform programmes, such as on institutional
integrity, access to justice by the poor and effective
court systems and procedures, with the aim of ensuring
the expeditious delivery of fair, equal and impartial
justice and strict adherence to the rule of law.

We are pleased to inform the Council that, from
11 to 12 August 2008, the Philippines hosted a State
visit by President Jose Ramos-Horta of Timor-Leste.
On the occasion of that visit, three important bilateral
agreements were signed by the relevant ministers and
witnessed by the Presidents of the Philippines and
Timor-Leste. Those agreements include a memorandum
of agreement on academic cooperation, a memorandum
of understanding for fisheries cooperation and a
memorandum of understanding between the
Philippines foreign service and Timor-Leste's Ministry
of Foreign Affairs on the training of Timor-Leste
diplomats.

The memorandum of understanding on academic
cooperation, referred to by President Ramos-Horta as
his "favorite project", encourages cooperation in
various educational activities, in particular as regards
the training of Timorese students in the English
language in Philippine colleges and universities. The
memorandum of understanding on fisheries aims to
promote cooperation in the sustainable development
and responsible management of fisheries, as well as to
promote mutual consultation and economic cooperation

08-4651]
on agreed areas in fisheries. The memorandum of
understanding on the training of Timor-Leste diplomats
institutionalizes and enhances collaboration in human
resources training and development in the field of
diplomacy.

In conclusion, the Philippines reiterates its
conviction that Timor-Leste is still one of the best
examples of a successful international enterprise
engineered through the combined cooperative efforts of
United Nations regional players and partners. The
international community must maintain its attention on
Timor-Leste in order to keep it on the track of
development, progress, prosperity and stability as a
strong democracy under the rule of law.

