Mr. Somavia (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish): In
its report to the United Nations in 1991, my delegation
stated that

"The Government of Chile unequivocally
condemns terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, irrespective of the place in which
terrorist acts occur, of the persons who perpetrate
them or of the causes or motives for their
commission." (A/46/346, p. 9, para. 1)

Chile supports the draft resolution before us and
vigorously condemns the assassination attempt against a
world leader, statesman and legitimate authority of a
country that is a friend of Chile's, namely, President
Mubarak of Egypt. We express our solidarity with the
countries of Africa in their revulsion at this act carried out
by terrorists in Addis Ababa, which, being the headquarters
of the Organization of African Unity (OAU), constitutes the
political capital of Africa. In dealing with this matter, I
wish to pay special tribute to Egypt and to its President.
Fortunately, the attempt failed. But one thing is clear: there
are criminals who have not yet been brought to justice.

This outright rejection reflects the position of the
international community in this matter. General Assembly
resolution 49/60 states that

"The States Members of the United Nations
solemnly reaffirm their unequivocal condemnation of
all acts, methods and practices of terrorism as criminal
and unjustifiable, wherever and by whomever
committed, including those which jeopardize the
friendly relations among States and peoples and
threaten the territorial integrity and security of States".
(resolution 49/60, annex, part 1, para. 1)

The unanimous decision of the General Assembly
expressed in that resolution is reinforced by the Convention
on the Prevention and Punishment of Crimes against
Internationally Protected Persons, including Diplomatic
Agents, which applies particularly in this case involving a
Head of State.

In this context, we support the decisions of the
Organization of African Unity in this matter, and we hope
that this draft resolution will provide support for the steps
being taken by the OAU. In no way does it interfere with
or replace or duplicate the work of that regional organ.

We emphatically appeal to the Government of Sudan
to comply urgently with the decisions of the OAU in this
regard, which are contained in the resolution we will be
adopting today.

Chile wishes to take this opportunity to reiterate the
need for the resolutions of the General Assembly, as well
as the various existing international agreements and
conventions relevant to the fight against terrorism, to be
constantly and effectively promoted and publicized by the
United Nations in order to make their implementation
ever more effective.

We hope that the subject we are dealing with in the
Security Council today will help us deepen international
cooperation in combating terrorism. By adopting this draft
resolution, the Security Council will be providing clear
guidance in this field. We do not want the culture of
impunity to continue. Chile hopes that the actions
entrusted to the Secretary-General, in cooperation with the
OAU, will yield positive results and that it will not be
necessary for the Security Council to continue to deal
with this matter in the future.

