Ms. Juul (Norway): I commend you, Mr. President,
for including this matter on the Security Council agenda.

As a country with a long coastline and a large
maritime sector, Norway is concerned that piracy,
fisheries crime and trafficking in people, drugs,
weapons and protected species are threatening the
legitimate use of the oceans. The livelihoods and
security of coastal communities are at stake. Enhanced
global and regional cooperation is required. Coastal
States must govern their territorial waters and their
exclusive economic zones to the best of their abilities.

The Gulf of Guinea is among the areas where
maritime security is a challenge. The members of the
Gulf of Guinea Commission, the Economic Community
of Central African States and the Economic Community
of West African States took an important decision
in 2013 when they adopted the Code of Conduct
concerning the Repression of Piracy, Armed Robbery
against Ships and Illicit Maritime Activity in West and
Central Africa. Norway remains a committed partner
in support of the implementation of the Code.

TheWesternIndianOceanwas the areamostaffected
by piracy until 2012. The Contact Group on Piracy off
the Coast of Somalia was able to curb those activities
through a series of coordinated measures. However,
pirates continue to test our readiness. The situation in
West and East Africa differ, but both require a viable
legal solution. In our View, it is particularly important
to prosecute the men in Somalia who organize piracy
groups. Norway supports the efforts of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) to assist
countries in drafting anti-piracy legislation. I commend
the countries that have acquired the legal instruments
necessary to prosecute pirates who are arrested outside
their territorial waters. Kenya, Mauritius, Seychelles
and Togo are among those countries.

Another of Norway's priorities is to assist our
multilateral partners in the fight against maritime
piracy. One example is our active support to
INTERPOL, deploying police officers to Seychelles for
a period of four years. Building up local, sustainable
police is a consistent way to prevent transnational
organized crime.

Fisheries crime poses a threat to the world's
fisheries resources and to economic development.
Around 20 per cent of the fish on the market is caught
illegally. Developing countries, and particularly small
island States, are hardest hit. As a country that relies
heavily on a sustainable blue economy, Norway has
long advocated increased international cooperation and
an effective legal framework to fight that type of crime.
Norway provides substantial support to a number of
projects to combat fisheries crime.

The Agreement on Port State Measures to Prevent,
Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated
Fishing includes effective measures and places special
emphasis on capacity-building in developing countries
to enhance their efforts to implement the agreement.
Norway has allocated almost $5 million in funding
for UNODC efforts to combat fisheries crime, as well
as significant resources, in cooperation with the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, to
fight illegal, unregulated and unreported fishing.

We call upon States that have not yet done so to
become parties to relevant international instruments
for combating organized crime at sea, including the
protocols supplementing the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime, and to take
measures to ensure their implementation.

