The Dominican Republic condemns the cowardly act of terrorism that took place in France. We express our condolences to the families of the victims. I thank the presidency for having convened this meeting on women and peace and security, and recognize the leadership of the Secretary-General and Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka in this area. Our appreciation goes also to the briefers for bringing their experience and recommendations to the Council. Without a doubt, gender equality is a predictor of peace. This year marks a historic milestone for the women and peace and security agenda, with not only the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) but also the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations. This juncture increases our determination to step up efforts towards the full implementation of the women and peace and security agenda. Regrettably, as we have heard today, we are still falling short of our goals. This calls for not only ongoing political support and determination but also concerted action. In speaking of full implementation, we would underscore the need to recognize the interrelated, inseparable and mutually reinforcing nature of all its elements. In our view, full implementation involves addressing the intersecting forms of discrimination many women face, as well as the removal of the structural barriers that prevent the inclusive participation of women in conflict prevention and peacebuilding. We may agree or disagree on certain policies, but it is unacceptable that in the twenty-first century, in the name of cultural, traditional or religious norms, women's rights continue to be undermined. In too many contexts, women's rights violations are deeply rooted in inequality and widespread discrimination against women, and yet they are often swept under the rug. The interconnections with the commitments made under the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women and its general recommendation no. 30 cannot be ignored. Civil society and women human rights defenders, as well as their civic space, must be protected by States and supported without reserve by the Council and the United Nations so that they can carry out their critical work without fear of reprisal. Many peace agreements do not include gender provisions that would adequately address women's security and peacebuilding needs - another reason why the full, equal and meaningful participation of women and young women in peace processes and in decision-making is not negotiable. It has to be at the core of any peace process for it to be credible and sustainable. For example, women organizations' repeated calls for disarmament and arms control remain unanswered. The Council should not lose sight of the gendered impacts of small arms and light weapons. Decisions, planning and efforts aimed at preventing their illicit trafficking must involve the participation of women. Conflict prevention also requires converting a culture of impunity into one of accountability, including redress for victims of conflict-related sexual violence and gender-based violence. The coronavirus disease is disproportionately impacting women and girls, particularly in fragile and conflict-affected areas, threatening decades of progress towards women's rights and equality. Nevertheless, against all odds, women have become critical figures in responding to the virus in their communities and countries. We continue to encourage the inclusion of gender provisions in the design, planning, implementation and evaluation of peace operations. An increase in the number of women peacekeepers is key, as is the inclusion of gender-disaggregated data in mission reports and the deployment of gender advisers and women's protection advisers with the necessary level of seniority. The Dominican Republic is honoured to co-chair the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security this year. The Group is a key platform for improving the implementation of that agenda on the ground. We encourage the effective use of the information and recommendations derived from it, which would enable us to better monitor and coordinate implementation activities. As we continue to face challenges in implementing the women and peace and security agenda, it is clear that the focus must be on delivering on the ambitious goals of its full normative framework. All root causes of conflict need to be addressed, including gender inequality and discrimination against women and girls, violations of international law and emerging threats to international peace and security such as climate change. Our resolve to fulfil those commitments has not waned; rather, the sense of urgency has increased. Let us ensure that the gains achieved in these past 20 years are not derailed and work together to strengthen them as we move forward. Finally, Danai Gurira just told us that the Security Council has repeatedly invited women to share their experiences and serve as an inspiration; it is the turn of the Council to show that we are listening. The message is clear.
