Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): My delegation is grateful for the briefings
that we have heard this morning and welcomes this
morning's constructive discussion. We believe that,
whatever the outcome of the referendum may be, it will
not only determine the future and status of the
Southern Sudan, but will also impact significantly on
the overall political situation in the region.

The Russian Federation hopes that the results of
the referendum will prepare the groundwork for the
post-conflict settlement process and the further
sustainable development of the Sudan. We welcome the
strong commitment by the Government of the Sudan to
implement the Comprehensive Peace Agreement,
including the peaceful and timely holding of the
referendum on self-determination for the South of the
country.

My delegation notes the parties' peaceful and
orderly conduct of the voter registration process for the
referendum. We agree with the assessment of the

Secretary-General's Panel on the Referenda in the
Sudan that completion of that process will lay the
foundation for the voting on 9 January 2011.

The Russian Federation will respect whatever
choice is made by the people of the Southern Sudan,
but it is important that outsiders not prejudge the
results of the referendum. We must bear in mind that
the counting process for the referendum is likely to
take a certain amount of time. My country is counting
on the constructive role that the Secretary-General's
Panel is called upon to play in that respect. We
welcome the ongoing dialogue among the Sudanese
parties on a broad range of issues of importance in the
post-referendum period.

For the Russian Federation, the matter of priority
is settlement of the Abyei situation. We are convinced
that the Sudanese parties are capable of resolving the
broad range of disagreements that have arisen among
them, while counting on the willingness of the
international community to provide all necessary
support.

Future cooperation among the Sudanese parties is
key to the full implementation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement, including the six-month transition
period following the referendum. What is most
important is to maintain peace in the Sudan, thus
guaranteeing stability in the subregion. Of course, the
chances of achieving such an outcome would improve
if a general political agreement in Darfur could be
reached as soon as possible.

