Mr. De Antueno (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by thanking the High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for
presenting his report on the implementation of the
General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (S/2013/646, annex).

Argentina reaffirms its support for the Dayton
Agreement and the protection and preservation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina's sovereignty and territorial
integrity. We underscore their importance, as well as
respect for the rule of law, in ensuring durable peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

First of all, we deplore the fact that the negative
trend of previous years has not been curbed, as
underscored in the High Representative's prior report
(see S/2013/263). We are worried about reports on the
ongoing challenges to the Federation's institutional
capacities, as well as the non-implementation of rulings
of the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We highlight the functioning institutions of the
Republika Srpska and the Government's further efforts
to resolve economic and social difficulties. However,
there is ongoing concern over reports of statements
made by high-ranking officials of the Republika
Srpska advocating the future dissolution of the State
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, thereby challenging the
basic provisions of the General Framework Agreement
for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the country's
territorial integrity.

My country also welcomes the fact that despite
tensions during preparations, the ceremony to
commemorate the victims of the 1995 Srebrenica
genocide took place without major incident.

With regard to the Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Argentina welcomes the fact that the
extended political crisis has ebbed and that tangible
progress has been achieved towards reaching agreement
in the appointment of judges to the Federation
Constitutional Court and the subgroup responsible for
matters of vital national interest. We hope that pending
matters in the way ofthe group's resuming its work will
be resolved promptly. In that regard, we highlight the
good offices efforts undertaken by the Office of the
High Representative.

We are concerned about the possibility that the lack
of significant and tangible measures to implement the
pending prerequisites of the five benchmarks and the
two conditions that are necessary for the closure of the
High Representative's Office will not be met. For that
reason, we welcome the legislative proposals linked
to State property and defense property. We call upon
the political parties to show commitment in seeking
consensus.

Of persistent concern is the fact that it has been
impossible to hold elections in the city of Mostar to
elect local authorities due to lack of implementation
of the 2010 ruling of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitutional Court on the city's electoral system.
Argentina reiterates its call to the political parties to
redouble efforts in order to achieve agreement on the
implementation of the ruling of the Constitutional
Court, ensuring respect for the rule of law and thus
enabling the holding of local elections.

With regard to implementation of the decision of
the European Court of Human Rights in the Sejdie-
Finci case, we reiterate the appeal made to the political
leadership of Bosnia and Herzegovina to renew
the efforts on reaching an agreement to ensure the
protection of the rights of non-constituent peoples.

Finally, Argentina reiterates its support for the work
carried out by the Office of the High Representative in
support of the implementation of the provisions of the
Dayton Peace Agreement and the efforts made to ensure
that the governmental entities are able to fulfil the
provisions of the Agreement and the State Constitution.
We consider it necessary to continue to provide support
and sufficient political resources to the Office of the
High Representative to enable it to fulfil its mandate
under the framework of the Dayton Agreement.

