Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank Ms. Mueller, Mr. Khiari
and Ms. Marcaillou for their briefings.

The situation in north-eastern Syria is a major
concern. A few days ago, the Council expressed its
deep concern about the growing terrorist threat and
the deterioration in the humanitarian situation in
the north-east. For France, those concerns remain
valid. The European Union has clearly expressed its
condemnation of Turkey's unilateral military action,
as what is happening in north-eastern Syria is serious.
The gains made after several years of effective fighting
against Da'esh, carried out together with the Syrian
Democratic Forces, are in jeopardy. The threats posed
by the spread of terrorists and the strengthening of
underground Da'esh cells is real. Responding to them
is our priority. That is why France has called for the
holding of a ministerial meeting of the members of the
Coalition against Da'esh in the near future.

The impact of the offensive on the humanitarian
situation is significant. France will do everything
possible in its power to maintain its assistance. The
President of the Republic has decided to allocate
€10 million in emergency aid to meet needs. France
also underscores the decisive role being played by
non-governmental organizations that are already
present in the north-east.

The European Union will withhold funding for
stabilization and development efforts if the necessary
conditions for the return of refugees are not met.
In that regard, we take note of the memorandum
of understanding reached by Turkey and Russia on
Tuesday. Our priority is that the truce be extended
and that a solution to the crisis be found through
diplomatic means. To that end, the President of France
has expressed his willingness to engage in a frank and
exacting discussion with Turkey, in cooperation with
his European partners.

No matter what, the truce must be supported by
progress in three areas: pursuing the struggle against
terrorism, the protection of civilians and the rapid
resumption of the political process. All must respect
international humanitarian law. It is non-negotiable.
The protection of civilians must be a top priority. We
condemn attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure,
in particular humanitarian and medical infrastructure.

The intensification of fighting in the north-west
in recent days is unacceptable. Every effort must be
made to ensure that the ceasefire in Idlib is respected.
The fight against terrorism is a crucial issue, which
no one disputes. It cannot be cited, however, to justify
violations of international humanitarian law. Those who
commit terrorist acts will have to face justice. We call
on all parties to cooperate with the various mechanisms
established by the United Nations to combat impunity.
We must spare no effort to ensure safe and
unhindered humanitarian access throughout Syria.
I reiterate the vital and irreplaceable need for cross-
border humanitarian aid. We call on the Council to show
unity and to shoulder its responsibility in preserving
that critical gain through the renewal of resolution 2165
(2014). There is no alternative to providing assistance
to the millions of people in need of it.

In this difficult situation, we must remain ready
to act in support of the Syrian political process, which
remains the only path to peace. Resolution 2254 (2015)
remains our road map. All of its provisions must be
implemented. The Council welcomed the announcement
of the agreement on the Constitutional Committee.
It must meet in Geneva to begin its work as soon as
possible. We support the efforts of Geir Pedersen. This
is the first step towards a genuine inter-Syrian process.

The launch of the Constitutional Committee is a
starting point, but progress must be made in parallel
on the other aspects of the political process, which
means creating a safe and neutral environment and
silencing the weapons throughout Syria. It also requires
confidence-building measures, in particular the release
of detained and abducted persons. Light must be shed
on forced disappearances.

Such an environment is imperative to holding of free
elections, monitored by the United Nations, in which all
Syrians, including those who had to flee because of the
war, must be able to participate. All those factors are
key to achieving a credible political transition. Until
that transition is definitively under way, France, like
its European Union partners, will not contribute to
financing the reconstruction. The situation in Syria is
serious. There are many challenges, but France is more
determined than ever to work with its partners to build
peace in Syria.

