Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, Mr. President, allow me to thank
you for convening this important meeting. We
especially appreciate the considerable efforts made by
France and its leadership in this regard. We would also
like to express our thanks to Secretary-General Kofi
Annan for his continuing follow-up on this issue and
for the important statement he made at the beginning of
this meeting. I would also like to express our thanks to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Olara Otunnu, and to Ms. Carol Bellamy,
Executive Director of the United Nations Children's
Fund (UNICEF), for their efforts in following up on the
issues before the Security Council related to children.

The issue of children and armed conflict is very
important. The fact that the Security Council is
meeting for a third time to debate this issue, including
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2002/ 1299), and
to discuss the implementation of resolution 1379
(2001) and previous resolutions shows the importance
and seriousness that the Security Council attaches to
this issue and to its follow-up. We hope that this
meeting will lead to an effective plan to protect
children in situations of armed conflict in general and
under foreign occupation in particular.

The delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic has
very carefully read the report of the Secretary-General.
The report refers to real problems that the world's
children face. We fully support the Secretary-General's
view, expressed in his statement this morning, on the
need to integrate the protection of children into all
aspects related to the maintenance of international
peace and security.

Reports submitted to the Security Council over
the past year have led us to concentrate on the plight of
children affected by armed conflict. We believe that the
plight of young girls affected by armed conflict
deserves more attention and follow-up by the Security
Council.

The way that the Israeli occupation authorities
have killed hundreds of Palestinian children has been
etched in our conscience and our memory. Muhammad
Al-Durrah, the child killed next to his father, and Iman
Hajju, the baby girl whose body was desecrated by the
occupying forces' bullets, must be remembered. The
perpetrators of such tragedies must be brought to
justice.

The Security Council has attached great
importance to the issue of the recruitment of children
in armed conflict. Presidential statements and Security
Council resolutions have urged parties to conflicts to
cease recruiting children in armed conflicts, whether
they be in Africa, Asia, or any other areas of conflict.
In our region, we have witnessed the effects of armed
conflict on children. We believe that the situation of
children under foreign occupation must be dealt with
seriously in order to address that catastrophic situation
in a cooperative effort to put an end to the suffering of
thousands of innocent children.

This in no way implies that we wish to focus on
certain elements at the expense of other important
aspects. We believe that all issues referred to in the
provisions of resolution 1379 (2001) must be taken up
on an equal footing. The resolution contains very
important provisions on the protection of children in
armed conflict and under foreign occupation.

My delegation believes that the best way to
address issues relating to the recruitment of children
and their protection in armed conflict must be based on
a request from the parties concerned and an immediate
end to the enlistment and recruitment of children. We
believe that yet another important element is to
ascertain the veracity of information submitted to the
Security Council on situations in which the enlistment
of children in armed conflict in some countries has
been alleged. We also believe that it is important to
ensure respect for States' obligations under
international agreements, particularly the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
and to urge all States to fulfil their obligations in
accordance with the 1949 Geneva Convention relative
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Times of War.
In our region, many serious breaches of that
Convention have occurred under the Israeli occupation
of Arab lands.

We further believe that it is of utmost importance
to focus greater attention on the root causes of conflict
and on the motivations and reasons for the enlistment
of children. That will ensure the appropriate way of
addressing this issue in a definitive manner.

Syria attaches special importance to issues
relating to children and to their care. We follow up
national plans at the highest political levels in relation
to child-related issues. At the level of international
cooperation, the Syrian Government has agreed to sign
the two Optional Protocols to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child, which it ratified in 1993. Syria was
among the first States to ratify the Convention,
proceeding from its conviction of the importance of the
Convention's provisions to ensure the protection and
well-being of children everywhere.

Syria believes that children represent our hope
and our future. We believe that, in that respect, children
must enjoy well-being and attention. The international
community must therefore make every possible effort
to safeguard that hope and that future.

