The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Egeland for the clarifications and answers he has
provided.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the
matter of protection of civilians in armed conflict.
The Council recalls all its relevant resolutions, in
particular resolution 1265 (1999) of 17

September 1999 and resolution 1296 (2000) of
19 April 2000 on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, as well as statements by its
Presidents, and reiterates its commitment to
address the widespread impact of armed conflict
on civilians.

"The Security Council reaffirms its strong
condemnation of all acts of violence targeting
civilians or other protected persons under
international law. The Council is gravely
concerned that civilians are increasingly targeted
by combatants and armed elements during armed
conflict, in particular women, children and other
vulnerable groups, including refugees and
internally displaced persons, and recognizes the
negative impact this will have on durable peace
and national reconciliation. The Council also
reaffirms its condemnation of all incitements to
violence against civilians in situations of armed
conflict, in particular the use of media to incite
hatred and violence. The Security Council urges
all parties to armed conflict, including non-State
parties, to put an end to such practices.

"The Security Council reiterates its call to
all parties to armed conflict, including non-State
parties, to comply fully with the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations and with rules and
principles of international law, in particular
international humanitarian law and, as applicable,
human rights and refugee law, and to implement
fully the relevant decisions of the Security
Council. The Security Council recalls the
obligations of all States to ensure respect for
international humanitarian law, including the four
Geneva Conventions, and emphasizes the
responsibility of States to end impunity and to
prosecute those responsible for genocide, war
crimes, crimes against humanity and serious
violations of humanitarian law. It further calls on
all States which have not already done so to
consider ratifying or acceding to major
instruments of international humanitarian, human
rights and refugee law, and to take appropriate
measures to implement them.

"The Security Council underlines the
importance of safe and unhindered access of
humanitarian personnel and assistance to civilians
in armed conflict in accordance with international
law. The Security Council reiterates its call to all

parties to armed conflict, including non-State
parties, to take all necessary measures to ensure
security and freedom of movement of United
Nations and associated personnel as well as
personnel of humanitarian organizations. The
Security Council condemns all attacks targeting
United Nations personnel and other humanitarian
workers, and underlines that the perpetrators of
such attacks must be held accountable as outlined
in its resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003.
The Security Council underscores the importance
for humanitarian organizations to uphold the
principles of neutrality, impartiality, humanity of
their humanitarian activities and independence of
their objectives.

"The Security Council recognizes the
importance of a comprehensive, coherent and
action-oriented approach, including in early
planning, of protection of civilians in situations
of armed conflict. It stresses, in this regard, the
need to adopt a broad strategy of conflict
prevention, which addresses the root causes of
armed conflict in a comprehensive manner in
order to enhance the protection of civilians on a
long-term basis, including by promoting
sustainable development, poverty eradication,
national reconciliation, good governance,
democracy, the rule of law and respect for and
protection of human rights. It encourages further
cooperation and coordination between Member
States and the United Nations system. The
Council, moreover, recognizes the needs of
civilians under foreign occupation and stresses
further, in this regard, the responsibilities of the
occupying Power.

"The Security Council, recognizing the
regional dimensions of certain armed conflict,
stresses the need for regional cooperation in order
to address cross-border issues such as
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
rehabilitation, cross-border movement of refugees
and combatants, human trafficking, illicit flow of
small arms and illegal exploitation of natural
resources and post-conflict situations. It
encourages regional and sub-regional
organizations to develop, as appropriate, a
regional protection strategy and provide for a
coherent and strong framework for addressing
protection issues. The Council welcomes the

steps taken by regional organizations in this
regard and requests the United Nations system
and other international organizations to provide
them with the necessary support, and to consider
means for the reinforcement of national
capacities. The Council takes into account, in this
regard, the Secretary-General's recommendation
regarding the establishment of a framework
within which the United Nations could engage
with regional organizations more systematically
on humanitarian issues related to protection and
access and better address those issues at the
regional intergovernmental level.

"The Security Council strongly condemns
the increased use of sexual and gender-based
violence as a weapon of war, as well as the
recruitment and use of child soldiers by parties to
armed conflict in violation of international
obligations applicable to them. The Security
Council underlines the vulnerability of women
and children in situations of armed conflict,
bearing in mind in this regard its resolutions
l325(2000) on women, peace and security and
1539(2004), as well as all other resolutions on
children and armed conflict, and recognizes their
special needs, in particular those of the girl-child.
It stresses the importance of developing strategies
aimed at preventing and responding to sexual and
gender-based violence, through the improvement
in the design of peacekeeping and assessment
missions by, inter alia, the inclusion of gender
and child protection advisers. It stresses also the
importance of women and children subject to
exploitation and sexual violence receiving
adequate assistance and support.

"Mindful of the particular vulnerability of
refugees and internally displaced persons, the
Council reaffirms the primary responsibility of
States to ensure their protection, in particular, by
preserving the civilian character of camps of
refugees and internally displaced persons and to
take effective measures to protect them from
infiltration by armed groups, abduction and
forced military recruitment.

"The Security Council reaffirms its
readiness to ensure that peacekeeping missions
are given suitable mandates and adequate
resources so as to enable them to better protect
civilians under imminent threat of physical

danger, including by strengthening the ability of
the United Nations to plan and rapidly deploy
peacekeeping and humanitarian personnel,
utilizing the United Nations Standby
Arrangements System, as appropriate.

"The Council considers that a coherent and
integrated approach to disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and rehabilitation of
ex-combatants, which takes into account the
special needs of child soldiers and women
combatants, is of crucial importance for a
sustained peace and stability. The Council
reaffirms the need for the inclusion of these
activities in the mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping operations and emphasizes the
importance of resources being made available for
such activities.

"The Security Council is concerned by the
growing problem of humanitarian emergency
situations while funding and resources do not
match requirements. It urges the international
community to ensure adequate and timely
funding in response to humanitarian need across
crises so as to provide sufficient humanitarian
the

assistance in alleviating the suffering of civilian
populations, in particular those in areas affected
by armed conflict or emerging from a situation of
conflict.

"The Security Council expresses its
appreciation for the efforts of the United Nations
agencies, regional organizations, international
humanitarian organizations and other relevant
actors aimed at raising international awareness of
the suffering of civilians in armed conflicts,
including refugees and internally displaced
persons, and considers such efforts as a key
element for the promotion of a culture of
protection and for the building of international
solidarity with the victims of armed conflict.

"The Security Council invites the Secretary-
General to continue to refer to it relevant
information and analysis where he believes that
such information or analysis could contribute to
improving its work on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict, and to continue to include in
his written reports to the Council on matters of
which it is seized, as appropriate, observations
relating to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. In this context, the Security Council
reiterates the importance of the aide-memoire
annexed to the statement by its President
(S/PRST/2002/6), as well as the road map for the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, as a
practical tool for dealing with protection issues.

"The Security Council notes the submission
of the report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict of
28 May 2004 (S/2004/431), which examines the
ten-point platform, and requests him to submit by
28 November 2005 his next report, and to include
in that report information on the implementation
of Security Council resolutions previously
adopted on this subject, as well as any additional
recommendations on ways the Council and other
organs of the United Nations, acting within their
respective spheres of responsibility, could further
improve the protection of civilians in situations
of armed conflict."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2004/46.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my

list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.55 p.m.
