Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Senegal is pleased to see you, Sir,
presiding in person over today's briefing on the report
of the Secretary-General on the Joint Force of the
Group of Five for the Sahel (S/2017/869), only a few
days after the Security Council's mission to the region.

We also welcome the presence and participation
of the delegation of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel), led by Mr. Abdoulaye Diop, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Mali,
accompanied by his colleagues from Chad, the Niger,
Mauritania and Burkina Faso.

The fact that the issue of peace and security in
Africa is on the agenda of the French presidency of the
Security Council in October is another illustration of the
special importance that France attaches to stability on
the African continent. France's ongoing commitment to
supporting African countries in their efforts to combat
terrorism and promote development is commendable
and deserves our thanks. I would also like to welcome
the participation in today's meeting of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson
of the African Commission, and Mr. Angel Losada
Fernandez, European Union Special Representative for
the Sahel.

I will spare the Council the details of the volatile
situation in the region, since the briefers I just
mentioned have already provided them in plenty. I
would simply like to add that what the members of the
Security Council saw, heard and reported following
our mission to the Sahel, along with the briefings we
have heard today, has confirmed our belief that only
a comprehensive response, backed by united, well-
coordinated efforts can put an end to the multifaceted
threats that continue to undermine the very foundations
of security and stability in the entire West African
region of the Sahel and its member States.

Senegal therefore emphasizes that, given the
transborder and transregional nature of this threat,
only by strengthening regional cooperation and
streamlining our efforts can we address the challenge.
Indeed, the G-5 Sahel countries have committed to
that goal by establishing a Joint Force to better combat
the terrorist and other criminal armed groups in the
Sahel region. We welcome that initiative, as it fits
squarely into the broader scheme that is gradually
being implemented throughout the Sahelo-Saharan
region to halt the propagation and spread of terrorism
and stamp out a scourge that undermines every effort to
build sustainable development and peaceful societies.
We should also consider the G-5 Sahel Joint Force's
complementarity with the Multinational Joint Task
Force in the Lake Chad basin, of which both the Niger
and Chad are members, as well as France's Operation
Barkhane and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
as they all work together to combat the negative
effects of the conflict in Libya and the proliferation of
foreign terrorist fighters in the region, not to mention
the various types of trafficking - in arms, drugs and
cultural assets - and the smuggling of migrants.

All of these reasons should encourage resolute
international support for the operationalization of the
G-5 Sahel Joint Force, and all the more so because
it has not been conceived as a miracle cure for all
the problems threatening the region but as playing
a decisive additional part in the international and
regional efforts already under way. As the Secretary-
General makes clear in his report, the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force's efforts will complement those of MINUSMA,
Operation Barkhane and Member States' national
forces, as well as other initiatives in the region.

As part of the effort to strengthen Africa's Peace
and Security Architecture, the African Union, which
has already given its blessing to the Joint Force,
should continue to play a central role in coordinating
and aligning the various subregional, regional, and
even international, efforts and initiatives. Ensuring
multidimensional support on the part of the international
community is exactly in tune with resolution 2378
(2017), which the Security Council adopted this year.
While the G-5 Sahel countries are chiefly responsible
for financing and equipping the Joint Force, it is a
fact that political, financial and operational support
from the United Nations and bilateral and multilateral
partners will be essential to enable it to reach full
operating capability between now and March 2018, as
established in its concept of operations.

For all of those reasons, Senegal supports the G-5
Sahel initiative, as President Macky Sall explained in
this Chamber on 20 September (see S/PV.8051) at the
Security Council meeting on peacekeeping operations
in Africa during Egypt's presidency, as well as more
recently in Dakar during the State visit by President
Roch Marc Christian Kabore of Burkina Faso. That is
because of the common destiny that links Senegal and
the G-5 Sahel countries, with which we share the same
space, the same aspirations and the same fight, as well
as extensive borders.

