The President (interpretation from Spanish): I thank
the representative of Gabon for the kind words he
addressed to me.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Brazil.

Let me begin, of course, by thanking the Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Vieira de
Mello. He is my compatriot, indeed, but he is first and
foremost an international civil servant whose career has
focused mainly on the humanitarian area and whose
knowledge of the matters he has spoken of here is very
extensive. It is for this reason that he was able to speak
to us not only with his mind but with his heart, including
the two excellent quotations he mentioned.

Let me first comment on the quote from President
Havel. It is very important to recall that it was a
statesman who said what he did about making dreams
come true and dreaming the impossible if we want the
impossible to become a reality. But perhaps, to pay
tribute to a great author who wrote in the language that I
am using - if not misusing - today, I should recall that
the same thought, though phrased differently, was
contained in the works of authors such as Cervantes. This
gives us some measure of the Iberian spirit, represented
here by the representative of Argentina and, perhaps
indirectly, by Brazil.

The other quotation has a direct bearing on some of
the issues I wanted to mention: the quotation by Burke,
which says that the only requirement for evil to prevail is
for good individuals to do nothing. I would say, though,
that if such people do nothing, then they are not good.
They may be well-intentioned, but there is a distinction to
be drawn between being truly good and having good
intentions. For us, I think, it is a ray of hope in the rather
gloomy picture painted for us by the Under-Secretary-
General to know that good men and women in the true

 

meaning of the word - not just well-intentioned - are
ready and willing to make the sacrifices they have agreed
to and to risk their own lives for the sake of humanitarian
ideals.

But this thought leads me to another: the Weberian
concept of distinguishing between individual morality,
which is based on conviction, and political morality, which
is based on responsibility. This is the task that all of us -
humanitarian agencies, in particular the United Nations
humanitarian agencies, but especially and principally the
Security Council, must undertake: to make that distinction,
because for us, the Security Council, what is important is
morality based on responsibility.

The difference between the two is that the morality of
responsibility cannot permit the belief that no sin has been
committed, that the right thing is being done from the
standpoint of the conscience; rather, it is necessary to
obtain results. The morality of responsibility involves the
concept of a morality oriented towards results. I believe that
that is extremely important in our daily work, because with
regard to certain issues we often feel the urge simply to call
upon parties to engage in dialogue or to reach a peaceful
resolution. But what is expected of us in the humanitarian
and in the political fields goes beyond that. I believe that
the comments of some of those who spoke earlier,
including the Ambassadors of the Netherlands and of
France, on the need for a political strategy which could
incorporate humanitarian activity are extremely important.
Otherwise, we will be left with good intentions but without
results. We must go beyond people's individual qualities of
courage and generosity and demand political vision.

I should also like to make a brief comment on an
issue that was raised a few days ago: the question of the
nature of current conflicts. There have been many analyses
pointing to a change in the nature of conflicts in the post-
cold war era, which today seem to be more internal in
character and to involve civilians. No one needs to be
reminded of the fact that, tragically, many conflicts in the
past also involved civilians. However, it also seems to me
that such analyses have implications for today's debate.

An interesting article published in the review, Foreign
Afiairs, a few years ago by Professor Stephen John
Stedman of Johns Hopkins University states that internal
conflicts are not in fact more frequent today than they were
in the past, or more violent. The American Civil War, for
example, took the lives of more than 600,000 people. The
Spanish Civil War in the 1930s and the Nigerian civil war
of the 1960s also led to fatalities on a similar scale. During
the cold war, the conflicts in Korea, Viet Nam, El
Salvador and Nicaragua were essentially internal conflicts
in which there was, of course, outside intervention. On
the other hand, many of today's humanitarian problems,
especially with regard to the issue of refugees, relate to
conflicts that cannot be classed as internal conflicts, as is
the case in the Middle East.

I say that simply so that we may take with a grain
of salt, as we did when discussing the issue of
peacekeeping, the idea that conflicts today are completely
different in character from those of the past. What may
have changed is that, with the end of the cold war, the
major Powers have become considerably less interested in
intervening in internal conflicts. Clearly, on the one hand
that is a positive development, because no one wants
external intervention in internal conflicts, which very
often simply leads to the perpetuation of such conflicts
beyond the period of the intervention, as was the case in
Angola, a subject with which we are so often occupied in
the Security Council. However, one consequence of the
fact that today the major Powers are less involved, at
least militarily, is that many of those conflicts have
become "orphaned" in a way, with the Security Council
becoming a forum of last resort to check the levels of
Violence.

I believe that that is what is happening, rather than
there being a great difference in the nature of the
conflicts. I believe that it is important for the Members of
the Organization, and especially for the members of the
Security Council, to arrive at an understanding among
themselves on the limits of Security Council action in the
humanitarian area, with the Council reserving its attention
and energy for those cases that truly threaten regional or
international stability - such cases are not infrequent -
while other bodies, such as the Economic and Social
Council and its strengthened humanitarian segment, deal
with the other issues. In this context, I am pleased to say
that yesterday, in my capacity as President of the Security
Council, I received a visit from the President of the
Economic and Social Council, Ambassador Paolo Fulci,
who indeed intends to take up the invitation that we
issued to the Economic and Social Council in several
documents with a View to dealing with situations of post-
conflict reconstruction and rehabilitation, including the
implementation of Article 65 of the Charter.

I believe that in the Council we must resist the
temptation to establish an automatic correlation between
the concept of collective responsibility, which does indeed
exist at the humanitarian level, and the effort to achieve

 

collective security, a concept which is specifically the
responsibility of the Council. Collective responsibility in the
face of a humanitarian emergency can be effectively
discharged by other bodies, as the Secretary-General
pointed out in his report on protection for humanitarian
activities. Clearly, that is almost a tautology, but sometimes
it is appropriate to stress tautologies. The Council must
shoulder its responsibilities when it intervenes in long-
standing questions that can be defined as collective security
issues in the context of regional or international instability
and dealt with if possible by means of diplomacy and with
the consent and cooperation of the beneficiary country.

Another issue relates to the various options for the
protection of humanitarian operations with serious security
problems which States either cannot or do not want to deal
with in a satisfactory manner and with regard to which one
or more parties to the conflict will not accept external
security forces. With regard to such situations, it is
worthwhile reaffirming that the report of the Secretary-
General states that no intervention that is deemed
humanitarian can be without a political strategy. In this
respect I am repeating to some extent the comments of
Ambassador van Walsum. In other words, protection
measures that are not part of a political or diplomatic plan
undermine the effectiveness of humanitarian action and can
actually make the situation worse.

Furthermore, we should recall that the humanitarian
organizations themselves are very often afraid that the use
of military force with humanitarian goals, especially in the
context of Chapter VII of the Charter, can compromise their
impartiality and neutrality and have a negative impact on
their ability to assist the victims of all the parties to the
conflict and may increase violence against the personnel of
the United Nations and of other humanitarian organizations.
That is another issue that has been mentioned here and
which we consider to be very important.

Given such considerations, perhaps we might engage
in some self-criticism and ask ourselves whether a certain
inclination to contemplate the use of force for humanitarian
purposes or eventually to adopt a position that is favourable
to one of the parties, abandoning the impartiality that must
be part of the code of conduct of humanitarian workers,
might, at least in some cases, be the source of an increase
in violence against humanitarian workers in conflict
situations.

My comments do not exclude the possibility that there
may be cases in which force may be truly indispensable as
a last resort, but it is clear that in any case the approval of
the Security Council is essential. Article 51 of the Charter
of the United Nations sets forth a single exception for the
use of force without prior authorization of the Council:
legitimate self-defence. Otherwise, accepting unilateral
military action in humanitarian emergencies would imply
the recognition in some form of one nation or a group of
nations not only wielding greater power, but having a
certain moral superiority of which they could take
advantage in such situations.

That having been said, however, we must also
consider the other side of the coin, which also seems to
me to be important. In order for the Security Council to
preserve its authority, it is necessary first to avoid any
erosion of that authority by actions taken outside the
Council. However, it is also necessary for members of the
Council - particularly the permanent members, who are
able to veto draft resolutions - to deal with specific
situations not from the standpoint of their own specific
interests but rather from the standpoint of ensuring peace
and security in the world and from the perspective of the
Organization as a whole. Because actions that take place
outside the Council may undermine the Council's action,
the Security Council itself may also be undermined by
having its activities blocked, perhaps without
consideration of very serious elements that arouse the
feelings of the entire world.

As I have already spoken at some length today,
particularly from this seat, I wish to make a final point on
the subject of sanctions. As all know, the General
Assembly adopted a resolution on the important topic of
an Agenda for Peace, but the Security Council has yet to
express its view in this respect. Proposals were made by
the Chairmen of the sanctions committees in 1998 -
among whom was Ambassador Dahlgren, who is no
longer with us - that are being considered by the
Council. We hope that it will soon be possible to adopt
certain specific guidelines for these committees,
particularly on the humanitarian issues that we are
addressing today. However, a broader and more
conceptual discussion will be necessary, and it would be
useful for such a discussion to be held in this Chamber.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

