Allow me at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on the manner in which you have conducted the work of the Security Council during the first 15 days of your presidency. I wish to express my appreciation for the presentation made by Ambassador Inga Rhonda King, Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and Chair of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and other Procedural Questions, whose leadership on this issue I also wish to highlight. I also acknowledge the presentations by Karin Landgren, Executive Director of Security Council Report, and Edward C. Luck of Columbia University. Today I will refer first to the Council's working methods in the context of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and then to the working methods of the Council in general. First, Ecuador wishes to highlight the efforts made by the members of the Security Council to ensure the continuity of its work in the context of extreme circumstances such as the COVID-19 pandemic. I reiterate our special appreciation to the Estonian delegation as well as to the delegations of the Dominican Republic and China, which chaired the Council in April and March, respectively. While acknowledging the opportunity to present this written statement, I wish to underline that, ideally, interested delegations should be able to participate directly in Council discussions, as provided for inrule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure. The Arria Formula meeting commemorating 75 years from the end of the Second World War on European soil is an example of the use of technological solutions. However, so long as technological challenges persist and the practice of written interventions continues, I believe that the latter should be requested and received in advance so that both permanent and non-permanent members can familiarize themselves with the criteria, priorities and recommendations of other delegations. The briefers' presentations could also be circulated in advance so that we can respond to them. On the other hand, I view the distribution of press elements as a good practice that should continue. They should always be distributed in writing. The COVID-19 pandemic revealed both the strengths and weaknesses in the working methods of all the organs of the system, including the Security Council. That experience has forced us to revitalize our working methods in order to make the work of the Council more resilient and, above all, ensure its continuity in any context, even the most difficult. This brings me to the second part of my statement, on the working methods of the Security Council in general. The subject of this debate no doubt relates to one of the most crucial questions affecting the Organization. Effective working methods promote not only the vitality of the Security Council but also that of the entire United Nations. For that reason, in considering the modernization of working methods, account should be taken not only of the procedural flow and internal communications between Council members and between the Council and its subsidiary organs, but also between the Council and the other organs of the system, and between its permanent and non-permanent members and the other States Members of the Organization. During the General Assembly debate held on 25 November 2019 (see A/74/PV.34), on the question of equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council and other matters related to the Security Council, I referred to the need to put an end to the dual-door Council, which separates not only the members of the Council from the rest of the delegations but also permanent members from non-permanent members. Although Ecuador will continue to raise this issue in the context of the process of Security Council reform, which is not the subject of today's debate, this is a factor that can be overcome through an improvement in working methods, without any need to reform the Charter. The revitalization of the Council's working methods will yield a body that is capable of meeting, without exception, its obligations in terms of ensuring international peace and security. We support the full and effective implementation of presidential note S/2017/507 and all existing provisions on the issue. To that end, greater transparency is required in the process of drafting and discussing resolutions. There is a need for greater objectivity in the elaboration of a text so that it can encompass the perspectives of the 15 members of the Council and, ideally, of the entire membership. Discussions and meetings should be held on an existing solid basis of information that includes verified statistics, projections and proposed solutions - not just the general information contained in the concept notes, which are certainly very useful, but also comprehensive information that allows for operational results and helps to avoid situations in which talks are limited to purely philosophical discussions. My delegation acknowledges the progress made on transparency in the Security Council but stresses that much remains to be done. While acknowledging that certain issues have delicate aspects that may require discretion and prudence, we believe that this can never serve as a pretext for institutionalizing secret diplomacy. Explanatory records must be available for all issues considered, as they would also grant full legitimacy to the decisions taken. We acknowledge and appreciate the opening and closing briefings provided by each Council presidency, a practice whose continuation we encourage. I also take this opportunity to thank in particular the Dominican Republic and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines for their efforts to help the Latin American and Caribbean Group countries better follow the Council's work. The achievement of greater transparency, efficiency and effectiveness in the Security Council is our common responsibility, not just that of its members. For that reason, in January Ecuador joined the Franco-Mexican initiative, which is aimed at promoting the suspension of the use of the veto in the case of mass atrocities. Furthermore, in November 2018 we signed the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group Code of Conduct regarding Security Council action in cases involving genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes. In conclusion, while the Security Council acts on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations on the basis of Article 24 of the Charter of the United Nations, that representation also means that it has the obligation to ensure prompt and effective action by the United Nations, as set out in that same Article, an obligation that must be fulfilled without any exceptions.
