The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Iraq in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sumaida'ie
(Iraq) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: It is my great pleasure to welcome
the presence of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan,
at this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
2

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2005/515, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of members to
document S/2005/509, which contains the text of a
letter dated 3 August 2005 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution. Unless I
hear any objection, I shall put the draft resolution to
the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Algeria, Argentina, Benin, Brazil, China,
Denmark, France, Greece, Japan, Philippines,
Romania, Russian Federation, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1619 (2005).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.30 am.
05 -45 745

