Mr. Steiner: I am pleased to tell you that the
United Nations operation in Kosovo under resolution
1244 (1999) has entered a new phase, allowing us to
make new proposals for the way ahead.

In the period beginning June 1999, the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) concentrated on the humanitarian crisis, on
essential services and on stopping open hostilities, with
KFOR's support. Indeed, the Kosovo where my
predecessors arrived - and with great joy I see
Bernard Kouchner here in the Council Chamber -
looked very different from the Kosovo of today.

What has been achieved? You have seen the
comprehensive report of the Secretary-General. His
support has been invaluable to our work.

With respect to government, the Kosovo-wide
elections in November were universally recognized as
free and fair. The Assembly, the President and the
multi-ethnic Government of Kosovo are now in place
and working. We are building an inclusive public
service. We have set aside more than 20 per cent of
posts for non-majority communities and 18 per cent for
Kosovo Serbs.

We have a functioning police and justice system.
The crime rate has gone down steadily. There were 500
murders during the second half of 1999, 250 in 2000
and 136 last year. Since January 2002, there have been
16 murders. If this trend continues, we can expect
fewer than 100 murders this year.

The economy is slowly beginning to function.
More than 95 per cent of the 2002 Kosovo consolidated
budget of 374 million euros is now funded with local
taxes and revenues. Starting this month, people are
paying income taxes. More than 50,000 businesses
have been registered. There has been a four-fold
increase in the rate of electricity production since 1999.

With respect to public services, social
infrastructure has been rebuilt from scratch. We have
more than 1,100 schools with a total of 450,000 pupils.
Five regional hospitals have been refurbished and
equipped. There are 360 functioning health-care
facilities throughout Kosovo. As of July 2002, 130,000
pensioners will start receiving pensions.

Now we have the provisional institutions of self-
government. What has changed? Until now, the
Mission had a general view of where it was headed, but
we did not see how it would get there. Now we can see
more clearly how to structure the path. The road is not
endless. We have a vision of how to finish our job.

We need to look both inside and outside. We need
to transfer authority within Kosovo to the Provisional
Government. We also need to convince the Kosovans
to look beyond Kosovo to Belgrade and to the region.

What are our priorities? The first is reliable
institutions. We now have Kosovan partners that we
can work with: President Rugova, Prime Minister
Rexhepi and Assembly President Daci. We need to
consolidate the provisional institutions to ensure that
they are effective, representative and transparent. We
will make a particular effort to ensure their multi-
ethnic character at all levels. The Kosovo Serbs have
agreed to my proposal for their participation in the
Government. They will nominate a Minister for
Agriculture, as well as an Inter-Ministerial Coordinator
on Returns. This is significant progress. On the local
level, the municipal elections run by the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) this
autumn will be key. There are good reasons why the
Kosovo Serbs, especially, want these elections this
year

Our second priority is to boost the economy. An
unemployment rate of 50 per cent is an untenable
situation. At the same time, UNMIK is downsizing.
There has already been a substantial drop in donor
money, and Kosovo is unable to borrow on the
international markets. Getting the economic
fundamentals right is therefore even more important. A
key element is privatization. Privatization will not
solve the problem in the short term, but it is the only
basis for secure jobs in the long term. The legislation to
create the Kosovo Trust Agency, which will be the
vehicle for privatization, is now with the Provisional
Government for comments.

The third priority is the rule of law. Effective
police and judiciary are essential. We will gradually
transfer policing responsibilities to the multi-ethnic
Kosovo Police Force under UNMIK supervision. Let
me pay tribute here to the brave policemen and women
of UNMIK. The Polish Special Police recently
demonstrated their dedication in an exemplary manner.
We are also enhancing capabilities to effectively
combat organized crime, terrorism and corruption.
However, I must emphasise that as we begin to make
significant arrests against the criminal gangs, we
should anticipate a criminal backlash. KFOR
Commander General Marcel Valentin and I stand
shoulder to shoulder on maintaining order. We must
count on the Council's support, especially when the
going gets tough.

The final priority is returns. Now that the Kosovo
Serbs will be part of the Government, we can focus
more efficiently on an integrated effort to facilitate
return. The years 2002 and 2003 will be decisive. We
are committed to creating the preconditions for a
substantial return process. Damage assessments in over
80 minority villages and urban areas have been
completed. Serb returns to 14 villages and non-Serb
minority returns to seven locations should commence
within the next three months. The Kosovo Serbs will
have their official representatives working on returns
within the Government and in my office.

It is time to work on a real breakthrough in
returns. But for this, I must ask for your help. When
the returns start, on the basis of our integrated
approach, we need to be sure that there will be money
to follow the returnees. Only this way can we achieve
sustainable returns.

Here I would like to make a more general point
that relates to the previous one. We need to follow a
dual-track approach. Multi-ethnicity and integration are
the two mutually reinforcing elements here. On the one
hand, the Kosovo Albanians, as the majority
community, have to practice what their leaders
preach- thank God. Multi-ethnicity means doing
everything they can to encourage the smaller
communities to stay in Kosovo and to make returns
possible. On the other hand, the smaller communities
have to participate in the institutions that we have set
up under resolution 1244 (1999). They must integrate
and abandon parallel structures. The rule of law must
apply everywhere in Kosovo. This is also true for
Mitrovica.

There will be no multi-ethnicity without
integration, and there will also be no integration
without multi-ethnicity.

Integration Within Kosovo needs to be
complemented by the strengthening of relations with
Belgrade as well as of cooperation Within the region.
Just as Kosovo is a factor influencing stability within
the region, relations with regional neighbours influence
stability in Kosovo. I have already made my first trips
to Belgrade, as well as to Skopje, Tirana and Sarajevo.
We will continue to foster regional dialogue at both the
bilateral and multilateral levels. Belgrade will be the
crucial partner.

Finally, I turn to the question of benchmarks. I
have described the priorities of my mission. The work
of implementing resolution 1244 (1999) is now a joint
effort with the provisional institutions.

We are transferring our responsibilities to those
institutions in the process of building substantial
autonomy. This will bring us closer to a stage at which
it will be time to begin the political process designed to
determine Kosovo's future status. This will be one of
my main responsibilities, as foreseen in paragraph 11
(e) of resolution 1244 (1999).

But let me say clearly that the time for this has
not yet come. Kosovo society and institutions will have
to show that they are ready for this process - without
prejudging its outcome. We must make clear what is
expected from them. Therefore, I am embarking on a
benchmarks process. These benchmarks should be
achieved before launching a discussion on status, in
accordance with resolution 1244 (1999).

The benchmarks are: existence of effective,
representative and functioning institutions;
enforcement of the rule of law; freedom of movement
for all; respect for the right of all Kosovans to remain
and return: development of a sound basis for a market
economy; clarity of property title; normalized dialogue
with Belgrade; and reduction and transformation of the
Kosovo Protection Corps in line with its mandate.

With your permission, Mr. President, following
my statement Council members will receive a brief
illustration of our thinking on benchmarks.

These benchmarks articulate our expectations of
Kosovo's leaders and of the wider public. They mirror
the principles and priorities in the coalition agreement
signed on 28 February by political parties forming the
Government. Through stimulating public debate, we
can also gain broad support for needed reforms.

Attaining these benchmarks is an objective in
itself. Kosovo can advance towards a fair and just
society only when these minimum preconditions are
met and when the changes in institutions are
sustainable even without an international presence.

I offer this to the Council as an exit strategy
which is, in reality, an "entry strategy" into the
European integration process. The benchmarks
complement the preconditions that Kosovo needs to
meet to qualify for the stabilization and association
process.

I rely on the support of the Security Council for
this strategy. But in addition to political support, I will
still need its sustained technical and financial support.
This is essential in achieving our priorities. Yes, we
will have to reduce our engagement, but not at a time
when we should be capitalizing on our past work. I am
concerned about the anticipated premature reduction in
the Kosovo peacekeeping budget. Given the marathon
that we have run in Kosovo since 1999, it would be
tragic to falter as we are nearing the finish line.

The next stages of authority transfer will succeed
only with the Council's help, and only with its backing
will Kosovo be able to develop normalized dialogue
and meaningful relations with Belgrade and its
neighbours.

The more we invest now, the more stable,
sustainable and fair a society we will leave behind. Can
we afford not to afford returns? Remember: a stable
Kosovo is a key to a stable region. The more support
the Council gives us now, the faster we will be able to
reduce spending and international personnel.

Members of the Council have visited Kosovo
twice. They have seen it develop. Where there was
rubble, there are now roads, schools and hospitals.
Where there was anarchy, there are now democratically
mandated institutions. This has been accomplished
through our international presence and the funds that
we have committed. I would like to invite the Council
to come again and see what it has achieved.

We have to finish the job we started together. It

will still take time, but this is now the decisive phase.
