Mr. Koudougou (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): At the outset, I wish to thank Mr. Pascoe and
Mr. Boyd for their briefings. We also welcome the
presence among us of the Permanent Representative of
Somalia.

Burkina Faso remains very concerned by the
security situation in Somalia, which is marked by
continued clashes between illegal armed groups and
Government forces. The violence has claimed many
lives - especially of civilians and political leaders.
Unfortunately, the 17 September attack against
AMISOM. force headquarters, which claimed the lives
of a number of Burundian and Ugandan soldiers, has
just added to that list. We take this opportunity to
extend our heartfelt condolences to the Governments of
those two States and to AMISOM. We again condemn
this attack, which was carried out by the Al-Shabaab
Islamist rebels. Any form of violence directed against
peacekeeping and humanitarian personnel is
unacceptable. We await the results of the United
Nations investigation with great interest and hope that
the perpetrators will be found and made to pay for their
actions.
As my delegation noted during our previous
consideration of the situation in Somalia (see S/PV.6173), the scale of the attacks and the intensity of
the clashes give credibility to the involvement of
foreign forces backing the insurgents with weapons,
combatants and logistics. This is also confirmed by the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/ 503).

We recall that the African Union expressed its
serious concern regarding the growing presence of
foreign elements in Mogadishu and other areas of
Somalia and requested that the Security Council
impose sanctions against those opposing the peace and
reconciliation process in Somalia. We hope that the
Council will follow up accordingly, including within
the framework of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 751 (1992)
concerning Somalia.

The already deplorable humanitarian situation
continues to deteriorate as a result of the growing
insecurity, with the killing of humanitarian personnel
and ongoing threats of hostage-taking. Here, we pay
tribute to humanitarian and associated personnel for
their courage and resolve and again appeal to the
belligerents to guarantee their security. While we
understand the difficult situation facing their personnel
on the ground, we urge the humanitarian agencies to
remain present among the local populations to the
extent possible.

As concerns the political situation, Burkina Faso
reiterates its full support to the Transitional Federal
Government and welcomes its continuing presence in
Mogadishu and its efforts aimed at consolidating its
authority, especially in the security sphere. We are also
encouraged by the fact that the parliament continues to
meet in Mogadishu despite the heightened security
risks.

Burkina Faso welcomes President Sharif's
renewed commitment to comprehensive implementation
of the Djibouti Agreement, which remains the only
relevant framework for a political settlement of the
Somali crisis. We encourage the country's authorities
to continue their policy of dialogue and openness vis-a-
vis the rebel groups, with the aim of involving them in
the process of pacifying the country. The cooperation
agreement signed in June by Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama'a is
an important step forward, and we invite the other
armed groups to follow that example.
We take note of the efforts under way to
revitalize the High Level Committee responsible for
the coordination and application of the Djibouti
Agreement. Within this framework, it is urgent that the
pledges made by donors at the Brussels Conference be
fulfilled to ensure the strengthening of the Somali
security forces, extension of State authority, promotion
of national reconciliation and management of the
transition process.

On the implementation of the three-phase
incremental approach for United Nations support for
Somalia, we congratulate the Secretariat for having
continued its cycle of missions despite very difficult
security conditions in the field. We encourage the
Secretariat to spare no effort to move as rapidly as
possible to the second phase. In our view, the rapid
provision by the United Nations of its support package
to AMISOM. is the most urgent element, alongside
development of the national security strategy and
strengthening the security services. Again we pay
tribute to the Secretariat for its efforts and to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, and his team for their
resolve alongside the Somali people despite the
difficulties they are experiencing.

We reiterate our gratitude to Uganda and to
Burundi for their invaluable contributions in the quest
for peace in Somalia. Given the severity of the
situation, we encourage the countries which have
already pledged troops to AMISOM. to honour their
commitments in order to contribute to strengthening
the mission.

Burkina Faso continues to believe in a future of
peace, stability and prosperity for Somalia. This will
require continued commitment by all Somali actors and
the continued support of the international community,
in particular that of the Security Council.

