Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): First of all, I wish to thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing.
I also welcome His Excellency Mr. Jorge Arreaza,
Minister of the People's Power for Foreign Affairs of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.

We have been closely following the situation and
the escalation of tensions in Venezuela, and we deeply
regret the loss of lives resulting from recent events. We
cannot afford to witness another loss. We fully support
the Secretary-General's statement calling for calm and
for violence to be avoided at any cost, and we appeal to
all of the parties involved, both within and outside the
country, to make serious efforts to substantially reduce
tensions and avert any escalation of violence.

Indonesia believes that dialogue, reconciliation
and negotiation must be the preferred options for the
resolution of any issue. It is our strong conviction that
there will always be a negotiated solution based on
dialogue among all those involved, including the option
set forth in Chapter VI of the Charter of the United
Nations, which provides us with various tools to be
utilized in addressing the situation. We therefore urge
all parties to follow that path, while taking into account
the safety and prosperity of the people of Venezuela.
In that connection, we welcome and support the
Montevideo Mechanism, which seeks to preserve peace
in Venezuela based on the principle of non-interference
and the peaceful resolution of conflicts.

Indonesia has always been consistent in upholding
and respecting the principles of non-interference,
sovereignty and the territorial integrity of all countries,
including Venezuela. At the same time, we are
cognizant of the fact that the humanitarian situation
in Venezuela is increasingly concerning and requires
proper attention. We therefore encourage the delivery
of all humanitarian aid for the people of Venezuela
through a proper channel of the United Nations, in
close coordination with the Venezuelan Government.

We strongly believe that the Council has an
important role to play - based on the Charter of the
United Nations - in assisting Venezuela to return to
normalcy. To that end, it should speak in unity. Indonesia
hopes that the Security Council can promote avenues
that create the environment conducive for all relevant
actors to commit to inclusive and credible political
dialogue. The Council must also be able to insist that
all relevant parties promote national dialogue and
accept the Secretary-General's good offices in order to
help resolve the crisis. It is high time for the Council to
play its pivotal role in avoiding the exacerbation of the
situation in Venezuela. We hope that Venezuela will be
able to peacefully overcome this crisis, while ensuring
security, stability and prosperity for its people.

I would like to end my statement by quoting Herbert
Hoover: "Peace is not made at the council table or by
treaties, but in the hearts of men." Let us all use our
hearts and minds for the people of Venezuela.

