Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-
Pierre Lacroix and Special Representative Pramila
Patten for their information on the progress of the
settlement in South Sudan. We took note of the briefing
by Ambassador Wronecka, Permanent Representative
of Poland and Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South
Sudan, about that subsidiary body's activity for the
second half of 2018.

The Russian Federation considers the signing on
12 September of the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan to be very
significant. What is most important is that the South
Sudanese parties showed a willingness to compromise
and a desire to settle their differences. We would again
like to pay tribute to the coordinated mediation efforts
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), which initiated and ensured the resulting
productive negotiations in Khartoum between June and
August, as well as the signing of documents that were
crucial to the peace process. We greatly appreciate
the ongoing personal contribution by President Omer
Al-Bashir of the Sudan to the peace Agreement. We
note that the regional actors involved have continued
to maintain their united approach to the settlement in
South Sudan, which is essential to the future progress
of the peace process.

We welcome the desire of the Agreement's
guarantors to assist in its implementation by providing
national contingents from the Sudan, Uganda, Djibouti
and Somalia to the Regional Protection Force. We see
that as an example of the realization in practice of the
principle of African solutions to African problems,
as well as an opportunity for effective cooperation
between the United Nations, its Security Council and
regional organizations. We are aware of the recent
contacts that have taken place between the Chiefs of
Staff of the IGAD countries on issues related to the
implementation of the Agreement, and we are ready to
consider substantive proposals from IGAD regarding
the Regional Protection Force.

We welcome the considerable progress that we
are beginning to see in implementing the Agreement,
including in that regard the formation and launch of the
operations of the structures and mechanisms provided
for in the Agreement. We consider it important that there
has been a considerable drop in the level of violence
and the numbers of human rights Violations since the
Agreement was signed. We have noted the intention of
opposition leader Riek Machar to return to Juba at the
beginning of 2019 at the latest.

We join the Secretary-General in his call to the
South Sudanese parties to finalize their agreements
on cantonment, the reintegration of former combatants
and other security-related issues. In our View, it is
only the full and comprehensive implementation of
the commitments that have been made that can help to
increase the trust between the parties and prevent them
from repeating the mistakes that occurred during the
settlement process in South Sudan in the past.
