Ms. Goolab (South Africa): Allow me to join others in thanking Ms. Ursula Mueller and Ms. Henrietta Fore for their briefings on the humanitarian situation in Syria. I wish also to welcome Deputy Prime Minister De Croo and Minister Maas to the Council. As we have heard today, the humanitarian situation in north-east Syria continues to deteriorate, with women and children the worst affected by this crisis. The increase in violence in the region has seen hundreds of thousands of civilians displaced. South Africa particularly emphasizes its grave concern regarding the attacks on civilian infrastructure and basic services, including health and education facilities. The continual violence will have long-term effects on the people, particularly the children, of Syria. South A frica reiterates that all parties to the conflict must adhere to their obligations under international human rights law and international humanitarian law, particularly with regard to the protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure. South Africa once again urges all parties to seek a non-military solution to the conflict. This would require a cessation of hostilities and a solution that upholds Syrian sovereignty and territorial integrity. In that regard, we wish to stress that external support for armed groups and United Nations-designated terrorist groups must cease immediately. External role-players should not be allowed to use the conflict in Syria as a proxy for their own interests. In view of the rising tensions and the potential of a direct military confrontation between Syria and Turkey, we look towards various forums, including the Astana process and bilateral engagements between the stakeholders, to contribute to the lowering of these tensions. As the humanitarian crisis worsens, those providing essential assistance have had to work harder to meet the needs of those requiring aid. We deeply appreciate their commitment in these changing and challenging circumstances. My delegation has taken note of the Secretary- General's report on alternative modalities for the Al-Yarubiyah crossing point, as requested by the Council in resolution 2504 (2020) (S/2020/139). We note the observations of the Secretary-General and support his view that all parties to the conflict and the Security Council itself must live up to their responsibilities to ensure that the people of north-east Syria receive the assistance they so desperately need. It is vital for there to be safe, unimpeded and impartial delivery of humanitarian assistance to all those who require it. We have also taken note of the letter from the Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic regarding authorization for a World Health Organization convoy and for the transportation of medical aid via land routes. That is a positive step in addressing the humanitarian situation. We note from the Secretary-General's report that crossline operations have improved since the Syrian Government approved the use of land deliveries. As challenges remain for crossline deliveries of aid, particularly for medical assistance, we encourage the Government of Syria to heed the recommendations of the Secretary-General to facilitate a simplified, expedited and reliable approval process to enable regular and predictable deliveries from Damascus into the north-east by land. As we have stated before, the only sustainable solution to the conflict in Syria remains an inclusive Syrian-owned and Syrian-led dialogue aimed at a political solution that is reflective of the will of the Syrian people. In that regard, South Africa fully supports and appreciates the hard work of Special Envoy Geir Pedersen in working towards achieving that goal.
