At the outset, I would like to congratulate Mr. Heiko Maas on Germany's assumption of the presidency of the Security Council, as well as on the excellent timing and choice of subject for this high-level open debate on pandemics and security, which coincides with the very recent adoption of resolution 2532 (2020), on the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The Kingdom of Morocco commends the efforts deployed throughout this process by all members of the Security Council - particularly the penholders, France and Tunisia - and welcomes the adoption of resolution 2532 (2020), which, among other things, supports the Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire to tackle the COVID-19 pandemic. In that regard, my delegation reiterates its unwavering support for the Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire and other appeals and actions regarding the fight against COVID-19, and joins the international community in expressing its concern about the devastating multidimensional impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic across the world, especially in countries ravaged by armed conflicts, in post-conflict situations or affected by humanitarian crises. In addition, allow me to welcome the participation of the Secretary-General, President Peter Maurer of the International Committee of the Red Cross and Ms. Amira Elfadil Mohammed, African Union Commissioner for Social Affairs, and to thank them for their detailed and enlightening briefings. The COVID-19 pandemic has wreaked havoc on livelihoods, societies, health systems and economies. Accordingly, my delegation would like to express itself on the following key areas. First, on our shared commitment to multilateralism, solidarity, international partnerships and cooperation, my delegation believes that the COVID-19 context reflects the deep need for a joint commitment to international cooperation and multilateral responses in facing the pandemic and its unprecedented consequences. Morocco therefore welcomes the emphasis placed on a collective response to COVID-19, with the United Nations at its core, and stresses the need for the creation of whole-of-society and whole-of-Government synergies to innovate and search for solutions to the multiple issues raised by the COVID-19 pandemic. Secondly, on leaving no one behind, COVID-19 has proved to be, first of all, a human crisis. Morocco reiterates the importance of taking a holistic approach that covers the three pillars of the United Nations and reflects our obligations under international law and relevant international commitments while emphasizing the importance of full respect for human rights and stressing that there is no place for stigma, hate speech, hate crimes, xenophobia, racism or any form of discrimination in the response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Thirdly, on recovering together and rebuilding better, Morocco highlights that the efforts deployed by developing countries, especially in Africa, to contain and control the transmission of COVID-19 are extremely commendable and must be supported by appropriate economic, financial and trade measures to enable them to recover swiftly from the crisis. My delegation continues to place strong emphasis on the need for building more equal, inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable societies while redoubling efforts towards the achievement of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Decade of Action. In accordance with the spirit of solidarity and South-South cooperation, on 13 April His Majesty King Mohammed VI launched an initiative of African Heads of State and Government aimed at establishing an operational framework to work with African countries in the fight against the pandemic. It is a pragmatic and action- oriented initiative, dedicated to sharing experiences and best practices to deal with the health, economic and social impacts of the pandemic. In the framework of that royal initiative, His Majesty King Mohammed VI issued regal instructions on 14 June for the sending of medical aid to several brotherly African countries, to provide them with protective medical equipment and products and support their efforts to fight the COVID-19 pandemic. That aid comprised nearly 8 million face masks, 900,000 visors, 600,000 hygiene caps, 60,000 medical gowns, 30,000 litres of hydro-alcoholic gel, as well as 75,000 packs of chloroquine and 15,000 packs of Azithromycin, which were produced entirely in Morocco and by Moroccan companies, in full compliance and conformity with World Health Organization standards. The aid benefited 20 African countries across all subregions of the continent as well as the Commission of the African Union in Addis Ababa. Finally, Morocco takes this opportunity to reiterate to the German presidency its appreciation of the convening of this high-level open debate and to renew its commitment to global solidarity, collective responsibility and enhanced multilateralism and cooperation.
