Ms. DiCarlo: The Israeli-Palestinian conflict
continues to be locked in a dangerous paralysis that
is fuelling extremism and exacerbating tensions in
Israel and the occupied Palestinian territory. There is a
growing risk of more unilateral actions and the loss of
hope that peace can be achieved through negotiations.

This outcome is not inevitable. We need to support
creating an environment conducive to advancing peace
and paving the way for negotiations on all final status
issues, including Jerusalem. In order to get there, we
need leadership, political will and the determination
to make tangible progress, despite the difficulties. We
must work together to bring Israelis and Palestinians
back to the negotiating table in order to resolve the
conflict on the basis of international law, relevant
United Nations resolutions and previous agreements.

Without the prospect of Viable negotiations on the
horizon, facts on the ground continue to undermine the
possibility of achieving a two-state solution.

In June, the District Court in Jerusalem ruled
that four houses in the Alei Zahav settlement could
be retroactively regularized under Israeli law, despite
having been built on private Palestinian land. This
decision is the first implementation in practice of the
so-called market regularization principle, according to
which up to 2,000 housing units in settlements could
be legalized. Further, on 8 July the Jerusalem District
Planning Committee approved for deposit a plan for
the addition of 48 housing units in the Gilo settlement
in East Jerusalem. I reiterate that settlements remain
a substantial obstacle to peace and are a violation of
international law.

Demolitions and seizures of Palestinian-owned
structures by Israeli authorities also continued. Sixty-six
structures were demolished or seized, overwhelmingly
on the grounds of lack of Israeli-issued building
permits, which are nearly impossible for Palestinians to
obtain. This practice must stop. According to the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA),
this resulted in the displacement of 90 Palestinians,
including 58 children.

On 11 June, Israel's High Court dismissed a petition
by the Palestinian residents of the Wadi Al-Hummus/Sur
Baher neighbourhood of East Jerusalem, giving them
until 18 July to demolish nine buildings, owing to their
proximity to the separation barrier. The structures were
demolished by Israeli authorities on 22 July, resulting
in the displacement of 24 Palestinians, including 14
children. As Deputy Special Coordinator McGoldrick
stated yesterday, Israel's policy of destroying Palestinian
property is not compatible with its obligations under
international humanitarian law and contributes to the
risk of forcible transfer facing many Palestinians in the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem.

On 27 June, six Palestinian-owned structures in
the Bethlehem community of Zatara Al-Kurshan were
demolished, displacing some 46 people. On 10 July,
a Palestinian family was evicted from a property in
the Silwan neighbourhood of East Jerusalem. This
was done after the Court ruled in favour of an Israeli
organization that had obtained ownership of the
majority of the property.

The past month has again seen a reduction of
violence in Gaza, while protests at the perimeter fence
have continued. One Palestinian was killed by the Israel
Defense Forces (IDF) and another 736 were injured,
including 234 children and 39 women. There were
also fewer launchings of incendiary balloons and kites
by Hamas and other Palestinian militants from Gaza.
Despite this, some 130 fires were started by some 100
devices in Israel during the reporting period.

Similarly, there has been a reduction in the number
of rockets launched by militants towards Israel since
the last dangerous escalation in May. Two rockets were
fired during the reporting period, causing no injuries
or damage. The launching of rockets and mortars
towards Israeli civilian populations is prohibited by
international humanitarian law. Hamas and Palestinian
Islamic Jihad must cease this practice immediately.

Sadly, the reporting period also saw continued
violent incidents in the occupied West Bank, including
East Jerusalem. On 27 June, a 21-year-old Palestinian
was shot and killed by an Israeli policeman after he
allegedly shot fireworks towards Israeli forces during
clashes in East Jerusalem. Clashes ensued in the
area for several days, during which 88 Palestinians
were injured.

On 12 July, a 9-year old Palestinian boy was shot and
severely injured during clashes with the Israeli security
forces in the West Bank Village of Kafr Qaddum. I call
on Israel to promptly launch a thorough investigation
and reiterate that children's lives and rights must
come ahead of any other consideration. They must be
protected from all forms ofviolence. In addition, Israeli
security forces injured 154 Palestinians, including 14
children, in clashes that erupted across the West Bank.
On 6 July, a vehicle driven by a Palestinian reportedly
rammed into a group of IDF personnel near the
entrance of Hizma Village, north of Jerusalem, injuring
five soldiers.
Settler-related violence also continued. According
to OCHA, six Palestinians were injured in six attacks
by Israelis. At the same time, two Israelis were injured
by stones thrown by Palestinians. I condemn all attacks
on Palestinian and Israeli civilians alike and call on all
sides to refrain from violence. All perpetrators must be
held accountable for their acts.

Allow me to return to the situation in Gaza.

The United Nations continues to work closely with
Egypt to mediate and de-escalate tensions. While our
joint efforts are beginning to bear fruit, I remain deeply
concerned by the humanitarian, economic and political
situation there. The shortage of medicines, equipment
and personnel continues to impede the ability of health
providers to meet the needs of patients, including those
severely injured during the weekly protests at the
perimeter fence.

Since the last round of United Nations and
Egyptian-led mediation, the Gaza fishing zone has been
expanded from 10 to 15 nautical miles. Israel has also
returned 44 confiscated fishing boats to the Gaza Strip
and eased some of the conditions for travel of Gaza-
based businessmen. I welcome these developments and
urge the continuation and expansion of such actions.

In line with agreed understandings, the United
Nations is accelerating the implementation of the
September 2018 and April 2019 packages of the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee for the Coordination of International
Assistance to Palestinians, which include interventions
that have already started to improve the situation in
Gaza. In this context, the United Nations efforts on
job creation through the United Nations Development
Programme and the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East have
thus far created some 9,000j0b opportunities, including
around 3,000 for women.

UN-Women has also initiated a smaller programme,
targeting some 250 vulnerable women in Gaza. A
recent assessment of the programme to date revealed
that 91 per cent of the beneficiaries had not earned any
income prior to this programme. About 83 per cent
of the women said that the opportunities improved
their livelihoods; 71 per cent said their interhousehold
tension has decreased due to the availability of income;
and 55 per cent reported that the earned income
allowed them to participate in decision-making at the
household level.

The current calm must be sustained in order to
gradually introduce longer-term interventions that
will support Gaza's sustainable development. I take
this opportunity to thank the Member States that have
contributed to date and strongly urge others to support
these Vital efforts, particularly in the areas of job
creation, health care, water and sanitation, and energy.

Yet, the root of Gaza's problems remains political.
I call on all Palestinian factions to take concrete steps
to ensure the reunification of Gaza and the West Bank
under a single, democratic and legitimate national
Government. Gaza is and must remain an integral
part of a future Palestinian State as part of the two-
State solution.

While discussions aimed at resolving the financial
crisis in the Palestinian Authority (PA) are ongoing, no
solution has yet been found. For the fifth consecutive
month, the Palestinian Government has refused to
receive Israel's partial transfer of tax revenues owed
to it. Despite the PA's announced austerity measures
and the support package committed by Qatar, the
PA remains under tremendous strain and may soon
reach the breaking point. The Palestinian economy is
increasingly showing signs of decline, with a noticeable
reduction of purchasing power contributing to an overall
reduction in economic activities. I call on both sides to
engage in a constructive manner to ensure compliance
with the Paris Protocol on Economic Relations.

In the meantime, it is critical to adopt temporary
measures to address the PA's fiscal crisis, and I encourage
Israel and the Palestinian Authority to work together to
find such solutions. The recent decision of the League
of Arab States to support with up to $100 million per
month the Palestinian Authority should provide a
welcome respite until a viable solution is found. The
recent memoranda of understanding between the
Government of the Palestinian Authority and Jordan
in the areas of energy, health and transportation are
also welcome.

During the reporting period, we saw additional
international support for Palestine's economic
development. I note the third high-level Conference
on Cooperation among East Asian Countries for
Palestinian Development, under the co-chairpersonship
of Japan and Palestine. I also note the Peace to
Prosperity economic workshop that took place in
Bahrain on 25 and 26 June, and which was attended by
Government officials, business leaders, representatives
of international organizations and religious leaders,
among others.

Humanitarian and economic support for the
Palestinian population is crucial to creating an
environment conducive to viable negotiation. Such
measures should be followed by a comprehensive peace
agreement that addresses all final status issues.

In closing, I would like to emphasize the severity
of the situation in the occupied Palestinian territory
and the urgent need for tangible steps to reverse the
negative trajectory. The circumstances will hardly ever
be ideal for advancing peace, but let us do our utmost
with conviction, hope and creativity to support the
creation of those circumstances. The United Nations
remains committed to supporting Palestinians and
Israelis in their efforts to end the conflict and to
realizing the vision of two States, living side by side in
peace and security.

