Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): I too
should like to congratulate the States of Africa on the
foundation of the African Union. Bulgaria wishes the
African Union every success. I should also like to
thank the Permanent Representative of Canada for
having taken the initiative of requesting this open
debate on an issue of great timeliness.

As a country associated with the European Union,
Bulgaria fully endorses the statement made earlier on
behalf of the Union by the representative of Denmark.
In its capacity not only as a signatory of the Rome
Statute but also as one of the first 60 countries to have
ratified it, Bulgaria has worked and continues to work
actively to bring about the consolidation of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) as a court with
universal jurisdiction to combat crimes against
humanity, genocide and war crimes, and against
impunity for the most grievous crimes. We associate
ourselves with all those who are working to strengthen
the principles of international law, the Charter of the
United Nations and the Rome Statute.

Bulgaria is the sole representative in the Security
Council not only of the Eastern European regional
group, but also of the Balkan countries. In that
capacity, it is of vital importance to my country to
preserve the still rather fragile stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. In order to contribute to promoting this
stability, and while recognizing the essential role
played by the United Nations and the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) in that
regard, as coordinator of the contact drafting group for
the former Yugoslavia last month Bulgaria introduced
in the Security Council a draft resolution on Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Along with other countries - and
this is something that relates not only to Bosnia and
Herzegovina but to the whole region - our goal is to
develop a clear vision for the future of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We think that this is a responsibility of
the entire international community and of the Security
Council. The United Nations and the Security Council
have undertaken serious commitments to assist that
country to move towards democracy. As the essential
political body of our Organization, the Council has the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. The Council must
remain fully engaged in Bosnia and Herzegovina until
the process that we began with so much effort becomes
irreversible.

The very animated discussions that have taken
place among members of the Security Council in the
last few weeks have been prompted by the entry into
force of the Rome Statute, which gave rise to
misgivings among some countries - including the
United States - that the Statute might concern their
citizens working in United Nations peacekeeping
operations on the territories of countries parties to the
Statute. Those discussions have tested the Council's
ability to carry out its mandate under Chapter VII of
the Charter.

Given the extremely complex situation that has
arisen, my country has taken an important decision to
work tirelessly for the unity of the Council, keeping in
mind the very serious political consequences of this
decision not only for Bosnia and Herzegovina but also
for the other peacekeeping operations. We remain
convinced that the members of the Council must act in
a spirit of compromise and mutual understanding, and
that they must actively work to find a solution that is
acceptable to all.

I would like to reaffirm here my country's very
clear position. Peacekeeping operations are an essential
instrument of the United Nations and the Security
Council in the implementation of the mandates
stemming from Chapter VII of the Charter.
Accordingly, the search for compromise should not be
linked with the weakening of important international
treaties such as the Rome Statute. We are convinced
that there is a possible solution to the current situation,
and that that solution can be found through
compromise and flexibility on all sides. Bulgaria will
strive to arrive at a formulation that will accommodate
the interests of all the parties concerned in this
discussion. We stand ready to discuss each and every
proposal that provides a reasonable response to the
current problem. United under the Charter of the
United Nations, we are duty-bound to find a solution
that both enshrines and preserves the principles of
international law, to which we all subscribe, and takes
into account the legitimate interests of the various
countries involved.

