Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): Let me
begin by welcoming High Representative Inzko back to
the Security Council. I also thank him for his
comprehensive briefing and his service and support of
the Dayton Peace Agreement.

The United States remains committed to the
success of Bosnia and Herzegovina, where we and our
12-33985
European Union (EU) allies have invested much over
the 16 years since the signing of the Dayton Peace
Agreement. We are very encouraged by the progress
made in recent months, and hope to see the leaders of
Bosnia and Herzegovina build upon that momentum to
resolve the remaining obstacles on the path towards
Euro-Atlantic integration, and to develop governing
institutions that will deliver results for all citizens
regardless of ethnicity.

I would like to make three points in reaction to
High Representative Inzko's report (see S/2012/307).

First, the United States welcomes Bosnia and
Herzegovina's significant progress on forming a
national Government since the last report (see S/2011/682). We applaud the diligence with which the
new Government has approached its responsibilities,
including adopting a State budget and pursuing
EU-required reforms. The Parliamentary Assembly's
adoption of two key EU-required laws - the Law on
State Aid and the Law on Population Census,
Households and Apartments - also are welcome and
critical milestones on the road to full European
integration. With that goal in mind, we encourage
Bosnia and Herzegovina's compliance with the
European Court of Human Rights ruling in the Sejdic-
Finci vs. Bosnia and Herzegovina case, which would
allow the EU stabilization and association agreement to
enter into force. The United States strongly supports
the European Union's increasing engagement under EU
Special Representative Peter Sorensen. The Office of
the High Representative and the EU complement one
another's important roles in helping the Bosnian people
find a path forward. We welcome their excellent
cooperation on the ground.

Secondly, we share the High Representative's
positive views on the 9 March political agreement on
principles to be used to resolve the issues of defence
and State property. We urge Bosnia and Herzegovina to
implement as soon as possible the defence property
portion of the agreement, through registration of
defence properties, in order to meet NATO's condition
for participation in the membership action plan. The
implementation of both State and defence property
deals would complete two outstanding 5+2 objectives,
bringing Bosnia and Herzegovina closer to meeting the
Peace Implementation Council's criteria for closing the
Office of the High Representative. Until the 5+2
criteria have been met, it is critical that that Office
12-33985
receive sufficient resources and political support to
uphold its mandate under the Dayton Peace Agreement.

Thirdly, the United States remains steadfastly
committed to preserving Bosnia and Herzegovina's
sovereignty and territorial integrity. We remain deeply
concerned by ongoing rhetoric challenging Bosnian
sovereignty and attempting to roll back past reforms.
The High Representative's latest report highlights
continued nationalistic statements made by senior
Republika Srpska officials acknowledging deliberate
obstruction of Dayton institutions and referencing the
dissolution of the State. Such statements do not help
the country move forward and are unacceptable.

Rather than attack the Dayton Peace Agreement
and the constitutional basis of the State, we hope that
all parties will continue to engage in political dialogue
with a view to serving the needs of all Bosnian
citizens. In that regard, it is imperative that Bosnians
work together responsibly in advance of October's
municipal elections, to contribute to reconciliation and
strengthen Bosnian democratic institutions.

As Secretary Clinton stated in July 2010, on the
fifteenth anniversary of the Srebrenica genocide,

"a prosperous, free and unified Bosnia and
Herzegovina is the most worthy monument to
those who lost their lives at Srebrenica, and the
best guarantee against such a tragedy ever
repeating itself".

