Mr. Timerman (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Before turning to the topic of today's debate, I wish to
convey the condolences of the people and Government
of Argentina to the United Nations, the Governments of
the countries of the victims and to the families of those
individuals who died in the service of peace in
Afghanistan as a result of the attack on the United
Nations compound on Friday. Once again, we see that
intolerance towards others on religious or cultural
grounds leads to unacceptable acts of violence. We
hope that the sacrifice of those who gave their lives for
international peace and security will encourage us to
redouble our efforts to build a culture of peace.

I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of April and to thank you in particular
for having convened this open debate on the situation
in Haiti, which gives us the opportunity to reaffirm our
robust commitment to that country, reflected in the fact
that 70 per cent of the personnel deployed by Argentina
in seven United Nations peacekeeping missions are
serving in the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH).

The international community has reiterated on
several occasions its steadfast commitment to Haiti.
Moreover, the successive crises caused by devastating
natural disasters regularly remind us of the need to
maintain continuous cooperation efforts.

Following the January 2010 earthquake, the
Interim Haiti Recovery Commission was established
with the essential task of coordinating international
assistance. We hope that the United Nations will
continue playing an appropriate role, in that regard.
For its part, Argentina has assumed additional
specific responsibilities that we continue to fulfil in
direct contact with the Haitian authorities. These
include the delivery of humanitarian assistance by
White Helmets, completing a total of four missions
between 2004 and 2010, and the promotion of
autonomous production of fresh food in household,
school and community gardens through the Haiti Pro-
Huerta programme, with the ultimate objective of
achieving food security.

Argentina's commitment to Haiti can also been
seen in our active participation in the Union of South
American Nations, an organization which, among its
many actions and commitments, decided in February
2010 to establish a fund for the reconstruction of the
country and in August 2010 institutionalized its
presence on the island with the opening of a technical
secretariat in Port-au-Prince.

Notwithstanding the commitment of the
international community as a whole to the
reconstruction of Haiti, we are aware of the
dissatisfaction of some sectors of the Haitian
population with the failure to deliver the humanitarian
assistance promised, which has indirectly affected the
perception of the entire international presence in Haiti.
This has led to consideration of ways to adapt the
mandate of the Mission and of ways in which the
countries of our region will participate in the new
phase.

We are convinced that local participation is the
fundamental principle to be taken into account in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding endeavours. In this
regard, like other countries of the region, we believe it
very important to establish direct contact with the
elected authorities as soon as possible so as to ascertain
their position on what they expect from international
cooperation as a whole and from the varied support
that the States Members of the Organization can
provide for reconstruction in Haiti.

In this regard, a number of Ministers for Foreign
Affairs and Defence from Latin America met in
Montevideo on 10 March to consider this matter.
Subsequently, we decided to draw up a report on the
situation in Haiti and the possibilities for cooperation
between the region and the new authorities, including
through institutional support and MINUSTAH.
Once that regional report has been finalized, we
are confident that we will be able to work with the
Secretariat to ensure that, in the drafting of the next
report of the Secretary-General and the setting of the
budget for MINUSTAH, appropriate attention is given
to two important aspects. First, due attention should be
paid to aspects relating to the strengthening of the rule
of law and institutional reconstruction in Haiti, such as
the provision of training and equipment to the Haitian
National Police. It is also very important to take into
account MINUSTAH's potential contributions to
peacebuilding in the country, including the possibility
of stepping up the activities of the engineering
component in the field of reconstruction, building on
the work achieved so far.

Finally, regardless of the criteria that may be
applied to the mandate of MINUSTAH, it is essential
that the United Nations assume further responsibility
for the coordination international efforts in support of
Haiti, always on the basis of the priorities set by the
country itself, in order to make sustained progress
towards the consolidation of a framework of stability
that will allow for a progressive transfer of
responsibilities to the Haitian authorities.

