Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to thank the representatives of
Germany, India and South Africa for their detailed
briefings on the activities of the counter-terrorism
Committees and for their efforts and energetic work in
leading them. The recommendations and analyses in
their briefings deserve our careful attention.

The Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004)
are essential mechanisms to ensure the implementation
of the obligations deriving from those instruments. It is
therefore essential to continue strengthening their
institutional capacities, continuously assess their
working methods and revitalize their tools in order to
facilitate cooperation and assistance to Member States.

To that end and in accordance with resolution
1963 (2010), the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
through the Executive Directorate, should continue to
work closely and in coordination with other United
Nations bodies on capacity-building to apply the
counter-terrorism international instruments, including
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
and the resolutions of the Security Council.

We welcome the review of the preliminary
assessment of implementation format and the
strengthening of dialogue with the Member States.
Greater transparency in the preparation of assessments
will provide more accurate information not only on the
status of implementation, but also on the assistance
needed by Member States. We highlight the renewed
emphasis placed on respect for human rights as an
essential part of international efforts against terrorism.
In this regard, the Committee should also promote
measures aimed at protecting and promoting the rights
of victims of terrorism. Unfortunately, this essential
element of the fight against terrorism, reflected in the
Global Strategy, has not been properly developed in the
framework of the Organization.

Regarding the 1267 Committee, Colombia
welcomes the reforms introduced by resolution 1904
(2009), aimed at improving procedures, particularly
with regard to respect for due process, transparency
and the quality of the information contained in the
consolidated list. The creation of the Office of the
Ombudsperson was a major step towards the
strengthening and legitimacy of the regime.
Ms. Kimberly Prost has done an outstanding job in her
few months as Ombudsperson.

11-3390]
We must continue to deepen the reform process
aimed at establishing fairer and more transparent
procedures. The Committee should ensure greater
availability of and access to the information related to
individuals and entities, and the reasons for listing
and/or de-listing. It is necessary to strengthen the
Office of the Ombudsperson and to provide resources
sufficient to the effective accomplishment of the
mandate. It is essential that the Committee facilitate
the provision of assistance to Member States so they
can have appropriate procedures to fully implement the
obligations arising from resolution 1267 (1999) and
subsequent resolutions.

I would like now to refer to the 1540 Committee.
My delegation co-sponsored resolution 1977 (2011)
because we are convinced that the very existence of
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and their
delivery systems constitutes a threat to international
peace and security. With the unanimous adoption of
resolution 1977 (2011), the Security Council
acknowledged the progress achieved by States, and
recognized that the full implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) is a task that requires ongoing efforts at
the national, regional and international levels.

International cooperation and technical assistance
are essential tools in responding effectively to the risk
that non-State actors may acquire, develop or use
weapons of mass destruction and/or traffic in them.
The extension of the mandate of the 1540 Committee
for 10 years will help us to plan its long-term activities
and increase its capacity to support Member States in
implementing resolution 1540 (2004).

Through various resolutions, the Security Council
has ordered that States must prevent all terrorist acts,
block and punish their funding, offer no passive or
active support for terrorism, and intensify and facilitate
the exchange of operational information, inter alia. We
therefore reiterate that cooperation in this respect
cannot be left to the discretion of States but is an
obligation under Chapter VII of the Charter.

My country has suffered the scourge of terrorism
and condemns it in all its forms and manifestations. We
reaffirm that there are neither motivations nor
circumstances to justify it. We are convinced that
terrorism can be defeated only with comprehensive and
decisive action of the international community through
cooperation and compliance with the obligations of
international law. International declarations and
condemnation of terrorism of any form are essential,
but even more important are decisive strikes against
terrorism and its perpetrators, such as that which
recently put an end to the criminal career of Osama Bin
Laden. Terrorist groups and the international networks
they have created remain active, requiring the
international community to reiterate its resolve to fight
them head on.

International cooperation should be the guiding
principle in the fight against terrorism. It is therefore
necessary to continue strengthening the coordination
between the three Committees and between them and
competent United Nations entities that are part of the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force.

