Mr. Terzi di Sant'Agata (Italy): At the outset,
Mr. President, I wish to express our deepest
appreciation for your presence today. Our appreciation
goes also to the delegation of Costa Rica for convening
this debate on strengthening collective security through
general regulation and reduction of armaments.

I have been asked by my Government to convey
to Your Excellency a sincere welcome, underlining the
high significance of you presiding over this Council
today. I would also like to express appreciation to the
Vice-President and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Panama, His Excellency Samuel Lewis-Navarro, for
being here today and delivering his statement, and to
the High Representative of for Disarmament Affairs,
Mr. Duarte, for his statement.

Italy aligns itself with the statement that the
representative of the French presidency of the
European Union will deliver on behalf of the Union.

Today's debate provides us with an opportunity to
examine the relationship between disarmament and
peace and security and to reaffirm our commitment to
an effective multilateral system centred on the United
Nations as the best framework for coordinated action
in this field.

The link between peace and security,
development and human rights is clear and undisputed.
We are all committed to pursuing these goals together,
knowing that there can be no peace and security
without the fulfilment of basic needs and no economic
development without the rule of law and respect for
human rights.

This connection between security, development
and human rights means that gains in one area translate
into positive consequences for the other two.
Disarmament can indeed free up resources for
development, while an effective collective security
system can reduce the need for military expenditures
by individual States. Member States should feel that
their security concerns are better addressed in a
multilateral framework than in an arms race.
Strengthening collective security arrangements at both
the global and regional levels can therefore generate
the confidence needed to promote disarmament.

The Security Council has a specific and special
role to play. To be credible, it must be able to address
crises at an early stage, prevent them from
degenerating into open conflicts and find solutions
when they do. Close cooperation with regional
organizations and arrangements is often crucial. The
Council has often debated the role of regional
organizations and favoured their role in managing the
crises that concern them directly. A new security
consensus to effectively face today's multifaceted
threats should be based on a close relationship between
the Security Council and regional organizations.

In 1993, the United Nations Disarmament
Commission adopted guidelines and recommendations
for regional approaches to disarmament. Regional and

023-6091!)
global approaches to disarmament are complementary
and should be pursued simultaneously. The toolbox of
arms control and confidence-building measures
developed in Europe, for example, could make a useful
contribution to the global efforts of the United Nations.

In addition to the Security Council's primary
responsibility for the maintenance of peace and
security, we would like to highlight the efforts of other
United Nations bodies, namely the General Assembly,
its two subsidiary bodies - the First Committee and
the Disarmament Commission - and the Conference
on Disarmament. The United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs and its regional centres also play
an important role.

The First Committee's role in setting the global
disarmament agenda cannot be overstated. Nor can the
Disarmament Commission's guidelines, which provide
the relevant standards for the establishment of nuclear-
weapon-free zones. Italy has always supported the
fundamental norm-setting activities of the
Disarmament Commission and is committed to the
immediate start and early conclusion of negotiations of
a non-discriminatory, universally applicable treaty
banning the production of fissile material for nuclear
weapons.

Therefore, we fully support efforts to make these
United Nations bodies more effective. Their broad
membership makes them an expression of the entire
international community. This is crucial, because
United Nations efforts in the field of disarmament and
international security cannot succeed unless they enjoy
the broadest political support.

