Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are very grateful to Mr. Jan Kubis
for his briefing on the situation in Afghanistan and
for presenting the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2014/163). We are also grateful for Mr. Tanin's
presentation.

We support the efforts of the Afghan leadership
to continue moving the country on the path of peace,
stability, development and broad cooperation with
neighbours in the region. We pay tribute to efforts
by the Afghans themselves to try, in the face of
various challenges, to determine their future and take
responsibility for their development and security. We
hope that at this crucial turning point in the history
of the country the people and society will be able to
mobilize their efforts and come together to fulfil
constructive objectives in the interest of all, respecting
human rights, fairness and harmony.

The situation in Afghanistan has been worsening
and it has remained at the centre of the attention of the
international community, especially since the country
is nearing critical milestones, namely, presidential
elections and the withdrawal of the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF). Those factors will,
to a large extent, determine the dynamics for the
unfolding of the situation, not only in Afghanistan but
in the region as a whole.

In this crucial period, we need a comprehensive
analysis of the risks and threats that stand in
Afghanistan's way. We cannot but note that the
report before us today does not mention many of the
challenges that the country faces, such as the Taliban
and Al-Qaida - which is not mentioned in the
report, as if Al-Qaida was not present in the country
at all - and other terrorist groups. Their aggressive
activity is a factor in the significant increase in number
of civilian casualties and deaths among Afghan
security forces. Armed opposition has strengthened in
various regions, particularly in areas previously under
the full control of the Government. The situation in the
south and east of the country is deteriorating. That is
confirmed by the armed attack on the Afghan National
Army base in Kunar province mentioned in the report,
the bold abduction by Taliban extremists of residents
in Kandahar and Nangarhar provinces for supporting
the Government and the increased number of deaths
among peaceful individuals in Helmand province.
Increasing terrorist activity in the north and north-east
is especially alarming, as the armed opposition there
has more than 10,000 fighters.

We cannot agree with the report's assessment of the
Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan. It is not at all limited
to remote and mountainous regions. It has been active
outside of Afghanistan's borders, as confirmed by the
killing of three Turkmen border guards near the border
between Afghanistan and Turkmenistan. Just three
years ago, the northern region of Afghanistan was calm.

We are highly concerned about the situation that
could develop in Central Asia after the withdrawal
of ISAF. We have seen increasing numbers of attacks
on foreigners, particularly United Nations staff. The
terrorist attack in January in Kabul that lead to the
deaths of20 people, including the Russian representative
at the mission, confirmed that the Taliban believe they
can act with impunity. The latest incident - the killing
of a journalist in the capital on 11 March - is another
example.

Bearing that in mind, it is our belief that certain
people continue to convince themselves that the
situation is fine, especially given that the insurgents
have demonstrated their destructive potential in the
run-up to the elections.

The Russian Federation is closely monitoring
the electoral process. It is of serious concern that, on
10 March, an appeal was published on the Taliban
website, urging the citizens of Afghanistan to avoid
participating in the electoral process, because any such
participation would be considered as efforts to assist
the occupation forces.

A legitimate question therefore arises: To what
extent is the forced transfer of responsibility conducted
in the country, from the international military force
to the Afghan forces justified? And to what extent is
the artificial withdrawal timetable justified? To what
extent has the coalition fulfilled the Council's mandate
in terms of stabilization and security and preparing
effective Afghan law enforcement and security forces?
That will require NATO to provide an objective status
report to the Security Council at the end of the year.

It is our belief that, if Kabul agrees to NATO's
further presence after 2014, it must be based on an
international legal framework in the form of a Security
Council resolution. After stabilization tasks have been
achieved, there will no further need for foreign military
contingents in Afghanistan. Efforts to address that
issue should focus on ensuring that Afghan citizens
and military personnel do not lose their lives as a result
of erroneous air strikes by ISAF. The most recent such
error took place in Logar province, killing five people
and injuring eight.

There is no doubt that opium production, which
has increased by 150 per cent, has contributed to
extremist activity. The number of drug addicts
has increased by 1 million, among which there are
300,000 children. The fight against illicit drug
manufacturing - which represents a threat to peace
and stability not only in Afghanistan, but at regional
and international levels - requires collective efforts. It
is not possible to pretend that is not a problem, simply
by indicating the lack of a specific mandate under ISAF.

Areas of cooperation must be defined among
NATO and the Collective Security Treaty Organization
(CSTO), aimed at illicit drug trafficking. The CSTO has
significant experience in combating drug trafficking,
and such efforts against that scourge would be more
effective in cooperation with NATO. Even a modest
reduction in drug trafficking activity would represent
a major achievement by the international community.

Russia fully supports the efforts of the Afghan
Government to support national reconciliation. Those
efforts should be headed by the Kabul Government
and based on three principles, that is, insurgents must
lay down their weapons, acknowledge Afghanistan's
Constitution and completely renounce relations with
Al-Qaida and other terrorist organizations.

It is clear that, as foreign forces draw down from
Afghanistan and Afghan security forces gain strength,
the motivation of the armed opposition will weaken.
The history of the Qatari office that was temporarily
closed by the Taliban is a good example. Bearing that
in mind, it might be possible to weaken the Council's
sanctions against the Taliban under certain conditions.

The Russian Federation considers it important
to strengthen regional cooperation in contributing
to the development of Afghanistan as a peaceful,
economically developed State. The best platform for
that is the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, which
represents nearly all of the countries of the region,
including Afghanistan.

Similarly, we do not consider justified what has
been noted about the Istanbul Process and its high
marks. Its added value has not yet been confirmed and
the working group format it is following has not proved
very effective. Also, there has been a lack of interest on
the part of the States parties. In our View, that process
simply represents a platform for international dialogue
to generate innovative ideas.

The stabilization of Afghanistan will achieve
firm results only through the collective efforts of all
actors, which must be effectively coordinated in order
to maximize results. In that respect, the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan will make an
essential contribution. Its role, as the foreign military
contingents withdraw, will only increase, as resolution
2145 (2014), adopted today, confirms.

Russia is ready to continue to develop regional
cooperation in the interests of Afghanistan in those
areas that could provide real benefits to the country. We
are open to engaging in partnership with all interested
States in the implementation of projects of interest to
Afghanistan.

The Russian Federation continues to provide
humanitarian aid to Afghanistan. We anticipate
that coordinated regional efforts to implement the
commitments made by the international community
will contribute to the sustainable development of the
country and the well-being of its citizens, as well as
help to re-establish a peaceful Afghanistan that is free
of terrorism and drug-related crime.

In conclusion, I would like to congratulate our
Afghan colleagues in the light of the upcoming holiday
of Nowruz and to wish them a good year.

