Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman and
Under-Secretary-General O'Brien for their briefings.

The recent escalation of the conflict in some parts
of Syria, especially Aleppo, has resulted in large
numbers of casualties among civilians and medical and
humanitarian relief workers. China sympathizes deeply
with the Syrian people in their suffering. We condemn
all attacks on civilian and humanitarian facilities.

The Syrian conflict cannot be settled by military
means, which will result only in greater unrest and
disaster. In that regard, China appreciates the new
round of efforts made by the Russian Federation and
the United States. The top priority now is for the
parties in Syria to put the interests of their nation
and people above everything else, cherish their hard-
won ceasefire, abide strictly by the relevant Security
Council resolutions, implement the agreement on the
cessation of hostilities effectively and end all attacks
on civilian and humanitarian facilities immediately in
order to regain the earlier momentum of the ceasefire.
The implementation of the agreement on the cessation
of hostilities has played an important role in expanding
the humanitarian relief operations and advancing the
Geneva peace talks.

In spite of the recent escalation of tensions in
some areas of Syria, in most parts of the country
the ceasefire has by and large been maintained. The
international community and the parties concerned
should adopt effective measures as soon as possible to
consolidate the results that have been achieved so far.
Other countries in the region should act in the interests
of maintaining regional peace and stability generally
and play a constructive role in achieving a full ceasefire
and a halt to the violence in Syria. The members of the
International Syria Support Group (ISSG) should work
together and consult as soon as possible on specific
measures for controlling the situation, thereby creating
conditions conducive to advancing the political process
in Syria and expanding humanitarian relief operations.

The Geneva peace talks have recently managed
to make progress despite difficulties and setbacks,
with the parties to the talks reaching a preliminary
understanding on some aspects. China appreciates
the important role that has been played in that regard
by Mr. Staffan dc Mistura, the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria. The more complex the
situation in Syria, the more essential it is to pursue
a political settlement without wavering, to insist on
enabling the Syrian people themselves to decide their
country's future and destiny and on the role of the
United Nations as the main conduit for good offices, to
firmly support the work of Special Envoy de Mistura
and ensure that the next round of the peace talks in
Geneva is resumed as soon as possible. The parties in
Syria should work on the principle of addressing the
easier issues first and moving to more difficult ones,
meeting each other halfway, establishing mutual trust
and gradually arriving at a solution acceptable to all.

Countering terrorism is an important component of
the efforts to address the Syrian issue. If terrorism is
not eradicated, the Syrian people will have no peace
and the countries of the region will have no security.
International cooperation in fighting terrorism must
adhere to uniform standards and make full use of the
leading and coordinating role of the United Nations
and its Security Council. We should do all we can to
fight all those identified as terrorists by the Council.
Recently, terrorist groups have frequently used chemical
materials as weapons, and the international community
must come up with effective ways to respond to that
issue as soon as possible.

As a permanent member of the Security Council
and a member of the ISSG, China has been working
tirelessly to achieve a political settlement of the Syrian
question. At a meeting of ISSG foreign ministers,
Mr. Wang Yi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of China,
laid out China's four-point proposal for a settlement
and put forward a specific programme for advancing
the ceasefire and cessation of hostilities, expediting
progress on humanitarian relief work and advancing
the political process. The special envoy for Syria of
the Chinese Government recently visited Geneva,
Syria and other countries concerned to engage in an
in-depth exchange of views with the parties involved
on the maintenance of the cessation of hostilities, the
expansion of humanitarian relief and the advancement
of the Geneva peace talks. We will continue to
play an active and constructive role in advancing a
comprehensive, equitable and appropriate settlement of
the Syrian question.

