Mr. Timmermans (Netherlands): On 17 July,
the downing of flight MH-17 caused the death of 298
innocent people. Their lives ended abruptly in midair
above Ukrainian territory - 298 innocent people from
11 countries and four continents. Our thoughts and
prayers are with those who lost their loved ones. Four
days later, I had the honour to address the Council (see S/PV.7221). That day, the Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2166 (2014). We remain grateful for that, and
we appreciate today's opportunity to brief the Council
on where we are two months and two days after this
unspeakable tragedy.

We remain fully committed to completing the
repatriation of human remains and personal belongings
and to facilitating the investigation into the cause of the
crash. We will continue to devote ourselves to ensuring
justice for the victims and their loved ones. We will not
rest until those responsible for this heinous crime are
held accountable.

Let me here recall paragraph three of the
memorandum of understanding between the Netherlands
and Ukraine in which we agree that:

"The Netherlands will coordinate the
investigation into the circumstances of the
accident, and will be responsible for the conduct
of the investigation in line with the provisions of
Chapter 5 of Annex 13 to the Chicago Convention.
The Netherlands will ensure the participation of
other parties concerned, in particular Ukraine
as the State of Occurrence, Malaysia as the State
of Registry, the United States of America as the
State of Manufacture and the International Civil
Aviation Organization (ICAO). The Netherlands
will communicate the report and findings to the
concerned States. Ukraine will use every means
available to facilitate the investigation."

I want to thank the countries that have actively
supported the implementation of resolution 2166 (2014).
It has been a privilege working with them, and I salute
the high level of professionalism, especially the human
nature of the efforts being made - so much humanity.
We are particularly appreciative of the tireless efforts
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe on the ground under very, very difficult
conditions. We have tremendous respect for the work
done by the rescue workers, initially by very brave
people from Ukraine, later by ajoint team ofMalaysian,
Australian and Dutch forensic experts.

Regrettably, rescue and investigation operations at
the site had to be suspended on 6 August because of
the deteriorating security situation. We are determined
to finish that work as soon as the security situation
allows us to do so. I urge all relevant parties to ensure
immediate and safe access to the site. We count on all
of them to make full implementation of resolution 2166
(2014) possible.

For the Netherlands, the first priority was and is
to bring home the remains of the victims and their
personal belongings. At present, 225 of the 298 victims
have been identified in the ongoing identification
process. That excruciatingly difficult work is being
carried out by experts from 11 different countries. They
deserve our deepest respect. Most of the remains have
been recovered, but we have the duty to make sure that
all remains and belongings are brought home. We will
continue to cooperate intensively with all countries
and international organizations involved to make this
happen.

As stipulated in resolution 2166 (2014), a thorough
investigation into the cause of the crash is under way.
In accordance with the agreement signed with Ukraine,
the independent Dutch Safety Board has assumed the
lead in this investigation, in close cooperation with
other countries involved, as well as with the United
Nations and ICAO. It has set up the investigation in full
accordance with international law and regulations, in
particular Annex 13 to the Convention on International
Civilian Aviation, which prescribes rules that need to
be followed. In accordance with those requirements
the following countries have contributed to the
international investigation team: Australia, France,
Germany, Indonesia, Italy, Malaysia, Russia, Ukraine,
the United Kingdom and the United States. ICAO
and the European Aviation Safety Agency have also
contributed to the investigation.

The Safety Board is committed to transparency and
will take all relevant information into account. I want to
underline the independent nature of the Board. Neither
the Dutch Government nor any other Government
has any control over, or influence on, its work and its
conclusions and recommendations. My Government is
committed to the truth and nothing but the truth. The
full independence of the Safety Board is the best way
to ensure that.

In accordance with paragraph 7.1 of annex 13 of
the Convention on International Civil Aviation, a
preliminary report was presented by the Safety Board
on 9 September. The preliminary report provides an
overview of the initial provisional facts. The report
has been sent to ICAO for consideration. ICAO
President Aliu remarked that ICAO is encouraged to
see that the MH-l7 investigation is proceeding with
the productive collaboration of accredited international
representatives. ICAO will continue to provide its full
support to the Netherlands, in conjunction with its
international team, while it awaits the conclusions and
recommendations that will be contained in the final
report on the accident.

For the final report, also required by annex 13
of the Convention, further consideration of available
data, including those deduced from the remains of the
victims, is needed. As the preliminary report states,
although additional investigations at the crash site itself
would be preferable, it is possible to conduct an effective
investigation based on other available sources and to
produce a final report. The final report is expected to
be published next summer.

The Netherlands remains fully committed to
bringing those responsible for that heinous act tojustice.
The Netherlands Public Prosecution Service has started
the largest criminal investigation in Dutch history. The
Public Prosecution Service has set up close cooperation
with the national investigation and prosecution
authorities of all other countries affected by the
tragedy. We all share the same goal. Those responsible
need to be brought to justice. My Government has been
informed by the Public Prosecution Services that the
investigation is complex, but that progress is being
made.

For all three dimensions of the crash of
MH-17 - recovery, investigation and accountability - it
remains of the utmost importance to gain safe access
to the site as soon as possible. We have deployed
personnel in Ukraine so they can move to the crash
site as soon as the security situation is stable enough.
We have an ongoing dialogue about this with Malaysia
and Australia. We are conscious of the responsibility
we have taken upon ourselves. We will do whatever is
needed to live up to that responsibility. We will not let
the Council down.

Let me conclude with the same words I used the last
time I addressed the Council. My country will not rest
until all facts are known andjustice is served.

