Mr. Laram (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this month
and thank you for holding this open debate.

This topic has particular importance for my
country on the basis of our foreign policy, which has
contributed to international efforts to prevent conflict,
to deal with its root causes and to work with the parties
concerned towards a peaceful settlement at a time when
the international community is responsible for saving
future generations from the scourge of war, as provided
for by the preamble to the Charter of the United
Nations. Nevertheless, since the establishment of the
United Nations, the world has witnessed the outbreak
of many conflicts, even though their root causes have
been addressed. Such disputes have become non-State
armed conflicts, giving rise to many material and
human losses that exceed those of international armed
conflicts, as well as the exacerbation of international
terrorism, poverty, the lack of development and ethnic
and religious persecution.

The facts on the ground around the world lead us
to conclude that there is a need to operationalize the
tools adopted by the United Nations and to enable
international and regional organizations to assume their
roles in accordance with Article 33 of the Charter so as
to prevent disputes from reaching the stage of armed
conflict. The mechanisms outlined in the concept note
(S/2014/572, annex) that you, Mr. President, kindly
provided, such as early warning and the role of the
Secretary-General and his special representatives and
special envoys, as well as preventive missions, must
also be put into practice, since we believe that such
measures will help to prevent conflict and to maintain
international peace and security. Since conflict
prevention is a proactive step, the effectiveness of such
measures requires, in our view, short-, medium- and
long-term strategies to assist implementation by all the
parties concerned so as to establish an international
environment of stability.

As we discuss this important issue, perhaps we
should recall today the fact that, in its presidential
statement of 31 January 1992 (S/23500), issued at the
end of a meeting held at the level of Heads of State
and Government, the Security Council stressed the
importance ofpeacemaking and peacekeeping, as well as
preventive diplomacy, to prevent conflict. If preventive
diplomacy seeks to resolve disputes before they arise,
the promotion and strengthening of institutions that
support peace will ensure non-recurrence.

Experience has frequently proved that mediation,
in particular diplomatic mediation, is one of the
fundamental ways to prevent and to resolve disputes,
as provided for by the Charter of the United Nations.
In the context of international conflict prevention
efforts, the State of Qatar has therefore participated in
mediation between many conflicting parties. That has
been welcomed and supported by the Security Council,
and peaceful settlements that led to the prevention of
many conflicts in the Middle East and Africa and their
human, economic and financial costs have been found.

We welcome resolution 2171 (2014), adopted by the
Security Council today. We believe that it contains many
important elements that will contribute to international
conflict prevention efforts. Allow me to underscore the
following.

The first aspect is the need to act early in order to
identify those cases that may lead to conflict and to use
special means, such as early warning, mediation and
the efforts of the Security Council and the Secretary-
General, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and international resolutions.

The second element is the need to address the
root causes of conflicts, in particular the lack of
development, social justice and non-respect for human
rights.

Thirdly, if a conflict occurs, peacemaking must be
undertaken.

Fourthly, the protection of civilians must
be a priority in conflict, while underscoring the
responsibility of States to protect civilians.

Finally, there is a need for international assistance
to promote peace measures and the implementation
of agreements between the parties. Peace institutions
must also be supported.

