Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Mr. President, we appreciate
your initiative to promote this timely and very
important debate. We thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2010/394) and his briefing this morning,
and we welcome his intention to appoint a special
adviser on legal issues related to piracy off the coast of
Somalia. I also thank the Legal Counsel, Ms. Patricia
O'Brien, for her presentation and Ambassador Elmi
Ahmed Duale for his comments.

Let me join others in extending a very warm
welcome to Ambassador Nishida, the new Permanent
Representative of Japan to the United Nations.

We welcome the Secretary-General's report,
which offers a very good analysis of the complex
challenges involved in ensuring that those responsible
for piracy and armed robbery at sea off the coast of
Somalia are brought to justice. The greatest challenge,
of course, is addressing the root causes of the problem.
As the report indicates, restoring peace and stability,
promoting effective governance, strengthening the rule
of law and providing alternative livelihoods in Somalia
are essential to a sustainable response.

The brutal Al-Shabaab attack against a hotel in
Mogadishu yesterday - which killed more than 30
people, mostly civilians - is another shocking
reminder of the pressing need for a timely and
comprehensive solution to the situation in Somalia. We
once again condemn the violence in the strongest of
terms and express our condolences to the families of
the victims and to the Government and the people of
Somalia.

While strengthening efforts to bring stability and
peace to Somalia, it is important to combat piracy and
ensure that pirate militias do not enjoy impunity. The
Secretary-General's report analyses several options for
that purpose. The report recognizes that the current
approach of providing assistance to regional States to
prosecute and imprison pirates has achieved some
results. In particular, we welcome and commend the
efforts by Kenya and Seychelles to prosecute suspected
Somali pirates. The recent opening of the high-security
courtroom in Mombasa, with support from the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), is
expected to enhance Kenya's capacity in this regard.
More States in the region are considering undertaking
piracy prosecutions.

The Security Council has played an important
role in fostering such cooperation and should build
upon it, especially by increasing its engagement with
States in the region with the support of the
international community. We should give top priority
to the implementation of the Djibouti Code of Conduct
and full support to UNODC and UNDP programmes to
develop the security and justice sectors in Somalia and
its neighbours.

The problem of piracy off the coast of Somalia is,
however, a global one. The burden of prosecuting
suspected pirates should not lie solely with States in
the region, which are already disproportionately
affected by the crisis.

The United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea determines the duty of all States to cooperate to
the fullest possible extent in the repression of piracy.
As has been highlighted, the Convention's provisions
allow for universal jurisdiction against this
international crime. In this context, Brazil is
encouraged by the efforts of the Netherlands, the
United States, France, Germany, Spain and other States
outside the region to prosecute in their own courts
suspected pirates apprehended off the coast of Somalia.
States affected by the scourge of piracy - flag States
of attacked vessels, States of nationality of victims or
naval States exercising the right of visit - should not
shy away from exercising their jurisdiction.

I would also like to address two concerns that
seem crucial, whichever option is pursued to further
the aim of prosecuting suspects and imprisoning
convicted pirates operating off the coast of Somalia.

First, there is the issue of evidence-gathering.
Brazil is concerned that hundreds of suspects have
been released this year alone because of lack of
evidence to support prosecution. States apprehending
suspected pirates should do their utmost to ensure that
such arrests are made on credible grounds and that the
necessary evidence is timely and adequately collected
and transferred to the institutions involved in the
prosecution. Otherwise, the effectiveness of naval
operations may be undermined through impunity, on
the one hand, and human rights violations of innocent
seafarers, on the other.

Secondly, it also essential to address the impunity
of those most responsible for acts of piracy and armed
robbery at sea. It is unlikely that those who provide the
funds, sophisticated equipment and heavy weapons and
who in turn receive the lion's share of the ransoms
currently paid to Somali pirates will be found and
apprehended at sea. They are on land in Somalia and
elsewhere. Focusing on foot soldiers apprehended by
naval patrolling States alone will not be sufficient to
ensure sustainable justice and to dismantle pirate
criminal organizations operating off the coast of
Somalia. In this regard, it is important to make full use
of the targeted sanctions regime against pirate leaders,
to increase intelligence cooperation - especially to
track financial flows of piracy - and to consider the
authorization contained in paragraph 6 of resolution
1851 (2008), subsequently renewed by resolution 1897
(2009).

Almost 20 years of conflict in Somalia have had a
significant impact at sea. Our actions to combat piracy,
however important and necessary they may be, will
only have a limited effect in the absence of progress in
restoring peace and ensuring an effective Government
in Somalia.

