Mr. Skoog (Sweden): It is good to see you back
at the United Nations, Mr. President. I want to begin
by thanking Kazakhstan for convening today's
timely meeting on a very important issue. Your
country's historic contribution to disarmament and
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
is commendable. Indeed, by your decision, more than
25 years ago, to give up nuclear weapons, showed that
nuclear disarmament is indeed possible. Your personal
commitment to end nuclear testing and promote the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty deserves our
thanks. It is a priority shared by my country and by all
members of the European Union.

Let me also thank the Secretary-General for his
thoughtful intervention this morning. We fully agree
with the Secretary-General's new year's message that
global anxieties about nuclear weapons are their highest
level since the Cold War. Speculations in recent months
about the possibility of the use of nuclear weapons are
an unwelcome echo from the past.

Meanwhile, both State and non-State actors push
the boundaries of our common values through the
use of chemical weapons. There is no doubt that the
proliferation ofweapons ofmass destruction is a serious
threat to international peace and security.

Nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation are
two sides of the same coin and mutually reinforcing.
Making progress on both fronts must be a priority for the
international community and for the Security Council.
It is not only a moral and humanitarian responsibility,
but also essential for our common security interests.

The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) remains the indispensable framework
and the cornerstone of global disarmament and
non-proliferation. We are committed to the success of
the current NPT review cycle. That will require making
progress on all three pillars of the Treaty, including
disarmament, concerning which the nuclear-weapon
States have a special responsibility. The widespread
frustration within the international community
regarding the lack of progress within the NPT context
is real and well-founded. It needs to be addressed by
concrete progress in the implementation of existing
disarmament commitments.

Effective disarmament will require sincere
negotiations in good faith within the framework of
all existing conventions. We must all act according
to our commitments and live up to our promises. On
the path ahead, it is essential that we build mutual
trust, as was stressed by the Secretary-General and
President Nazarbayev earlier this morning, including
by increasing understanding for each another's
perspectives - something clearly lacking today.
We must also mobilize the necessary political will
to negotiate and compromise in order to reach a
positive outcome.

The paralysis in the Conference on Disarmament
(CD), which is now in its twenty-second year, should
be a matter of concern for us all. Sweden will assume
the rotating presidency of the CD next month. We
will make every effort to define a combination of
substantive issues based upon which a programme of
work can finally be agreed and that we hope may help
to break the deadlock.

We are also faced with the increasing threat of
weapons ofmass destruction being acquired by non-State
actors. Collective efforts are needed to meet the evolving
threats and uphold the global non-proliferation regime.
All States must work to implement their obligations
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).

Confidence-building measures can help reduce
tensions, prevent conflicts and build the trust necessary
for effective disarmament and non-proliferation. Such
efforts are strengthened if they are based on the clear
principles of accountability, transparency, irreversibility
and verifiability. The nuclear-weapon-free zone in
Central Asia provides a good example of where those
principles have been applied. It was the first zone of
its kind to be based on verification according to the
model additional protocol of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA). That provided the IAEA
with the ability to verify not only the non-diversion
of declared nuclear material, but also the absence of
undeclared nuclear material as well as activities in
participating States.

The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (J CPOA) is
another important example of the potential of diplomacy.
The JCPOA is designed to ensure the exclusively
peaceful nature of the Iranian nuclear programme
That crucial agreement contributes to stability within
and beyond the region, and contributes significantly to
strengthening the global non-proliferation architecture.
As reiterated by High Representative of the European
Union Federica Mogherini, and by many others around
the table today, the European Union remains committed
to supporting the full implementation of the JCPOA,
and it is vital that all parties continue to implement
their commitments. IAEA verification and the Joint
Commission for addressing implementation matters
are both indispensable components of the agreement.
In addition, we look forward to Iran's early ratification
of the additional protocol, which is essential to building
confidence and ensuring sustainability.

The Council has repeatedly addressed the testing
of nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles by the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea in breach of
international obligations and contrary to the existing
global norm against nuclear testing embodied in the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. We continue
to condemn those actions in the strongest terms.
The full and comprehensive implementation of the
Council's relevant resolutions by all United Nations
States Members is needed. At the same time, sanctions
alone will not solve the current crisis on the Korean
peninsula. Efforts are needed to pave the way for
a peaceful, diplomatic and political solution to the
conflict. In parallel to effectively implementing the
sanctions regime, we must undertake further work to
reduce tensions and build trust. We welcome the latest
developments on the peninsula, including the steps
taken to reopen channels of communication, such as
military-to-military dialogue. That is an important
means to avoid misunderstandings and reduce tensions.
We also welcome the decision of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea to participate in the
Olympic Games. Those are positive developments. It
is important to seize that window of opportunity and
support all efforts that can lead to denuclearization and
peaceful relations on the Korean peninsula.

Stepped-up efforts are also needed to address the
issue of chemical weapons. The use of such weapons in
Syria and Iraq is illegal and unacceptable. There can be
no impunity for such grave Violations of international
law. Those responsible must be identified and brought
to justice. We deeply regret the multiple instances of
the use of the veto in the Council, thereby hindering
accountability. Recent allegations of the use of
chlorine gas in Syria and ongoing investigations by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic
serve only to further illustrate the need to continue our
efforts to develop a new mechanism for attribution so
as to ensure accountability and uphold the international
disarmament and non-proliferation regime. The Council
has a responsibility in that regard, and we will continue
our efforts to find a way forward.

In his New Year's message, the Secretary-
General urged leaders to bring people together around
common goals. Surely, one of those goals must be
furthering non-proliferation and disarmament. The
Council must work together and enhance its efforts
to promote and uphold progress, including by helping
building confidence and trust among countries. We
will continue to work actively will all partners to
further disarmament, non-proliferation, respect for
international law and accountability for those who
Violate international norms and obligations.
