Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I thank you for joining
us in the Security Council, Madam President. I think
that your presence here again underlines your country's
commitment to the issue that is at stake today.

Germany remains steadfast in its commitment to
Israel's security as a Jewish and democratic State. The
German Government recently underlined its support to
Israel in a declaration on the occasion of the seventieth
anniversary of Israel becoming a Member of the United
Nations. We condemn all attacks on Israel in the
strongest possible terms, including the recent firing of
rockets from Gaza, which put Israel's security and the
lives ofcivilians at risk. Germany will not be silent when
Israel's right to exist is questioned or compromised.

Let me underline that, from our perspective,
only a two-State solution can meet the aspirations
of both parties and deliver peace and security in a
sustainable way. European Union member States are
united in stating that any future plan should consider
the parameters, as laid out in resolution 2334 (2016), in
order to be successful. We believe that this is essential
for Israel's security. It is indispensable that a solution be
negotiated and guarantee the right to self-determination
of the Palestinians as well. Any peace plan should not
preclude solutions negotiated between the two parties.

We are deeply concerned about developments that
increasingly undermine the prospects for a two-State
solution and contribute to entrenching a one-State
reality, which cannot be in anybody's interest. I can
only repeat what my French colleague just said that,
with regards to the developments on the ground, we are
moving closer to the point of no return.

The latestunilateral actions and decisions-the Israeli
decision to partly withhold Palestinian tax revenue, the
rejection of any tax revenue transfers by the Palestinian
Authority, the move of the United States Embassy to
Jerusalem and the United States recognition of Israel's
sovereignty over the occupied Golan Heights - have
all added to growing tensions and are not helpful in an
already fragile situation.

We reiterate our position that settlement activities
in the occupied Palestinian territories are illegal under
international law and undermine the prospect of a two-
State solution The continuous expansion of settlement
activity by Israel in the Palestinian territories is a
matter of great concern to us. That includes the recent
approvals of construction for thousands of new housing
units in settlements in the West Bank.

We call upon Israel to end the expansion of
settlements, the legalization of outposts and the
demolition and seizure of Palestinian-owned
structures. Those actions jeopardize the prospects
for a peace agreement on the basis of a two-State
solution by creating enclaves, obstructing Palestinian
development and leading to frustration and despair.
We are also extremely concerned about statements of a
possible annexation of parts of the West Bank. Should
such statements be translated into Government policy
or law, Germany would see that as a clear violation of
international law.

We also remain deeply concerned by the dire
economic and humanitarian situation in Gaza.
Protests in Gaza have to be peaceful, and the rights
of demonstrators to express their opinion freely and
peacefully have to be respected. At the same time, the
right to peaceful protest must not be used as a pretext
for incitement or exploited in order to commit violent
acts. In that context, we call on all sides to refrain from
the use of excessive force.

Let me turn to the very impressive briefing by
Commissioner-General Krahenbiihl. For we are deeply
concerned about what he had to report to the Council
with regard to the current challenges facing the mission
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA).
We believe that UNRWA remains indispensable for
providing humanitarian assistance and essential
services, not only in the Palestinian territory but also
in Jordan, Lebanon and Syria. What he mentioned
concerning East Jerusalem is worrisome. We would
like to commend UNRWA's efforts to overcome the
recent financial crisis as well as its tremendous work in
the light of that crisis.

In continuing to provide services that encompass
education, health care, relief, social services, camp
infrastructure and improvement, protection and
microfinance, UNRWA remains key to maintaining
stability in the region. We continue to firmly support the
mandate of UNRWA and encourage others to similarly
continue to show their political and financial support
for the Agency's work. In that regard, let me express
once again, as I did earlier, that we very much regret
that the United States, which had been a consistent
donor to UNRWA, is no longer contributing.

The question that I have asked the United States
delegation is, who does it believe will teach the more
than 200,000 students in the Gaza Strip, who would
no longer receive UNRWA schooling were funding
unavailable? The question of who would provide such
teaching has not been answered. I am afraid that, as
my French colleague just said, Hamas and others would
teach the children. We are therefore very grateful that,
in very difficult circumstances, UNRWA does what it
does. As the representatives of Kuwait and France said
earlier, Germany is proud to be among the top donors
in sponsoring that important work. In that context, I
have a question for Mr. Kreihenbiihl. Mr. Greenblatt
mentioned that the Commissioner-General scheduled
the donor conference for the same date as the Bahrain
conference. I would ask Mr. Mr. Krahenbiihl if he might
clarify that.
With regard to the situation of the Palestinian
Authority, we look forward to working with the new
Palestinian Government. Although the intra-Palestinian
reconciliation process remains in deadlock, progress is
urgently needed in order to build strong and inclusive
Palestinian institutions. That includes the renewal
of democratic legitimacy through well-prepared
elections, which are overdue. It is also important that
the Palestinian Authority remain financially stable
and functioning. That is important for the delivery
of health care, education and security to millions of
Palestinians, which, we believe, is in the interests of
both the Palestinians and the Israelis.

Resolution 2334 (2016), to which I alluded earlier,
needs to be fully implemented, not only with regard to
settlement activities but also violence against civilians,
including acts of terror, incitement, provocative
actions and inflammatory rhetoric. We welcome that
that the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/251)
also focuses on those obstacles to achieving peace.
We strongly urge all parties to de-escalate tensions,
exercise restraint and refrain from provocative rhetoric
and actions.

In conclusion, let me share the Secretary-General's
concern in his report about the weakening of the
international consensus to achieve the realization of a
negotiated two-State solution, based on internationally
agreed principles. Joint efforts to restore a political
perspective for the resumption of the peace process
are urgently needed. We support any attempt to restart
meaningful direct talks and negotiations between the
parties, with the objective of creating a lasting peace,
based on the internationally agreed parameters. At the
same time, we have to counter collectively the negative
developments on the ground that are undermining
the viability of a negotiated two-State solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, based on the internationally
agreed parameters.

