Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I too would like to
add my delegation's voice in welcoming Mr. Bassole
and Mr. Abou Moussa, Principal Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. It is very
good to be able to hear from them at first hand in the
Security Council.

On behalf of the United Kingdom, I would also
like to extend our warmest congratulations to Minister
Bassole on Burkina Faso's election to the Security
Council for the period 2008-2009. As the impressive
work done by President Compaore and Special
Representative Badini has shown, securing peace in
Cote d'Ivoire has been a very important venture. We
believe that the Council will benefit enormously from
Burkina Faso's experience and wisdom as we work to
ensure peace and security, not only in West Africa but
across the continent and more widely. Allow me to say
that the United Kingdom very much looks forward to
being able to work closely with the Mission of Burkina
Faso on those shared ventures.

I would also like to join others in welcoming the
appointment of Mr. Choi Young-jin as the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Cote
d'Ivoire. He is well known to United Nations
representatives in New York, and we look forward to
working with him. His role will be crucial, in particular
in certifying the electoral process.

I would like to reaffirm the United Kingdom's
support for the Ouagadougou Agreement, which is the
best chance yet to achieve sustainable peace in C6te
d'Ivoire. As Minister Bockel has said, it is important
that that the Council remains engaged. Like other
speakers, however, we do have some concerns about
the serious delays in meeting the timetable set out by
the Ouagadougou Agreement. I should like to make
four observations in that connection.

First, free, fair and credible elections are central
to resolving the crisis. Secondly, greater momentum is
needed on identifying voters through the mobile courts.
Thirdly, as other speakers have mentioned, integration
of the Forces nouvelles into the army and the
disarmament and demobilization of militia will also be
critical to success. Fourthly, we are concerned by
reports of human rights abuses, in particular sexual
violence against women and young girls, the increased
trafficking of children, and forced labour. I think it is
true that a culture of impunity for those responsible
still persists. We would like to use this occasion to urge

greater efforts to address those issues in C6te d'Ivoire,
and we call on the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to make that one of his priorities.

Lastly, I should like to say that we support the
press statement proposed by Minister Bassole.

