Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, I would like to thank the High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his
briefing this morning.

I would like to begin by highlighting Uruguay's
adherence to the principle of the territorial integrity
of States, enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations. Uruguay reaffirms its support for Bosnia and
Herzegovina in the consolidation of its unity and in the
exercise of its sovereignty.

Respect for institutions and legality is the path
towards a stable Bosnia and Herzegovina, in which the
communities that compose it live together in harmony.
In that context, Uruguay attaches the highest value to
the rule of law and to the authority of the institutions
established by the General Framework Agreement for
Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina and therefore deems
it essential to maintain the commitment to fully comply
with the 1995 Dayton Agreement. We urge all parties,
including the international community, to support any
and all efforts to promote peace and stability in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, which will also have an impact on
stability in the entire region.

Here I would make a special plea to the political
players in Bosnia and Herzegovina to conduct themselves
responsibly and to engage in a constructive dialogue
that will enable them to overcome their differences
and focus on national reconciliation and on achieving
common objectives, so as to ensure that Bosnia and
Herzegovina becomes a solid and prosperous nation.

The report of the High Representative (S/2016/9ll, annex) indicates scant progress in achieving the
remaining five objectives and two conditions
established by the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council for the closure of the Office of
the High Representative. For that reason, I would point
once again to the importance of continuing efforts and
maintaining progress in taking forward the 5+2 agenda.

Despite the lack of progress in some areas, Bosnia
and Herzegovina has progressed in others, which must
be highlighted. I wish in particular to note the climate
of security and stability that prevailed during the
period despite the inflammatory rhetoric and enabled
the peaceful holding of local elections of October.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has made progress in
implementing its Reform Agenda, adopted in July
2015, which focuses on the socioeconomic issues that
directly affect its citizens, and has taken a number
of steps towards European Union (EU) integration
through its signing of the Protocol on the adaptation
of the Stabilization and Association Agreement and the
adoption of the EU coordination mechanism.

The international community must continue
to support the process of consolidating the peace
agreements. We are especially grateful for the work of
the European Union-led peacekeeping force Operation
Althea, which represents a guarantee of the political
and social stability of the country. It is vital that the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina continue to
cooperate with the Office of the High Representative
until the end of his mandate, once the 5+2 programme
has been completed.

I reiterate Uruguay's commitment and our desire
to see a stable and sovereign Bosnia and Herzegovina
that embraces all of its citizens and focuses on their
common welfare.

