Mr. Malmierca Diaz (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the 118
countries members of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The Movement would like to take this
opportunity to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this open debate, which provides us with an
appropriate forum to make some comments on the
issue of the security sector reform.

In recent months, the international community
has begun to pay great attention to several
controversial theories and ideas that are directly linked
to the subject of our debate today. We have yet to reach
consensus among Members of the United Nations as
regards those concepts, which will require an
exhaustive process of negotiations. The Non-Aligned
Movement believes that security sector reform as a
whole is a concept that was recently developed within
several subregional and other intergovernmental
organizations, although it has never been debated in a
07-24463
transparent and inclusive manner at the multilateral
level in the context of the General Assembly.

The underlying theme of security sector reform is
that ineffectiveness and poor governance represent
serious obstacles to peace, stability, poverty reduction,
sustainable development, the rule of law and respect
for human rights. Nevertheless, there is insufficient
clarity as to how to assess that ineffectiveness. That
lack of clarity has led to divergent interpretations and
value judgments - a situation that could lead to
arbitrary implementation. That will undoubtedly lead
to undermining and infringing upon the concept of
sovereignty, which is a matter of overriding concern in
Charter of the United Nations.

The process of rehabilitating the security sector
in States emerging from conflict is a matter that should
be decided by national Governments as part of their
national strategies for post-conflict peacebuilding
bearing in mind their own needs and priorities, socio-
cultural characteristics and the specificities of each
case. It is not the prerogative of the international
community to prescribe the road they should follow.
National ownership is essential in that regard.

The Security Council, with its limited
membership, does not seem to be the appropriate
framework to plan, or even to direct, activities
involving inter-agency coordination aimed at carrying
out reforms in the security sector. In that regard, the
Non-Aligned Movement would like to highlight the
fact that if the concern is mainly about rehabilitating
the security sector in post-conflict situations - where
that sector has been affected along with other
Government institutions following several years of
conflict - then the issue is clearly not related to the
reform of the security sector. Instead, it is a matter of
capacity-building in the States emerging from
conflict- an area in which the Peacebuilding
Commission seems to be poised to play its role of
coordinator of the work of all United Nations bodies.

The Non-Aligned Movement stresses that we
cannot afford the luxury of repeating past mistakes:
when the Security Council has attempted to impose
reforms on the judicial and security sectors without
prior consent of the concerned State.

The Movement believes that efforts should
concentrate on resolving the root causes of conflicts. In
this regard, the organs and agencies of the United
Nations system need to coordinate their work to deal

with issues of underdevelopment, epidemics and
poverty, and the marginalization of the third world in
the global economy.

In conclusion, the Non-Aligned Movement
reaffirms the role of the Peacebuilding Commission
and reiterates that, without prejudice to the functions
and powers of the principal organs of the United
Nations in relation to post-conflict peacebuilding
activities, the General Assembly must play the key role
in the formulation of such policies and in assessing the
implementation of the relevant activities. The
concerted actions of international agencies are essential
in supporting the national programmes of States
emerging from conflict, including reconstruction and
rehabilitation and achieving economic development
and social progress. The Non-Aligned Movement
stresses the importance of national ownership and
capacity-building in the planning and implementation
of post-conflict peacebuilding activities, and these
must be based on the principles and purposes of the
United Nations Charter and on international law.

