Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the President for convening this debate. I would
like to begin by thanking Ambassador Sandra Honore,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
her presentation of the Secretary-General's report
(S/2014/617), as well as for her work as Head ofthe United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
In addition, I would like to acknowledge the presence
of the Permanent Representative of Haiti to the United
Nations.

Spain is a strong ally of Haiti, as evidenced by the
fact that, simply put, Haiti is far and away the biggest
recipient of Spain's official development assistance. I
think that fact speaks for the warm feelings of sympathy
and regard that the Spanish people feel for Haiti.

While I align myself with the statement just made
by the observer of the European Union, I would like

to add some remarks in my national capacity with
respect to a number of issues that concern the political,
security and humanitarian situation. I will then add
some thoughts on the future of MINUSTAH.

Spain shares the concern with regard to the political
situaution expressed by the Secretary-General in his
report. The current political impasse in Haiti could
jeopardize the elections planned for the end of this year.
Spain therefore believes that the only possible option is
a dialogue among the parties.

With regard to the security situation, we note
with satisfaction that there was progress between
2013 and 2014, due in no small part to institutional
strengthening of the Haitian National Police and the
role of MINUSTAH. However, we need to do more. We
need to work harder. We share the Secretary-General's
suggestion, as put forth in his report, that there needs
to be a greater commitment by the Haitian Government
for an expansion of the Haitian police force.

On the humanitarian front, I would like to
acknowledge and greatly appreciates the efforts of
MINUSTAH. We also commend the efforts carried out
by the entire international community to effectively
curb the tragic cholera epidemic.

Spain supports the consideration under way for
some time now by the Secretary-General on the future
of MINUSTAH. However, in the current political
context, which has been well explored in today's
meeting, Spain shares the Secretary-General's analysis
in the sense that the timeline for a reconfiguration
of the components of the Mission should take into
account the political and security situation, and that it
should have greater flexibility based on both short- and
medium-term analysis of the situation. I would like to
underscore the word flexibilitly.

On the other hand, we believe that MINUSTAH's
role will be fundamental in guaranteeing the normal
development of a secure and transparent electoral
process, as well as the establishment of a new
Administration. Therefore, Spain welcomes the
recommendation to extend the Mission's mandate
by one more year, until October 2015, on the terms
proposed by the Secretary-General.

