Mr. Elaraby (Egypt): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of office. The
delegation of Egypt is confident that your able leadership
will benefit the Security Council in its deliberations on
this important issue.

I should also like to pay tribute to your predecessor,
Ambassador Li Zhaoxing, the Permanent Representative
of China, for his commendable contributions during the
month of March.
The Permanent Representative of Indonesia will be
speaking shortly on behalf of the non-aligned States
parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT). We have seen his text and my
delegation shares his views.

This meeting of the Security Council is of the
utmost importance. What is really at stake is the ability of
the Council to discharge its primary responsibility in the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
Charter, in its Article 26, specifically confers upon the
Security Council the crucially important task of
formulating plans for the establishment of a system for
the regulation of armaments. The elaboration and adoption
of credible security assurances would fall squarely within
the ambit of the mandate assigned to the Council.

When the General Assembly was debating the
adoption of the NPT in 1968, Egypt's Permanent
Representative stated in unequivocal terms that the non-
nuclear Powers that signed the Treaty without a firm
guarantee from the major nuclear Powers would be

 

undermining and even jeopardizing their very existence as
sovereign States.

It is relevant to recall that the Charter was conceived
and concluded before the advent of the nuclear era; hence,
the perils of the nuclear age were unforeseen and perhaps
unimagined by the authors of the Charter. This explains the
absence of measures commensurate with the qualitatively
higher threats posed by nuclear weapons to international
peace and security. The advent of the atomic bomb
fundamentally altered the nature of the world in which the
United Nations would have to function, modified the
attitude that had been expressed in the Charter towards
disarmament, and firmly established the elimination of
nuclear weapons as the primary concern of all endeavours
pertaining to the survival of life on our planet.

In this context, it was imperative politically and even
psychologically to assign the highest priority to attaining
general and complete disarmament. It was also for the
purpose of preserving peace and security in the world that
efforts were directed at limiting the possibilities of nuclear
confrontation. Only the five permanent members of the
Security Council were exempted from the ban on obtaining
nuclear weapons. In return, non-nuclear-weapon States were
to be offered guarantees that nuclear weapons would not be
used against them.

It is indeed regrettable that, 25 years after the entry
into force of the NPT, it has not yet acquired universality.
General and complete disarmament remains a faraway and
even an elusive objective. Moreover, the NPT relies for its
implementation on the strict application of comprehensive
International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards, which are
themselves inadequate and need to be strengthened, updated
and improved. Consequently, the nuclear-weapon States
have a definite obligation to demonstrate to non-nuclear-
weapon States parties to the NPT that their security will not
in any way be endangered by the use or threat of use of
nuclear weapons, and to extend genuine protection and
assistance in the event that this security is threatened.

A brief survey of the genesis of the concept of
security assurances is in order. When negotiations began on
elaborating a treaty to curtail the proliferation of nuclear
weapons in the mid-1960s, many States held the view that
a clause on both negative and positive security assurances
must form an integral part of any such treaty. Indeed, the
Egyptian delegation has consistently strived, throughout the
years, to ensure that non-nuclear-weapon States would be
adequately protected. As far back as October 1967, during
the negotiations for the elaboration of the NPT, Egypt
submitted, at the 18-nation Disarmament Committee, a
draft article to be incorporated in the proposed text of the
NPT. Notwithstanding the initiative by Egypt and many
other non-nuclear-weapon States, the efforts to
incorporate a security assurance in the text of the NPT
were unsuccessful. The NPT was finally adopted by the
General Assembly in May 1968 without a clause on
security assurances. One month later, Security Council
resolution 255 (1968) was adopted in conjunction with
unilateral declarations by three nuclear-weapon States.
However, resolution 255 was from the very outset
defective and disappointing. It was widely considered
inadequate, since it did not extend genuine security to
non-nuclear-weapon States, nor did it and the
accompanying declarations add anything new to what had
already been provided for in the Charter.

In point of fact, resolution 255 failed to demonstrate
any effective element of deterrence to a would-be
aggressor or to provide protection to a Victim of
aggression. Nor did it indicate the scope and nature of
assistance to be provided to any non-nuclear-weapon State
Party to the NPT that fell victim to a nuclear attack or
threat of such an attack. The unilateral declarations issued
at that time by the three nuclear-weapons States were, in
essence, statements of intent with no binding assurances
to provide for their application or to prevent their
withdrawal. They stated that nuclear aggression would
create a qualitatively new situation but, in effect, did not
provide any corresponding, qualitatively new procedures,
over and above the provisions of the Charter itself, for
dealing with such a grave threat.
In light of these shortcomings, non-nuclear-weapon
States continued to strive for more effective, more
comprehensive and more binding assurances for their
security. To this end, Egypt became the first to submit
proposals, to the Fourth Review Conference of the NPT
and the Conference on Disarmament in 1990, to update
the substance of resolution 255 by expanding the nature
and scope of application of security assurances, and by
ensuring that they are enunciated in an international
instrument, of a legally binding nature, that would ensure
a response by the Security Council to any attack or threat
of attack against a non-nuclear-weapon State Party to the
NPT. Egypt's record confirms that its position on security
assurances has throughout been both consistent and
persistent.

Today, as the Security Council ponders the adoption
of a new resolution which aims to provide security
assurances to non-nuclear-weapon States, and as we are

 

about to embark, next week, on the process of reviewing
the NPT and securing its preservation in the most suitable
manner, we must also remind ourselves that any system of
security assurances must be measured - and measured
carefully - on the basis of its effectiveness and its
credibility. This is the spirit in which my delegation
approaches the question of security assurances.

Security assurances, to be worthy of the name, must
be designed and structured in such a manner as to cover the
exigencies of our contemporary world and at the same time
anticipate the developments of the future. They must meet
the security needs of the world not only for today but also
for tomorrow. Until the NPT becomes universal, the danger
of proliferation will steadily increase with the passage of
time. With this premise in mind, my delegation, in its
consideration of the proposed resolution, is guided by four
basic principles: credibility, deterrence, protection and
assistance. I shall address each of these elements.

Firstly, credibility. Any resolution must capture and
accurately reflect the magnitude of the nuclear threat which,
as I said earlier, was unforeseen and unimagined by the
authors of the Charter. Any distinction between a nuclear
threat and a conventional threat must be amplified in no
uncertain terms.

Under paragraph 4 of Article 2 of the Charter,

"All Members shall refrain in their international
relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of any
State ..."
Accordingly, whenever a State threatens another with
conventional weapons, the Security Council is duty-bound
to take effective collective measures for the removal of the
threat and the suppression of the aggression, as stipulated
in paragraph 1 of Article 1 of the Charter. This Charter
injunction, as we all know, addresses conventional
weapons, be they cannons, bullets or missiles, or even
bows, arrows and spears.

The Council's response must draw a clear distinction
between the nuclear and the conventional threats. Failure to
distinguish can only undermine the credibility of the whole
edifice. Experience has shown that it is no easy matter to
repress a conventional armed attack. A conventional attack,
however, has a limited scope; it does not entail the total
destruction and massive annihilation that a nuclear one
does. When a conventional attack occurs, one can swallow
a response confined to "bringing the matter to the attention
of the Council" and to "seeking Council action to provide
necessary assistance". But a threat or use of nuclear
weapons to wage war should unleash the collective
security system, set out in Chapter VII of the Charter, in
order to repel the aggression.

Moreover, attention must be drawn to a most grave
factor, namely, the fact that the Council's response to a
nuclear threat is subject to the regular voting procedure
provided for under the Charter, specifically in the
provisions of paragraph 3 of its Article 27, which pertains
to the concurring votes of the five permanent members.
The magnitude of the unprecedented and unparalleled
devastation nuclear weapons can cause necessitates a
degree of automaticity if credibility is to be conferred.
Therefore, it should be clearly spelled out that a nuclear
threat shall be deterred and that the victims shall be
protected, assisted and defended in a clearly defined
manner commensurate with gravity of the nuclear threat.

The rationale and philosophy of the draft resolution
under consideration are based on the assumption that the
potential nuclear threat is not expected to come from any
of the permanent five, which have solemnly offered not
to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon
States.

The draft resolution therefore is directed toward a
threat emanating from a non-NPT party or perhaps an
NPT party which violates its NPT obligations and
develops nuclear weapons. This fact poses a legitimate
question: why is this important draft resolution
"vetoable"? It is our considered view that this particular
draft resolution should undoubtedly be beyond the scope
of application of the veto in order to ensure its credibility.
The second element is deterrence. If the resolution
is to have any deterrent effect on a would-be aggressor,
it must contain an explicit reference to the fact that
aggression with nuclear weapons, or the threat of such
aggression, against a non-nuclear-weapon State party to
the NPT constitutes a threat to international peace and
security, and shall automatically trigger an immediate
response by the Security Council in conformity with
Article 39 of the Charter and in a manner consistent with
the substance and the spirit of the relevant Articles of
Chapter VII. The effectiveness of the deterrent hinges on
spelling out the precise dimensions of the response of the
Council.

The third element is protection. The element of
genuine protection must also be clearly enunciated in the

 

form of a mechanism for enforcement of the security
assurances which would indicate the mandatory action to be
adopted by the Council to redress a situation where a non-
nuclear-weapon State was the object of a nuclear attack or
threat of an attack. It is axiomatic that the magnitude in the
degree of devastation and destruction by nuclear weapons
necessitates a proportionate elevation of the Security
Council's response. It has to be abundantly clear that the
territorial integrity and the political independence of any
non-nuclear-weapon State, as well as the survival of its
population, will be guaranteed as a matter of right and not
as a recognition of an interest - whether or not we term
it legitimate - to receive security assurances.

The fourth and last element is assistance. It is
imperative to clarify and specify the scope and nature of
assistance and compensation to be provided to any non-
nuclear-weapon State party to the NPT that is a victim or
object of a threat of aggression in which nuclear weapons
are used. In this context, it should be recognized that
assistance must be comprehensive and reparation
mandatory. The draft resolution has expanded the technical
assistance aspects. It remains silent, however, on the
political remedial assistance needed to defend the victim.

However, in our View, the draft resolution before us
contains three positive elements: It is endorsed by all the
permanent members of the Council. It addresses the
element of technical assistance in a more comprehensive
manner than resolution 255 (1968), albeit in voluntary
language. Operative paragraphs 5 and 6 invite Member
States of the United Nations to provide assistance to any
State that is victim of an act of aggression by nuclear
weapons and recognize the right of any such victim to
compensation from the aggressor. These are definitely
positive elements and represent a welcome improvement on
resolution 255 (1968).

We are not, however, persuaded that the formula in
the joint draft resolution before us offers the non-nuclear-
weapon States all that can now be devised, or even all that
is due, to deter the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons.
In all candour, the draft falls short of the general
expectations.

In this context it is appropriate to point out that at the
1991 session of the Ad Hoc Committee on Effective
International Arrangements to Assure the Non-Nuclear
States against the Use or Threat of Use of Nuclear
Weapons, Egypt submitted a paper on security assurances
which sought to update and enhance resolution 255 (1968)
and called for the initiation of a process of collective or
individual consultations on security assurances. That was
five years ago. Unfortunately, current efforts by the five
members of the Security Council to update resolution 255
(1968) have completely bypassed any dialogue with the
non-nuclear-weapon States, which are the prime
beneficiaries and the constituency for security assurances,
and have thereby resulted in a draft resolution which
addresses only one of the foregoing elements, namely
assistance - as if the Security Council's role in this
matter is not to anticipate a nuclear threat but, rather, to
expect a nuclear accident similar to the one in Chernobyl.

In the light of what I have said, it is evident that the
draft resolution now before the Council lacks the
following essential principles: first, a prior determination
that the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons
constitutes a threat to international peace and security;
secondly, a trigger mechanism to ensure Security Council
response to threats or attacks by nuclear weapons; thirdly,
a commitment by the Security Council, as stated in the
Charter:

"to take effective collective measures for the
prevention and removal of threats to the peace, and
for the suppression of acts of aggression or other
breaches of the peace".

I have expressed Egypt's position on the substance
of the draft resolution. Allow me now to touch very
briefly on the time factor.

It is obvious that the timing of the submission of the
draft resolution has a certain significance. The rush of the
sponsors to secure its adoption one week before the start
of the NPT Review and Extension Conference no doubt
aims at tilting the balance towards their most preferred
outcome for the Conference.

Thus, the Security Council is scheduled to vote
today on a most important draft resolution with a direct
bearing on the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all
non-nuclear-weapon States, without allowing adequate
time for broad consultations between all the concerned
parties.

In point of fact, due to the far-reaching
consequences of the draft resolution, its adoption should
have been preceded by wide-ranging consultations and
even a reasonable period of sober reflection.

However, one cannot help but wonder whether the
adoption of such a draft resolution by the Security

 

Council would suffice to dispel the wide scepticism about
its credibility, which will have detrimental repercussions on
the future success of the Treaty as a whole. This is not to
suggest that the Security Council is not the right forum to
enunciate such assurances. On the contrary, it is perhaps the
course dictated by the Charter. However, it is self-evident
that the crux of the security assurances is, and will remain,
not who issues the assurances but what their contents are.

In conclusion, my delegation appreciates the efforts
exerted by the sponsors to improve the text of the draft
resolution. We must stress, however, that the draft
resolution before us should not represent the end of the
road, but rather the beginning. We noted with appreciation
the statement of the Permanent Representative of France in
the Conference on Disarmament on 6 April 1995 that the
draft resolution

"constitutes a first in many respects, and reflects
our intention to meet the expectations of the
international community globally, collectively and
specifically." (S/1995/264, annex, p. 3)

In our View, the only global, collective and specific
assurance against the use or threat of use of nuclear
weapons is their total elimination. My delegation therefore
does not subscribe to the view that the draft resolution
provides the non-nuclear-weapon States with the required
and long-awaited credible security assurances to which they
are entitled as a result of their renunciation of the nuclear
option.

In point of fact, the adoption of this draft will not in
any way strengthen the NPT regime. As it stands today, the

draft is, regrettably, insufficient in both form and substance.

