Ms. Bird (Australia): The scale and pace of
challenges facing the Security Council today must
bolster our resolve to ensure that the Council is as agile
and effective as possible. I will focus on three key areas
of working methods reform, namely, transparency,
the use of the veto, and early warning and prevention
of conflict.

First, Australia firmly believes that transparency
is an important element of the Council's effectiveness.
Article 24 of the Charter of the United Nations enshrines
the responsibility ofthe Security Council to act on behalf
of the United Nations membership as a whole. In line
with that, Council members should engage regularly
with the broader membership through briefings with
regional groups and outreach to affected countries.
We also support greater use of public meetings, open
debates, Arria Formula meetings and monthly wrap-up
sessions. When much of the Council's work involves
or relies on non-members' ability to implement its
decisions, it is imperative that the broader membership
be engaged appropriately in Council deliberations.

Secondly, we must move urgently, decisively
and in unison to agree on clear limitations on the
veto. Too often, the Council has failed in its mandate
because narrow interests have been allowed to prevail
over those of the most vulnerable. We therefore join
others in calling on all Council members - current
and incoming - to commit unambiguously to the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group's
code of conduct and the complementary French-
Mexican initiative on limiting the use of the veto in
situations of mass atrocity.

Thirdly, the Council must become better at
predicting and preventing the escalation or relapse into
conflict. We all have a responsibility in that regard.
Frank, timely and independent assessments from the
Secretariat on situations where populations are at risk
are crucial to that. Briefings by the Secretary-General's
Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide and on
the Responsibility to Protect are valuable in ensuring
the Council is well placed to prevent mass atrocities.
We urge Council members to reinstate regular
horizon-scanning briefings on potential emerging
conflicts. As we well know, human rights abuses are
often a precursor to conflict. In that light, we commend
the Secretary-General on driving change through his
Human Rights Up Front initiative, and we encourage
him to make greater use of his prerogative under
Article 99 of the Charter to bring such situations to the
Council's attention.

In conclusion, as we continue to grapple with
multiple, overlapping challenges of terrorism,
instability, conflict and fragility, working methods
reform is not just a bureaucratic exercise; it is critical
to the ability of the Council to discharge its core
mandate - and to the lives that depend on it.

