Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (Spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank the High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for submitting
his report (8/2015/300, annex).

Chile supports the implementation of the 1995
Dayton Peace Accords, as well as safeguarding the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We believe that effectively
implementing the Accords, along with respect for the
rule of law, is essential to a lasting peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. In that regard, we welcome the new
Government formed on 31 March. We urge all political
leaders to take advantage of that opportunity to move
towards genuine integration and national reconciliation.

Chile regrets the lack of progress on implementing
the Dayton Accords, which illustrates the persistence of
disagreement among political parties and the difficulty
in forming the new Government in the various cantons.
It is necessary that the political leaders of the different
communities in the country do more to advance
the strengthening of democratic institutions, while
expanding institutional reforms in an inclusive manner.

We also urge them to refrain from negative rhetoric

that undermines the cohesion among the various ethnic
communities in the country, thereby hindering national
reconciliation. For instance, calls encouraging options
that could create the potential for the secession of
Republika Srpska present a critical situation. We call
for cooperation with the High Representative with
regard to events that have the potential to affect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

We support the efforts of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to overcome its past. We also emphasize the importance
of the return and reintegration of refugees and
internally displaced persons, which will contribute
to mending the broken social fabric and which is an
essential step towards national reconciliation. In that
context, cooperation with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia remains a priority
challenge so that those responsible for genocide, ethnic
cleansing, war crimes and crimes against humanity do
not go unpunished. The effectiveness of institutions
such as the Tribunal contributes to the development of
jurisprudence and to safeguarding universally shared
ethical principles ofjustice and reparation.

We reiterate our strong support for a stable Bosnia
and Herzegovina with functioning institutions in the
service of its people, in peace and prosperity. Chile
participated in the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina with police personnel. Our participation
continues today in Operation Althea of the European
Union military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
This year marks 12 years of uninterrupted Chilean
military presence in the latter.

Likewise, we call on the international community
to continue to honour its commitment to support the
aspirations of the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as
well as to provide the necessary resources to fulfil the
mandate provided for under the Dayton Accords.

We conclude by reiterating our appreciation for the
work of the High Representative as part of his efforts
to strengthen the rule of law, monitor compliance with
the rulings of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and facilitate reforms aimed at ensuring
conditions for the functioning of institutions, social
stability and prosperity in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
emphasize that his Office should continue to receive
political support to carry out its important functions.

