Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation thanks Argentina for its initiative
of holding today's open debate, and for its outstanding
work as Chair of the Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Matters.

In accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, the Council should elaborate its own rules of
procedure. In recent years, while meeting all its other
responsibilities, the Council has paid close attention
to improving its working methods. These efforts have
borne fruit. The number of open meetings convened
by the Council has risen every year and the Council
presidencies have persisted in briefing non-Coucil
Members on a monthly basis, thereby enhancing the
transparency of its work.

Through various flexible means such as informal
interactive dialogues, the Council has attached
importance to improving its exchanges and interaction
with the Member States and regional and subregional
organizations. Since the beginning of this year, the
Council has adopted four notes of the President on
improving its working methods. These targeted
measures have strengthened the mechanism-building
process within the Council, contributing to its more
pragmatic and efficient work, and helping the Council
to better fulfil its Charter responsibilities.

The current international security situation is highly
complex. The continual outbreak of regional conflicts
and local wars, coupled with the interlinked threats
and challenges to security posed by terrorism, have
made the responsibilities and mission of the Security
Councileven more arduous. The wider United Nations
membership also has high expectations of the Council.
China supports the ongoing improvement of the working
methods of the Council so that it can conduct its work
more fairly, efficiently and transparently, better meet
the expectations of the international community, and
play a greater role in the maintenance of international
peace and security.

I would now like to focus on the following points.
First, the Council should adhere to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations as its
guide in promoting the peaceful settlement of disputes.
The Council should make use of the prevention, good
offices and mediation tools entrusted to it by the Charter
in an integrated manner in order to actively facilitate
political dialogue and, through consultations and
negotiations, promote reconciliation in order to achieve
lasting peace and stability and safeguard international
peace and security. That is also an important reflection
of the Council's role in the peaceful resolution of
disputes under the principles of international law and
its fulfilment of the responsibilities entrusted to it by
the Charter.

Secondly, the Council should focus on priorities
and coordinate the division of labour. Under the
Charter, the Council has the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Meanwhile, the Charter also includes provisions on
the responsibilities of other United Nations organs. All
United Nations bodies should fulfil their respective
mandates, and, under the Charter, the Council should
focus its energy and resources on addressing the
most urgent issues that threaten international peace
and security. On thematic issues, it should enhance
its consultation and coordination with the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and other
United Nations bodies in order to avoid duplication of
effort.

Thirdly, it should continue to pursue democratic
consultations and political collective decision-making.
Council members share the same responsibilities for
maintaining international peace and security. The more
complex and urgent the crises and challenges are, the
greater the need for Council members to work together
to be united in purpose and efforts and to cooperate
fully in ways that reflect the principles of justice and
democracy. All Council members should have ample
time for studying the draft resolutions and presidential
statements presented and, through patient consultations
and negotiations, reach broad consensus and preserve
the solidarity of the Council, rather than forcing texts
through on which there are still major differences.

Fourthly, there should be stepped-up communication
and pooling of ideas. The Council should pay more
attention to listening to the views of the general
membership, in particular the countries on its agenda,
and should step up communication and dialogue with
the countries contributing troops to the peacekeeping
operations and with the Secretariat.

Questions related to Africa have always been a
major focus of the Security Council. Therefore, the
Council should attach importance to applying the
expertise and experiences of the African Union and
other regional organizations and their advantages in
terms of history, geography and culture; strengthen its
communication with them, and fully hear their opinions
before making decisions; and support the important
role played by regional organizations and the countries
themselves, third-party States and organizations to play
a more important role in the resolution of conflicts.

I thank Ms. Prost, Ombudsperson of the Council's
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities, and Ms. Bensouda, Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), for their
briefings. China supports discussions on improving the
sanctions mechanisms of the Council in order to ensure
that the information related to listing applications is
complete and accurate.

The establishment of the post of Ombudsman for
the Council's Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee has its
own special background and needs. In the light of the
work of other Sanctions Committees, the Council may
wish to study the question as to whether the mandate
of the Ombudsperson should be extended to other
Sanctions Committees.

In handling relations between the Council and the
ICC, China's position is consistent. We believe that the
ICC's efforts to seek justice should take into account
the urgent needs of maintaining regional peace and
stability. The ICC should strictly abide by the principle
of complementarity and support the Council's efforts to
fulfil its responsibilities under the Charter.
