Mr. Mochochoko: Allow me to start by thanking
you, Sir, the Guatemalan presidency and the Security
Council for convening this very important meeting, the
first ofits kind. This meeting comes at a very opportune
time as the International Criminal Court (ICC)
celebrates 10 years of existence. I would also like
to convey, on behalf of the Prosecutor, Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, her greetings and her apologies for not being
here today. The Office of the Prosecutor considers
today's exchange with the Council to be crucial, given
that both the Council and the Office of the Prosecutor
are committed to preventing mass atrocities, which can
constitute a threat to international peace and security.
Indeed, this debate offers an opportunity to reflect on
issues of mutual concern and interest between our two
bodies.

The Office of the Prosecutor welcome the concept
note (S/20l2/73l, annex) circulated by the Guatemalan
presidency in preparation for this meeting. The note
clearly articulates some of the key principles regarding
the relationship between the Security Council and the
Court, and raises important points for discussion.

The respective mandates of the two bodies - the
pursuit of individual criminal accountability and the
pursuit of international peace and security - are at the
heart of the relationship.

The significance of today's debate can thus not be
overstated. As President Song has already mentioned,
the Office of the Prosecutor is currently working on
two situations referred by the Security Council to the
Office of the Prosecutor - the situations in Darfur and
in Libya.

We investigate war crimes, crimes against
humanity and genocide in a number of countries that
also have the close attention of the Security Council.
At the same time, the Security Council is working on
many issues that relate to the mandate of the Office of
the Prosecutor, including, for instance, efforts to end
the use of child soldiers, as was recently taken up by
the Security Council in its open debate on children
and armed conflict (S/PV.6838) and resolution 2068
(2012) adopted at that meeting, under the auspices of
the German presidency. Those efforts coincide with
the completion of the first ICC trial and its verdict on
the use of child soldiers. Furthermore, the Security
Council discusses issues of peace and security and
authorizes peacekeeping missions in situations where
the Office of the Prosecutor is operating. The Council
is also addressing the link between sexual violence and
conflict, and is monitoring new situations involving the
alleged commission of massive crimes.

It is evident from the foregoing that the relationship
between the Office of the Prosecutor and the Council
could be nurtured and strengthened by extending our
interaction beyond specific situations referred by the
Council to the Prosecutor and by creating space for
open discussions on thematic issues. Such dialogue is
crucial, as both the Security Council and the Office
of the Prosecutor are committed to preventing mass
atrocities which constitute a threat to international
peace and security.

The evolving relationship between the Council
and the Court is not without complexities, given our
different mandates and organizational structures.
Allow me to highlight three areas, looking at them from
the Office of the Prosecutor's perspective.

First, a key difference between our two organs is
that the Security Council is a political body within the
UnitedNations system, while the Office ofthe Prosecutor
is an independent organ within an independent judicial
institution, which has to adhere to clear legal criteria
and jurisdictional boundaries at all times in order to
maintain its legitimacy and credibility. We are all too
familiar with frequently raised concerns about the
politics of case selection as a result of Security Council
referrals. Incidentally, the same concerns can be raised
with regard to State referrals.

What many forget or overlook is that for both types
of referrals, the Rome Statute provides clear guidelines
that protect the independence of the judicial process.
The Rome Statute provides for a legal process for the
preliminary examination, investigation and prosecution
of situations referred by States or the Security Council,
as well as for judicial review, during which situations
may be rejected if they fail to satisfy statutory legal
criteria for opening an investigation. Simply put, the
Council may unilaterally trigger, but cannot impose
acceptance of jurisdiction by the Office of the
Prosecutor. Perceived or real political selectivity on
the participation of the Council is further constrained
because referrals encompass a situation rather than one
or several particular suspects or groups.

It is important to underscore the need to respect the
Office of the Prosecutor's independence at all times.
Once the Security Council decides to refer a situation to
the Prosecutor, the judicial process has been triggered
and the matter is fully in the hands of the Prosecutor
and the Judges. The only way to stop the procedure is
by legal means, namely, by invoking article 16 of the
Rome Statute. Efforts to interfere with the independent
exercise of the Office's mandate would only serve
to undermine the legitimacy and credibility of the
judicial process, thus giving credence to allegations of
politicization of the process.

The second area I would like to highlight involves
what we have in common. First, there is the matter of
our respective mandates. While the Security Council
has been given the primary responsibility to maintain
international peace and security, the mandate of the
Office of the Prosecutor is to ensure accountability for
the most serious crimes of concern to the international
community as a whole. Some might construe that as a
source of tension between the two organs. In our view,
the respective mandates link us together.

The fight against impunity, to which both organs
are committed, is an essential contribution to the quest
for world's peace and security. That is also recognized
in the Rome Statute's preamble, which notes that "such
grave crimes threaten the peace, security and well-
being of the world". Indeed, the Security Council was
instrumental in ushering in what the Secretary-General
has called "the age of accountability".

Next year, we will celebrate the twentieth
anniversary of the creation of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia by the
Council. It was in 1993 that the Council revived the
notion of international criminal justice, after a long
silence following the Nuremberg and Tokyo trials.
The Council was thus a source of inspiration for the
establishment of the ICC.

Secondly, both the Council and the Office of the
Prosecutor have a role to play in strengthening the
complementary relationship between peace and justice.
From the Office of the Prosecutor's perspective, there
is no dilemma or contradiction between peace and
justice. In most situations before the Court, conflict
management and, often, specific peace negotiations
were under way while investigations and prosecutions
were proceeding.

The role of the ICC has never precluded or put
an end to such processes; in some cases, it has even
encouraged them. The policy of the Office is to pursue
its independent mandate to investigate and prosecute
those few most responsible and to do so in a manner that
respects the mandates of others and seeks to maximize
the positive impact of the joint efforts of all. To pursue
its judicial mandate and preserve its impartiality, the
Office cannot participate in peace initiatives, but it will
inform the political actors of its actions in advance so
that they can factor investigations into their activities.

Finally, both the Security Council and the Office
of the Prosecutor have a clear preventive mandate.
Prevention is key to all our efforts. For the Office, the
preventive role is foreseen in the Rome Statute preamble
and reinforced in the Office's prosecutorial strategies.
In fact, the preamble makes clear that prevention is
a shared responsibility in that it provides that States
parties are

"determined to put an end to impunity for the
perpetrators of these crimes and thus to contribute
to the prevention of such crimes".

The Office of the Prosecutor will make public
statements referring to its mandate when violence
escalates in situations under its jurisdiction. It will
visit situation countries to remind leaders of the
Court's jurisdiction. It will also use its preliminary
examinations activities to encourage genuine national
proceedings, and thereby attempt to prevent the
recurrence of violence. Given that the commission of
massive crimes can threaten international peace and
security, the Security Council can complement the
Office's preventive efforts.

Let me now briefly look forward to how the
relationship between the Security Council and the
Office of the Prosecutor can be strengthened.

The Council has already referred two situations
involving the commission of massive crimes to the
Prosecutor, and the Prosecutor regularly reports back
to the Council on those matters. The Council and the
Office should together seek more constructive strategies
for attaining their mutual goals. We are encouraged by
recent efforts of regional organizations, and would like
to mention in particular the multilateral efforts to bring
to justice the leaders of the Lord's Resistance Army,
including Joseph Kony. Those efforts must be replicated
in other situations. The failure of States to implement
ICC arrest warrants is also reflected in the failure to
implement Security Council resolutions relating to
cessation of violence, disarming parties to a conflict,
ensuring an end to impunity through local initiatives,
and other relevant obligations.

The relationship between those two obligations
must be explored further. True peace and justice rely on
the acceptance of Security Council resolutions as the
binding legal obligations that they are. Increasing the
political and diplomatic support of the Council for the
Court is essential, and the Council can do so through
its declaratory statements recalling the need to observe
applicable norms of international law and stressing the
importance of accountability for those most responsible
for serious violations of the rules. Additionally, such
tools as avoiding all non-essential contacts with
ICC suspects in order to achieve the arrest of these
individuals need to be further explored and deepened.

A new chapter should be added to our relationship.
The Office of the Prosecutor can make a substantial
contribution by proactively collecting information and
monitoring situations under preliminary examination,
and by investigating and prosecuting those most
responsible for serious crimes. But once its judicial
process has resulted in requests for and the issuance
of arrest warrants by the Court's judges, it is up to the
international community, through the Council, to act.

We must find the necessary consensus to show
that we are serious about the threat that these serious
crimes pose to international peace and security and that
we have and will use the tools necessary to put those
crimes to an end.

