Mr. Wang Xuexian (China) (interpretation from Chinese): First of all, Mr. President, allow me to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency for
this month. I believe that with your vast diplomatic
experience, wisdom and talent you will guide the work of
the Security Council efficiently and guarantee constructive
results. I should also like to take this opportunity to thank
your predecessor, the Ambassador of the Czech Republic,
for his contribution to the work of the Council in the
month of April.

The Chinese delegation would like to take this
opportunity to welcome the delegation of the Republic of
Georgia and its participation in this meeting of the

 

Security Council and to thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Georgia for his important statement.

The Chinese delegation has always been keenly
interested in the development of the situation in Georgia.
The Chinese delegation is deeply concerned at the
insufficient progress achieved towards a comprehensive
political settlement of the question of Georgia and at the
obstruction of the return of refugees and displaced persons
in the Abkhaz region. We also believe that in seeking a
settlement of the question of Georgia the international
community must respect the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Republic of Georgia. In the meantime, the
rights of the peoples of all the ethnic communities in the
Abkhaz region must also be guaranteed. A sound solution
to all conflicts and contradictions should be sought through
peaceful means and negotiations.

In our view, a genuine solution to the situation in
Georgia depends on the political will of all parties
concerned. The United Nations efforts can play only a
complementary role. In this connection we would express
our appreciation for the new efforts being made by the
Government of Georgia. We express our appreciation to the
Secretary-General and his Special Envoy for the
tremendous efforts they have made to achieve a political
settlement of the situation in Georgia and hope that all
parties concerned will cooperate with them in seeking
substantive progress at an early date towards a
comprehensive settlement of the question.

We note the positive role played by the United
Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) with
respect to a political settlement and the return of refugees.
UNOMIG has also maintained good relations of cooperation
with the peace-keeping force of the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS). We therefore support the proposal
of the Secretary-General to extend the mandate of
UNOMIG and we shall vote in favour of the draft
resolution before us. We hope that the draft resolution can
give new and powerful impetus to the peace process in the
Republic of Georgia.

