Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Kazakhstan for its initiative to convene today's
Security Council meeting on non-proliferation.

China thanks His Excellency President Nazarbayev
for presiding over today's meeting. We also welcome
Kazakhstan's Foreign Minister back to New York.

We thank Secretary-General Guterres for his briefing.

Peace and development remain two main
contemporary issues. However, our world has yet to
achieve peace. Regional hotspots continue to emerge
and traditional and non-traditional security threats
are on the rise. The proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and their delivery systems constitute
genuine threats to international peace, security and
stability and are common challenges faced by the
international community.

Owing to the international community's efforts
in recent years, consensus has been reached on the
international non-proliferation regime. The regime
is increasingly enhanced by the improved capacity
of States and greater in-depth cooperation. We must
acknowledge that proliferation risks and challenges
remain severe. Some non-proliferation hotspot issues
are protracted and intractable. Technological advances
have lowered the threshold for proliferation. The risk of
non-State actors, and terrorists in particular, acquiring
and using weapons of mass destruction is increasing.
The authority, universality and effectiveness of
the international non-proliferation regime must be
enhanced urgently.

President Xi Jinping of China has stressed that
no country can respond on its own to the fiercest
challenges facing humankind and or return to self-
imposed isolation. We urge the people of the world to
work together to build a shared destiny for humankind
and a world that is open, inclusive, clean and beautiful,
with lasting peace, universal security and shared
prosperity. China is of the View that strengthening
global governance in the area of non-proliferation is
an important component for building a shared destiny
for humankind. The international community must
therefore enhance cooperation and coordination in
many dimensions.

First, a commitment to achieving common security
is Vital. Non-proliferation is in essence a security issue.
Security concerns are the main drivers of proliferation
activities. All countries should reject the Cold War
mentality, remain resolute in adhering to the purposes
and principles ofthe Charter ofthe United Nations, foster
a concept of shared, comprehensive, cooperative and
sustainable security, build a new form of international
relations featuring mutual respect, fairness, justice and
win-win cooperation, and create a security trend that
features fairness and justice, joint contributions and
common benefits. The United Nations and the Security
Council should bring into full play their essential
role in ending war and maintaining peace, finding
a path to effectively prevent conflicts, and building
enduring peace in order to achieve common security
for all countries. That will fundamentally eliminate the
drivers of proliferation. It is also a fundamental way for
all countries to build confidence.

Secondly, it is important to commit to the peaceful
resolution of issues by political and diplomatic means.
Confrontation and unrelenting sanctions and pressure
will lead only to the escalation of conflict and the
increased risk of proliferation. All countries should
remain on the path to the peaceful resolution of conflict

and strive to resolve non-proliferation hotspot issues by
political and diplomatic means.

At present, some positive changes have emerged
on the Korean peninsula. All parties should make a
concerted effort to maintain the hard-won momentum of
reduced tensions, create the conditions for relaunching
dialogue and negotiations and return the nuclear issue
of the Korean peninsula to dialogue and negotiation.

The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA)
with Iran is a hard-won and important accomplishment
of multilateralism. It is also a model for resolving
international hotspot issues by political and diplomatic
means. The relevant parties should bear in mind their
overall situation and long-term interests, maintain
their political will, manage differences properly and
continue to comprehensively and effectively implement
the J CPOA.

Thirdly, there must be a commitment to consolidating
and developing the international non-proliferation
regime. With the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, the Chemical Weapons Convention,
Biological Weapons Convention and resolution 1540
(2004) as its legal bases, and with international
organizations such as the International Atomic Energy
Agency and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons as its institutional mechanisms, the
international non-proliferation regime is an important
component of the global security order and has played
a vital role in preventing the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction and in maintaining global strategic
balance and stability. The international community
should effectively maintain the universality, authority
and effectiveness of the regime, continue to improve
relevant international norms, adhere to equality before
norms, and discard double standards and elective
practices. The international non-proliferation regime
founded on the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons must be maintained, and whoever
acquires nuclear weapons illegally must effectively
comply with the obligation to denuclearize.

Fourthly, with respect to the commitment to
enhancing States' non-proliferation capacities, the
primary responsibility for non-proliferation should be
assumed by Governments. Non-proliferation policies
developed in accordance with country-specific
situations should be respected and supported in order to
push for continuous improvement of non-proliferation
laws and regulations and to strengthen capacity-
building in enforcement. All countries should, in
the spirit of openness, inclusion, mutual benefit
and win-win cooperation, conduct exchanges and
practical cooperation in non-proliferation so as
to jointly enhance their capacity and the level of
non-proliferation. The needs of developing countries
for international non-proliferation assistance should be
effectively met. At the same time, a comprehensive and
balanced approach should be put in place to promote
non-proliferation and the use of science and technology
for peaceful purposes. Non-proliferation should not
be used as an excuse to limit or deprive countries of
their rights to use science and technology for peaceful
purposes and to promote international cooperation.

China has consistently advocated for peace,
development and cooperation in order to promote
the peaceful settlement of disputes and support the
prevention of conflicts. China is firmly opposed to the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their
means of delivery. China has acceded to all international
conventions and joined relevant international
organizations in the field of non-proliferation. China has
built a complete system of non-proliferation and export
control and ensured the effective implementation of
relevant laws and regulations. China comprehensively
and fully implements relevant Council resolutions,
actively participates in international and regional
cooperation on non-proliferation, supports the United
Nations in playing its role in non-proliferation,
and commits to pushing for a political solution to
non-proliferation hotspot issues.

China constructively participated in the negotiation
and implementation process of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action with Iran and put forward its
own proposals.

China has work tirelessly to promote a negotiated
solution to the nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula.
China's suspension-for-suspension initiative and
two-track approach, as well as the road map jointly
proposed by China and Russia, are realistic and feasible
for appropriately resolving the nuclear issue of the
Korean peninsula. China hopes for a positive response
and support from all sides on this. A denuclearized,
peaceful and stable Korean peninsula is in the
interest of all parties. The unity of the international
community on this issue is critical. China would like
to work with the international community, engage in
close communication, display mutual confidence and
mutual respect, and strengthen cooperation in pursuing
continued progress towards a suitable solution to the
Korean peninsula issue.

Non-proliferation is a long-term task before the
international community. It requires the involvement
of all countries. China is a builder of world peace
and a guardian of the international non-proliferation
regime. China would like to continue to work with all
parties in making a greater contribution to enhancing
the international non-proliferation regime, advancing
global governance in non-proliferation and building a
common destiny of humankind.

