Ms. Loj (Denmark): I would like to thank Special
Representative Qazi for his statement, and Ambassador
Bolton for his statement on behalf of the Multinational
Force.

As described in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2006/706), the situation in Iraq continues to present
challenges to the international community on several
fronts. However, we remain convinced that the visions
and the political initiative of the new Government,
combined with the continued commitment of the
international community, will make the International
Compact with Iraq a success and will provide the
people of Iraq with a fresh start.

The security situation remains very serious in
several parts of Iraq. Indeed, the Secretary-General
mentions "growing violence and insecurity",
particularly in Baghdad and in the southern and
western regions. In the Secretary-General's view, the
current level of violence is likely to continue for some
time. The sectarian nature of much of the violence is a
cause for particular concern. In addition, the report
describes an acute human rights and humanitarian
crisis and State institutions unable to protect
individuals from gross human rights violations. The
number of internally displaced Iraqis more than
doubled during the reporting period.

Humanitarian needs must be urgently addressed.
Human rights must be respected, and the Iraqi
Government should give due attention to the situation.
Clearly, the influence of sectarian-based militias
cannot be curbed by security operations alone.
Reconciliation, economic development and a well-
functioning independent police force and justice
system must form part of the solution.

We welcome the fact that the Iraqi Government is
determined to improve the situation through a series of
political initiatives, notably the peace and
reconciliation plan launched in June. The plan contains
the right elements, but implementation remains key. In
the national reconciliation process, the United Nations
and the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) should play a pivotal role.

We are pleased to see the increasing capabilities
among the Iraqi security forces, which made possible
the transfer of security responsibility in Al-Muthana
province this summer. With stronger and more
confident national forces, and with the continued
support of the Multinational Force, we hope that the
level of violence will decrease and that the main focus
will be directed towards the reconstruction of Iraq.

The launch of the Iraq Compact, on 27 July,
marks a new departure for international support for the
realization of the Iraqi Government's plans for a
united, federal and democratic society at peace with its
neighbours. Denmark stands ready to contribute to that
process.

Denmark intends to maintain its presence in Iraq
as long as our support is requested by the Iraqi
Government and the United Nations and as long as we
believe that our presence is meaningful. This spring,
the Danish Parliament decided to extend the mandate
of the Danish troops in Iraq until the end of June 2007.
Denmark's involvement in Iraq also comprises
reconstruction and humanitarian assistance; we have
committed approximately $90 million.

As I have mentioned, Denmark supports an
expansion of the United Nations role in Iraq. Denmark
continues to provide direct support to UNAMI.
Effective in mid-November, we have decided to
comply with a UNAMI request to deploy a C-130
aircraft suitable for both passengers and cargo.

Iraq is at a critical juncture. The political process
mapped out in resolution 1546 (2004) is almost
complete, and a broad-based and constitutionally
elected Government has been formed. However, many
serious challenges remain. With the full backing of the
international community, the Iraq Compact will, in the
coming weeks and months, provide vital support for
the development of a peaceful, democratic and
prosperous Iraq.

