Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): The delegation of Equatorial Guinea is
highly gratified by the holding of this meeting today.
As such, it conveys its congratulations to the Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), Mr. Sacha Sergio Llorentty
Soliz, Permanent Representative of the Plurinational
Republic of Bolivia. We would like to thank him
for his leadership, dedication and efforts as Chair of
that important Committee. We also thank the entire
Committee and the outgoing Group of Experts for the
work they have accomplished. We once again pledge
the readiness of the delegation of Equatorial Guinea to
work and participate actively in the Committee's tasks.

We have taken good note of the report of the Chair
of the 1540 Committee on the activities carried out
over the course of 2017. We welcome the Committee's
progress in the submission of national implementation
action plans by new States, among them Equatorial
Guinea, which submitted its first action plan in 2017 to
the Committee - a significant step towards achieving
this goal. We note that the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea is continuing its work towards the full and
correct implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

I encourage the Chair of the Committee to continue
divulging the implementation measures for resolution
1540 (2004). There are only 13 States left, which means
we are very close to reaching universality on national
action plans. In that regard, we stress the importance
of joining forces with the 1540 Committee to that
end. That is why we believe it is urgent to advance
this discussion.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is deeply
concerned about the growing threat of terrorism and
the risk of non-State actors acquiring, developing
or employing nuclear, chemical or biological
weapons - or trafficking them. That would bring
about unforeseeable and devastating consequences
for humankind. The threat to global security is real and
very serious. Developed nations that have magnificent
infrastructure and security forces capable of countering
the terrorist threat and preventing non-State actors
from using weapons of mass destruction must bear in
mind that, if they do not help developing States gain
access to the same type of tracking, surveillance and
security infrastructure, especially at border crossings,
those deficiencies could be exploited by terrorists and
other non-State agents to obtain the raw materials
that make it possible for them to manufacture and
proliferate weapons mass destruction. Therefore, not
only is it imperative for all States to spare no effort
in prioritizing the adoption of measures at the national
level pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), but it is also
important for States, such as the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea, to secure other means to enable the correct and
successful implementation of the measures referred to
in the resolution.

Equatorial Guinea acknowledges the significant
progress that has been made by the international
community in the elimination of chemical weapons. In
that regard, we want to stress the need for the destruction
of all categories of weapons of mass destruction, so that
humankind can live without the fear of the threat posed
by those weapons.

On Tuesday, 10 April, the Security Council once
again showed itself unable to be effective in the
conflict that the Syrian people are experiencing by
not being able to give Syrian children a place to play
without fear of the next bomb, not being able to give
Syrian women an opportunity to go out for a walk
and not being able to give the elderly and the sick an
opportunity to find medicine or go to the hospital (see S/PV.8228). Is it so difficult for the Council, which is
entrusted with ensuring global peace and security, to
find a solution for all those people who are waiting on
this decision-making organ of the United Nations? Is it
so difficult to reach an agreement on an independent
investigative mechanism to identify those responsible
for using of chemical weapons in Syria? Syrians have
suffered seven years of war, while the Second World
War lasted only five years.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea encourages all
parties involved in the conflict and those that have a
greater or lesser influence on the country to think a bit
about those Syrian children who are suffering so much
as if they were our own children and grandchildren, to
think of those Syrian women as if they were our wives
or sisters and to think of those elderly men and women
as if they were our mothers and fathers.

We must urgently work on a new consensual
draft resolution to establish a new mechanism for
monitoring and attributing responsibilities for the use
of chemical weapons.

