Mr. Zenenga: I thank Council members for their
statements of support and for the questions that they
have raised. The questions raised by the representative
of France have been addressed by previous speakers. I
think I will therefore focus on only the questions from
the United Kingdom and Germany.

The question raised by the representative of
the United Kingdom was about the prospects of the
Somalia Partnership Forum. All partners in the Federal
Government agree that holding that Partnership Forum
is very important, and we are working towards that.
There is a preparatory committee that is putting the
technical preparations in place. However, as long as
cooperation between the federal member states and the
Federal Government leaders is not restored, it might be
very difficult to convene that meeting. We are therefore
continuing to encourage the resumption of dialogue
and the scheduling of another meeting between the
respective leaders of the federal member states and the
Federal Government. It is important that they have a
prior meeting ahead of the Somalia Partnership Forum.

The representative of the United Kingdom also
asked about key priorities on which the Forum could
focus. The Federal Government has set out its priorities
in the four road maps, all of which are important.
However, we believe that the Somalia Partnership
Forum and, going forward, all of us should focus on
those key priorities that will propel progress across
the board in Somalia. These are what we have called
in our recent discussions the "must-not-fail priorities"
that would open up the prospects of further progress on
many fronts. I would cite the examples of the restoration
of cooperation between the two tiers of Government;
the completion of the review of the Constitution;
preparations for elections, including the passage of the
electoral law; and Somali National Army and police
force generation to support the transition process and
the ongoing related operations. There is also the issue
of achieving the cluster of benchmarks that have been
agreed under the economic reform process. We believe
that if we make progress in these areas, that would also
propel progress across the board.

On the question raised by the representative of
Germany on whether staffmorale is improved, I will say
very briefly that the security environment is still very
difficult. The United Nations Support Office in Somalia
is doing its best to construct more accommodation
facilities, especially office accommodations, so that we
can decongest the areas where we have accommodated
staff who are working in soft-skin offices, and also
to construct areas for social gatherings that we had
closed down because they were in open spaces that
are vulnerable.

The visit by Ms. DiCarlo contributed immensely
to improving staff morale, as she engaged with them.
We now have a stock-taking review being conducted by
an independent team whose headquarters is deployed
here. They are also engaging staff over the course of
more than a week, and that is helping also to improve
staff morale. We have very active and very capable
staff counsellors who are helping in this difficult
environment, and we believe that the deployment of the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General
will also contribute immensely to the improvement of
staff morale. We continue to update the staff on the
progress we are making in repairing our relations with
the Federal Government, and that is also helping to
reduce tensions within the staff body.

Another question posed by the representative
of Germany was whether there had been a follow-up
meeting to the Garowe schedule. As I indicated in the
briefing, there has been no agreement on scheduling the
next meeting, but the President and the Prime Minister
continue to reach out to the federal member states. We
are also encouraging them to resume their meetings.

I would addjust one point to the lessons learned from
Operation Badbaado, which is that joint planning and a
comprehensive approach produced very good results.

The meeting rose at 5.35 pm.
