Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): We would like to
thank Mr. Mariano Fernandez, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his comprehensive
statement. At the outset, we wish to express and
reiterate our continued support for the United Nations
efforts in Haiti.

Haiti has undergone significant change since its
emergence from the devastating earthquake of January
2010 and the conflict. The country had to face the
daunting task of reconstruction while at the same time

it had to deal with the challenges of governance and
democracy. Despite these seemingly very difficult
challenges, Haiti has made significant progress.

Towards the end of last year, we saw progress on
the political front after the compromise between the
President and Haiti's legislators that led to the
swearing in of a new Government and the appointment
of a Prime Minister. However, we are concerned that
the strained relationship between the presidency and
Parliament has paralysed progress towards developing
a consensual legislative agenda and the adoption of the
national budget, as well as progress relating to the
upcoming elections.

The resignation of Prime Minister Conille should
not be allowed to hamper any political progress
achieved so far. We hope that the Haitians are able to
reach consensus on all these outstanding issues. Stable
governance is essential if the Haitian people are to lead
efforts to rebuild their country. We encourage
collaboration between the executive and legislative
branches of the Government. A rapid resolution of this
crisis will allow the Haitians and the international
community to focus on the key challenges of
development and the reconstruction of Haiti.

The Council has previously recognized the
interconnected nature of the challenges facing Haiti.
We reaffirm that security, institution-building - such
as in the area of the rule of law - the consolidation of
national government structures, democracy and
development are mutually reinforcing.

The strengthening and capacity-building of the
Haitian National Police is critical to ensuring stability
in Haiti and to laying a firm basis for the withdrawal of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) in the future. The Haitian Government,
working with MINUSTAH, must identify critical
capacity gaps within the police service and develop
strategies to address them as soon as possible.
Importantly, the promotion of the rule of law at all
levels is critical to ensuring stability and to facilitating
development in Haiti. In this regard, we also welcome
President Martelly's appointment of the President and
Vice-President of the Supreme Court, which further
strengthens the rule of law institutions in the country.

We note from the Secretary-General's report
(S/2012/128) that the overall security situation is
stable. However, we are concerned over reports of the
increased mobilization of several hundred armed
former members of the Haitian armed forces. We share
the view expressed by the Secretary-General that this
mobilization poses a threat to the stability of the
country and that the Government should take necessary
measures to address the issue.

South Africa commends MINUSTAH's military
and police personnel, as well as the Haitian National
Police, for their contribution to the improvement of the
overall security situation in Haiti. While we welcome
this positive development, we are mindful of the fragile
stability of the situation, due to civil unrest related
mainly to socio-economic grievances.

We hold the view that addressing these socio-
economic challenges should be prioritized, as they also
contribute to security and stability. Given the strong
linkages between peace, stability and development, we
welcome President Martelly's pronouncement of his
Government's priorities, which include security, the
resettlement of the displaced, job creation,
environmental protection, health care, education and
schools, among others.

The case of Haiti clearly illustrates the
relationship between security and development. We
note the positive contribution of MINUSTAH's
engineering components and quick-impact projects to
improving the lives of those most in need. These
aspects of MINUSTAH's work help to establish
conditions conducive to long-term reconstruction and
recovery, and support the notion of peacekeepers as
early peacebuilders.

My delegation welcomes the work done by
MINUSTAH's Conduct and Discipline Unit to address
the allegations of sexual misconduct by the Mission's
personnel by strengthening prevention measures,
accelerating disciplinary case management and taking
remedial action, in line with the United Nations zero
tolerance policy regarding misconduct by its personnel.

We recognize that Haiti continues to face
humanitarian challenges. The cholera epidemic and
food insecurity necessitate enhanced international
assistance in Haiti. It is therefore incumbent on the
international community to continue to support Haiti in
its recovery from the humanitarian challenges it faces,
without which the country will not be able to achieve
stability and development.
South Africa is committed to assisting the people
of Haiti. In addition to our bilateral assistance, South

Africa will continue to work with its partners in the
India-Brazil-South Africa IBSA Facility for Poverty
and Hunger Alleviation.

In conclusion, Haiti has made significant strides
towards peace and stability. Challenges remain and it is
imperative that the Haitian people, with the sustained
support of the international community, work with
MINUSTAH to overcome all these obstacles.

