Mr. Antonio (spoke in French): At the outset, I
extend to you, Sir, the appreciation of Chairperson Jean
Ping, who has been unable to travel but is closely
following the Security Council's work in support of the
African Union. I congratulate you, Sir, on behalf of the
African Union on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council. I join the previous speaker in thanking
you for having convened this open debate.

We also thank Under-Secretary-General Alain
Le Roy for introducing the Secretary-General's report
(S/2009/470) and for the support he has reaffirmed for
the African Union. We are, moreover, honoured by the
presence of Mr. Romano Prodi, whom we thank for his
tireless dedication to the noble causes of Africa. We
also thank all the members of the African Union-
United Nations panel who have worked under
Mr. Prodi's leadership to bring us together here to
focus on the cause ofAfrica.

The role of such regional organizations as the
African Union in the maintenance of international
peace and security has been the subject of the
heightened interest and in-depth consideration of the
Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council and Assembly of Heads of State and
Government. At the same time, the Security Council's
primary Charter responsibility in the maintenance of
international peace and security has been amply
reaffirmed by the Council itself and other stakeholders.

Against that backdrop, funding for peacekeeping
operations conducted by regional organizations
remains a central concern of the African Union on the
basis of its experience in various activities to promote
peace and security on the continent. The pertinent
issues addressed in the relevant documents of the
United Nations and the African Union include the
nature of the structure of the partnership between the
United Nations and regional organizations; inter-
institutional coordination and consultation
mechanisms; the enhancement of resources to
strengthen the capacities of the peacekeeping and
peace-support operations of regional organizations;
conflict prevention and mediation; support for
peacebuilding and post-conflict reconstruction; human
rights and humanitarian activities. Those are topics at
the heart of the problems plaguing the African
continent.
While pursuing our reflections on this matter, we
have simultaneously experimented with practical and

innovative approaches in order to respond to pressing
needs on the ground. Here I must mention the initial
and heavy support packages authorized by the Security
Council for the African Union Mission in the Sudan
(AMIS) as well as the ongoing support for the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). Mention should
also be made of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), which is
further evidence of the innovative approaches taken by
the African Union and the United Nations to addressing
the peace and security challenges on the African
continent.

We believe that the combination of reflection and
pragmatism has significantly enhanced our
understanding of how great a need there is to establish
predictable and sustainable funding mechanisms for
peace support operations conducted by regional
organizations such as the African Union, with the
authorization of the Security Council, of course. In this
respect, it is clear that the most viable option is to
make use of United Nations assessed contributions. We
are convinced that obtaining predictable, sustainable
and flexible funding for regional organizations such as
the African Union through assessed contributions
would also enable the Security Council to utilize local
comparative advantages in its efforts to tackle, in a
continuous way, the threats to international peace and
security that affect us all.

Over the past few years, the African Union, with
the support of its international partners, has
demonstrated a renewed will to shoulder its share of
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. The decision to deploy a mission in
Somalia, in spite of the volatile security situation
prevailing on the ground - with which we are all
familiar - and the difficult environment overall, as
well as earlier deployments in countries such as
Burundi and the Sudan - and thus in Darfur - bear
testimony to this determination. I should thus like to
recall the decision taken by the special summit of the
African Union held in Tripoli, Libya, at the end of
August 2009, to increase the percentage of the AU
regular budget transferred to the Union's Peace Fund.

Looking to the future, we believe that the Council
should, in the next stages of its consideration of this
matter, fully utilize the constructive and rich
environment created by the combination of reflection,
pragmatism and lessons learned, in order to take
decisive measures to address the specific issue of the
predictability, sustainability and flexibility of funding
for regional organizations when they undertake
peacekeeping operations under a United Nations
mandate, and to do so through assessed contributions.

We note the recommendations contained in the
report of the Secretary-General with respect to the
strategic partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union, which provide a good basis for
strengthening the cooperation between the AU and the
United Nations in the area of the maintenance of
international peace and security. We also note the
recommendations made with respect to capacity-
building, and we stress the need for their speedy
implementation, bearing in mind ongoing African
Union efforts and the need to ensure very close
coordination.

It must, however, be clear that, in order to
address the challenges of peace and security in
Africa- something in which we all have a stake -
we need not only to enhance the capacity of the African
Union, but also to find effective responses to the issue
of financing peace support operations.

Lest we lose sight of our goal, we must bear in
mind that Security Council action on the subject of this
debate will strengthen the unflagging confidence that
the Governments and populations facing the scourges
of conflict and instability place in the Council and in
its readiness to help them restore lasting peace and
security. I therefore seize this opportunity to reaffirm
the commitment of the African Union to continue
working with the Council, Member States and all
international partners in pursuing and achieving this
common goal.

