Mr. Ward (Jamaica): Madam President, my
delegation is pleased to see you presiding over the
Council, and we thank your delegation for scheduling
this meeting.

We are also pleased that the Government of
Guinea-Bissau has taken full advantage of the
opportunity presented by this open meeting of the
Security Council. Vice-Prime Minister Faustino Fudut
Imbali has set out for us the programme priorities of
his Government. This morning the Secretary-General
opened our discussion by emphasizing the importance
of this meeting.

We also welcome the statement of Mr. Callisto
Madavo, Vice-President of the World Bank, who
informed us of the role of the international financial
institutions in the post-conflict peace-building process
under way in Guinea-Bissau.

When my delegation first proposed that the
Council convene an open briefing on the situation in
Guinea-Bissau it was for the simple purpose of
focussing attention on the Government's post-conflict
priorities and of garnering support for its efforts to
provide the necessary financial and material resources
to give effect to those priorities.

My delegation believes that the international
community must appreciate that the commitment to
peace does not end with the cessation of hostilities in a
conflict. Rather, the true measure of long-term peace
involves the building of democratic, social and
economic institutions and practices in order to
consolidate and maintain peace. It involves national
efforts for reconciliation, tolerance and the peaceful
management of differences. These efforts need the
involvement of civil society to overcome the suspicion
and animosity built up during the period of conflict.

The events of the past week demonstrate just how
tenuous the hold on elected office can be if there are
divisive elements in the society seeking to thwart the
restoration of full democracy. These events also
demonstrate, vividly, the urgency of the consolidation
of the Government's peace initiatives.

My delegation is satisfied that the situation in the
country has apparently stabilized and that there appears
to be no permanent damage to the legitimate
Government of President Kumba Yala. The key
challenge which must be squarely addressed is the need
for the former military regime to withdraw from the
process and subordinate itself to the constitutional
authorities. This will be an important step towards the
realization of democratic rule and the creation of the
necessary institutions to support the restoration of
lasting peace, stability and sustainable development in
Guinea-Bissau.

The creation of these institutions will not happen
in a vacuum, but depends on the establishment of
practices of good governance, including the
empowerment of individuals and communities. The
challenge for the Government of Guinea-Bissau is to
create a system of governance that promotes, supports
and sustains human development; especially for the
poorest of the poor. Successful States create a body of
laws and practices around which a country's population
can gravitate, secure in the knowledge that the
Government and State apparatus exists for their
benefit, that they are better off with a government than
without.

The United Nations Development Programme has
termed this approach sustainable human development.
This means development that not only generates
economic growth, but that also distributes its benefits
equitably and empowers men and women rather than
marginalizing them. In this regard, my delegation
welcomes the commitment of the Guinea-Bissau
Government to post-conflict reconstruction and
reconciliation, electing as its primary objectives good
governance and the fight against poverty.

The successful outcome of the post-conflict
transition in Guinea-Bissau will stand as a test of the
international community's resolve to enable formerly
war-torn countries to establish the institutions which
will prevent a return to conflict. For its part, the
Security Council must ensure that, at the very outset, or
as soon as practicable, peace-building measures are
included as an integral part of the planning of peace
operations. This requires a partnership with the
Secretariat in developing a doctrine of peace-building
strategies and programmes in an integrated and
comprehensive approach to conflict situations.

In the case of Guinea-Bissau, which is now
ranked among the poorest countries in Africa, the
international financial institutions will need to address
themselves to mobilizing financial resources to
facilitate the rehabilitation, reconstruction and
development priorities identified by the Government.

My delegation is of the view that the challenges
of the post-conflict situation in Guinea-Bissau require
an integrated and consolidated form of support by all
concerned agencies, including the United Nations
system, the World Bank and the International Monetary
Fund (IMF) as well as bilateral donors. We hope that
this occasion has served to sensitize these institutions
to the need for lenient and constructive policies which
will meet the pressing and urgent needs of the post-
conflict society.

Again, as I stated earlier, recent events have
emphasized that there should be no gap between
peacekeeping and peace-building. We are pleased to
learn from Mr. Madavo that the World Bank and the
IMF are taking action to address the post-conflict
peace-building priorities of Guinea-Bissau, including
the urgent problem of Guinea-Bissau's debt burden.
There is no room for delay; time is of the essence.

In this regard, my delegation fully endorses
Secretary-General Kofi Annan's statement that the
donor community, including the international financial
institutions, must exercise greater flexibility and, to use
the Secretary-General's words, "greater tolerance"
(supra) when addressing peace-related priorities,
which require public sector expenditures and budget
deficits. Old boilerplate prescriptions and
conditionalities may not be appropriate in these
circumstances and should not be applied across the
board.

My delegation commends the work of the United
Nations Peace-building Support Office in Guinea-
Bissau and, in particular, the timeless efforts of
Mr. Nana-Sinkam in carrying out post-conflict peace-
building in Guinea-Bissau.

