Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to start by showing solidarity with the people of the Niger for the death of over 89 soldiers over the weekend and by expressing our continued solidarity with our brotherly country of Haiti on another anniversary of the tragic earthquake of 2010 that cost over 300,000 lives, including 102 people working for the United Nations. We welcome Colombia's Minister for Foreign Affairs, Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi. It is truly an honour to have her with us in the Security Council. We also thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu for his briefing. At the outset, the Dominican Republic reiterates its firm support for the peace process in Colombia and acknowledges the Colombian people's commitment to the process of achieving peace in the country. Peace has cost them dearly, and we must all remain committed to its consolidation. We cannot forget that it has been the brotherly Colombian people who have paid the highest price over years of violence. We therefore welcome the Government's efforts to address the demands and aspirations of Colombians within the framework of anational conversation and to prioritize very specifically the issue of youth within that conversation. We hope that will culminate in the adoption of tangible joint measures to increase the people's confidence in the entire process. We deplore the acts of violence recorded in some areas of the country resulting from the presence of illegal armed groups. We encourage the parties to ensure a safe environment free from violence for the civilian population. Despite the challenges to its implementation, the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace in Colombia remains a point of reference for building a conflict- free American continent and a clear illustration that dialogue and consultation are the only way to achieve peace. Therefore, to overcome the challenges ahead, the parties must address and resolve their differences in joint spaces such as the Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the Implementation of the Final Agreement, the National Commission on Security Guarantees and the National Reintegration Council. We recognize the efforts of the Government, which has committed itself to the peace process and promoted comprehensive reforms, including rural reform, as a way to combat poverty and promote the development of the communities most affected by the conflict. We stress that it is essential to continue providing educational opportunities to ex-combatants for their subsequent economic and social reintegration as agents of change and definitive reconciliation in Colombia. We regret that, regarding the security situation, especially in rural areas, social leaders and human rights defenders who support the peace agreement and related policies continue to face heightened risks. We are particularly concerned that indigenous leaders, women leaders and human rights defenders, especially women defenders of the land and the environment, face threats to their security. Likewise, armed groups continue to violate the rights of not only Colombian children but also of Venezuelan children, who are in highly vulnerable situations. We call on the groups to commit to ending such violations. We would like to express our recognition to the Colombian people for having peacefully exercised their right to vote in the recent district elections. We urge the authorities to step up efforts to provide the necessary guarantees to participants in the political process, including ex-combatants. Those efforts were on display yesterday when the Government of Colombia prevented an attack on Rodrigo Londofio Echeverri "Timochenko", a leader of the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Comtn, for which I commend the Government of Colombia. All acts of violence must be investigated and prosecuted. We hope that all parties concerned, including civil society, local communities and the private sector, will decisively stay the course, value the progress made in the peace process and prioritize the full implementation of the agreement. These goals can be achieved through inclusive dialogue, building trust among all the parties and promoting peace through development. In conclusion, the Dominican Republic reiterates its support for the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombiaand encourage it to continue working tirelessly with all stakeholders, including the United Nations country team, civil society and local communities, on the road to lasting peace based on the promotion and preservation of Colombia's national unity.
