Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
too would like to thank the two Special Envoys,
Mr. Jan Eliasson and Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim, for their
respective statements, which have given us an
overview of the current situation in Darfur, especially
as regards the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). I would also like to
congratulate them and to assure them of our full
support in the great efforts they are making to ensure
that UNAMID is at last effective and to restore peace
to Darfur.

The recent mission of the Security Council to
Sudan allowed us to see the reality on the ground at
first-hand, to fully assess the scope of the challenges
facing UNAMID and, above all, to hear the
expectations of the civilian population as regards
security and stability. What we saw there, especially in
camps for refugees and displaced persons, was fully in
line with the statements we have just heard. The
continuation of violence serves to remind us of the
urgency of finding a way out of the crisis. We have
taken note of the assurances given by the Sudanese
Government. We reiterate our strong condemnation of
all acts of violence, regardless of who the perpetrators
are.

The confrontation between the Sudanese
Government and various illegal armed groups, which
include inter-tribal and inter-factional groups, is
exacerbating the humanitarian and security situation in
Darfur, thereby endangering the political dialogue
currently under way. That situation of insecurity -
which also affects humanitarian workers and UNAMID
personnel, who are also victims - serves to limit
access in providing humanitarian assistance to the
vulnerable civilian population.

Burkina Faso believes that the lack of genuine
political will by the parties to engage in substantive
negotiations, in particular on the part of various illegal
armed groups, is the major obstacle to resolving the
crisis. The Security Council must therefore call upon
all parties to agree to the principle of peace. In that
regard, we welcome the decision of the Secretary-
General to soon appoint a joint chief mediator to begin
negotiations as quickly as possible.

With regard to the deployment of UNAMID, as
several speakers before me have emphasized, along
with senior UNAMID officials, we have taken into
account the difficulties and constraints facing the
deployment of the Operation.

There is a lack of infrastructure for the operation,
a lack of engineering capacity, difficulties in
transporting equipment, lack of security, et cetera.
Solutions to these problems must be found as soon as
possible, lest UNAMID be endangered.

We are gratified by the Sudanese Government's
willingness to work for the effective deployment of
UNAMID, and we take note of its hope that some of
the mission's concerns can be resolved in collaboration
with the competent Sudanese authorities. It is a fact
that UNAMID needs vigorous, concrete and substantial
support if it is to be fully operational in the near future.
The Security Council has a central role to play in that
regard.

08-3959]

We thank the countries that are providing support
to the mission and at the same time appeal to all
partners to contribute to eliminating the obstacles that
continue to hamper the deployment of the force. We are
confident that the commitment of all States Members
of the United Nations, and of Security Council
members in particular, will make it possible to resolve
these logistical issues.

As many have noted, the search for a lasting
solution to the Darfur crisis hinges on a regional
approach, specifically the normalization of diplomatic
relations between Chad and the Sudan. Here, we urge
those two countries to begin constructive political
dialogue and to resume the meetings of the contact
group supporting the implementation of the Dakar
Agreement, without forgetting, of course, the African
Union mediation. We believe that on that basis it will
be possible to build lasting peace and stability in
Darfur and throughout the subregion.

