Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I congratulate
the United Kingdom on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council. We once again thank the Togolese
delegation for a job well done over the past month.
Allow me also to welcome the presence here today of
Under Secretary of State Bellingham to preside over
this important meeting. I also thank the Secretary-
General for his presence and analysis, as well as
Special Representative Mahiga for his very helpful
briefing. I commend him and his team for their work
and efforts.

For a period of several months we have been
seeing encouraging signs and important positive
developments in Somalia. Nevertheless, the overall
situation remains fragile and of concern. But the
international community's role and determination in
continuing to support the Somali people is clear.
Politically, that support was demonstrated by the
London conference in bringing together key partners at
this critical juncture for the country, with the aim of
reaching a comprehensive strategy for the
establishment of peace and stability. It has also been
demonstrated by the continuous engagement of the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, as well as by Turkey's intention to hold
another high-level meeting in Istanbul in the coming
months, thereby building on the momentum.

The adoption of resolution 2036 (2012) and the
significant strengthening of the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) that it authorized; the support
being given to develop the Somali security forces,
especially by the European Union; the hard work and
sacrifice of AMISOM, regional partners and the Somali
security forces; as well as the commitment of troops by
established and new contributing countries, all
highlight the support at the security and military levels.

In that regard, allow me to acknowledge the
efforts made by all parties involved in military action
in Somalia to minimize the negative impact of military
intervention on Somali civilians - we continue to
encourage them to continue to do so - and to promote
the safety and welfare of civilians fleeing conflict and
meet the food needs in the country.

On the humanitarian front, despite the end of the
state of famine, partners continue to be heavily
engaged in improving and addressing the ongoing,
protracted needs of Somalia. However, assistance will
only be fruitful if it reaches those in need in a timely
way. To that end, we urge all parties to ensure full and
unhindered access for humanitarian aid across the
country.

Partners are also addressing the underlying
causes of instability. In that regard, the relocation of
the United Nations Political Office for Somalia to
Mogadishu, the support aimed at building stability at
the local level and the consistent stepping-up of action
to tackle the threats posed by piracy and terrorism are
of great importance. Portugal is engaged in multiple
efforts, mainly through the outstanding contribution of
the European Union. In that context, we of course
share the position of the European Union, to be
expressed later by Ambassador Mayr-Harting.

The engagement and additional efforts that we all
have committed ourselves to are nevertheless
dependent upon the will and commitment of the Somali
people, in particular the Somali political leadership.
Portugal welcomes the consensus on ending the
transitional period in August 2012, in line with the road
map for ending the transition, and takes note of the
agreement on the Garowe Principles and the
commitment by Somali leaders to ensure the delivery
of basic services to the population, promote good
governance and safeguard peace and security in
Somalia.

We take this opportunity to once again urge the
Transitional Federal Institutions and all road map and
Garowe signatories to redouble their efforts. As
Portugal has stated before, it is also vital to ensure
inclusiveness and representativeness throughout the
current process. We recall the constructive role that
women can play towards that end, as well as in
ensuring full respect for human rights. Turning those
decisions into reality is another step, yet a significant
one, that Somalis need to take themselves towards a
stable and viable State. We call upon them also to
continue to work closely with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador
Augustine Mahiga, whose efforts I wish again to
underline and commend.

In concluding, allow me to recall the need to
ensure the sustainability of the progress achieved so far
in Somalia. To that end, and despite the current
environment of global financial constraint, we
encourage others, in particular new donors, to
contribute to that collective endeavour, by ensuring the
sustainability of AMISOM. financing.

