Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
should like to begin by thanking you, Sir, for having
taken the initiative of organizing this debate under your
competent presidency, a debate in which Africa is once
again at the centre of the Security Council's attention.

I should also like to welcome the presence of
Ambassador Jagdish Koonjul, Chairman of the ad hoc
Working Group; of Mr. Ibrahima Fall, Assistant
Secretary-General in charge of the United Nations
Office in Dakar; and of Ambassador Ivan Simonovic',
President of the Economic and Social Council, whose
contributions will enrich and enlighten our current and
future discussions.

The sustained attention of the Security Council
and ofthe United Nations system in general that Africa
now enjoys is all the more reassuring in that it is now
shared by the entire Council. That is also the result of
the daily and persistent action ofthe Secretary-General,
who has fostered an international awareness of Africa
and who spares no effort in giving the continent hope
for a better future.

We are pleased that this debate is taking place at a
juncture marked by encouraging prospects for conflict
settlement, particularly in Angola and Sierra Leone and
between Eritrea and Ethiopia. As a member of the
African family, my delegation is glad to participate in
this debate, which concerns the role, the functions, and
the programme of work of the ad hoc Working Group
on conflict prevention and resolution in Africa. That
Group, established three months ago, was given the
mandate of monitoring the implementation of the
successive recommendations of the President of the
Council with regard to conflict prevention and
resolution in Africa. The nature and the scope of that
mandate poses, at first glance, the problem of a
possible overlap between the Group's activities and
those of the General Assembly's working group
charged with the application of the recommendations
contained in the Secretary-General's report on the
causes of conflicts (S/l998/318).

Despite the informal nature of the ad hoc
Working Group, a delineation of the fields of action of
both bodies seems desirable in order to ensure the
rationality and the effectiveness of United Nations
action in this area. We believe it is indispensable that
there be complementarity between the tasks of the ad
hoc Working Group, those of the General Assembly
and those ofthe Economic and Social Council.

For any action undertaken by the Council in the
area of conflict prevention and management in Africa,
the Secretary-General's report of 13 April 1998
remains the indisputable reference, inasmuch as it
contains a detailed analysis of conflicts and of their
deep-rooted causes, and it proposes realistic and
achievable recommendations to put an end to them.
This basic document remains, therefore, the point of
departure for any discussion or action designed to
suppress or prevent African conflicts. It is only fitting
that the programme proposed by the Ambassador of
Mauritius draws its references from that same report.

As you have requested, Mr. President, my
delegation will focus its observations and comments on
four items. I shall begin with relations with the
Economic and Social Council.

Given the well-established interaction between
peace-building and the socio-economic development of
the African countries emerging from conflicts, the
coordination of the Economic and Social Council's
activities and those of the Security Council goes
without saying. The same logic calls for the
establishment of links between the Economic and
Social Council advisory group and the Security
Council ad hoc Working Group, thus giving concrete
form to the integrated approach described in the
Secretary-General's report on the causes of conflict.
Indeed, such coordination is not an end in itself; it will
be worthwhile only if it is pragmatic and oriented
towards achieving results. It would have the merit of
offering more visibility to the Government of a country
involved in a conflict, as well as to its partners,
whether they be donor countries, international financial
institutions or private investors.

Within the context of the coordination sought by
the Council in order to prevent the aggravation of
conflict or to prevent the outbreak of new conflict, we
feel that particular mention should be accorded to
cooperation and coordination with the High
Commissioner for Refugees and with the International
Committee ofthe Red Cross.

Conflicts in Africa are a constant source of untold
human suffering. Millions of persons have been
displaced from their homes, separated from their
families and forced to live in deplorable conditions. In
that regard, the High Commissioner for Refugees and
the International Committee of the Red Cross play a
valuable and irreplaceable role in the treatment of the
humanitarian aspects of African conflicts and should
therefore be able to fulfil their mandate with regard to
refugees and detained persons, regardless of the final
political settlement. In that respect, it is essential that
the United Nations adopt concrete measures with a
view to ensuring strict respect for the norms of
international humanitarian law by all of the parties to
conflicts. As we know, these are imperative norms that
must be respected by all.

I should now like to discuss the second item,
concerning confidence-building measures in the Mano
River region. The Mano River region deserves all the
attention that the Council can accord it in this debate.
My country, which, upon the invitation of His Majesty
the King, hosted on 27 February a summit of the heads
of State of Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone, can
testify to the commitment of the leaders of those
countries to re-establish peace in the Mano River
region. The summit in Rabat launched a quest for peace
with the adoption of a set of measures to make
common borders safer, to repatriate refugees and to
provide assistance to displaced persons.

In the framework of the follow-up to the summit,
a meeting of foreign ministers was held in Morocco on
7 and 8 April. At that meeting, confidence-building
measures were drafted and adopted by the participants.
They included the rapid deployment of joint border-
security units; the control of the proliferation of small
arms and light weapons; the establishment of an
environment conducive to the repatriation of refugees;
the organization of a caravan to restore confidence
along the common borders, to include dignitaries from
the three countries; and the official opening of borders
to permit the free movement of people and goods. The
implementation of those measures warrants all the
support that the international community can muster
with a view to restoring peace to the region.

With respect to the role of the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General, my
delegation wishes to stress the following elements.

First, the role of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, entrusted with the primary
responsibility for a peacekeeping operation, is crucial
to the fulfilment of the Organization's mandate with
respect to a given dispute or conflict. That mandate
logically begins with a guarantee of strict respect for a
ceasefire by all parties. That respect is the starting
point and fundamental basis of any process leading to a
definitive political solution to the conflict.

Secondly, ongoing coordination between the
various United Nations agencies involved in a
peacekeeping operation is of significant added value
and a principal asset towards the success of a given
mission.

Lastly, as we know, the Secretary-General
occasionally and periodically holds coordination
meetings with the various Special Representatives,
either in New York or in Geneva. It might be desirable
for similar regular meetings to be held within an
African region or subregion or even at the African
continental level. Such regular meetings could
encourage an exchange of experiences and information
that could prove useful in improving mission
performance.

I wish now to discuss cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations and with States. Such
cooperation, set forth in the United Nations Charter
and institutionalized by General Assembly resolutions,
should be extended to such subregional organizations
as the Southern Africa Development Community, the
Economic Community of West African States, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
Community of Sahel-Saharan States, which, it must be
said, play an active role in reducing tensions in several
African regions. Interaction between the ad hoc
Working Group of the Security Council and these state
groupings could only be beneficial to United Nations
efforts to resolve conflicts. Similarly, States whose
proximity to or relations with parties to a conflict
recommend them for a role in promoting
rapprochement and reconciliation would benefit by
being included regularly and whenever necessary or
useful in the work ofthe ad hoc Working Group.

Lastly, I wish to say that my delegation is pleased
to note that peace-building and the implementation of
preventive diplomacy, particularly in Africa, continue
to be a focus of the Security Council. This debate,
however, should not lead us to forget that peace in
Africa remains linked to development and that the
United Nations and the international community must
pursue both of these objectives at the same time and,
with the same determination and energy, assist Africa
in its efforts towards democratic, economic and social
recovery and to eradicate, in particular, poverty and
AIDS.

