Mr. Mukasa-Ssali (Uganda): I should like to express
our congratulations to you, Sir, upon your assumption of
the presidency for the month of April and also to offer our
gratitude to your predecessor. I also thank you for giving
me this opportunity to participate in the present discussion,
which touches on matters of particular interest to my
Government.

Since this matter before the Council deals, to a large
extent, with the dangerous policy of the Sudanese
Government's support for terrorism, especially in the
subregion, I would like to take time to inform the Council
of the persistent and determined efforts by the Sudanese
regime to destabilize Uganda.

In spite of our efforts to maintain a policy of good-
neighbourliness with all our neighbours, the Sudanese
regime has continued its activities of assisting, supporting,
facilitating and even giving shelter and sanctuary to two
rebel movements based on its soil, whose sole purpose is to
wreak havoc and misery on defenceless civilians in the
north and northwestern districts of Uganda.

It will be recalled that the Government of Uganda
severed diplomatic relations with the Government of Sudan
on 13 April 1995, over incidents aimed at destabilizing
Uganda and compromising its security and stability. It is
with regret that I inform the Council that, since then, rather
than improving, the situation has progressively worsened,
with frequent incursions by Kony Lord's Resistance Army
(LRA) and the West Nile Bank Front of Juma Oris into
northern and northwestern Uganda, respectively. Both rebel
movements are based well inside the territory of Sudan,
whence they make incursions into Uganda.
It is important that I give details of some of the
numerous incidents that have taken place starting last year
and up to as recently as 17 April 1996.

On 17 April 1995, two LRA brigades of Stocree and
Gilva, numbering between 250 and 300 and all dressed in
Sudanese military uniforms, entered Uganda from Parajok
in the Sudan. They invaded Adodi, north-west of Parabek,
and attacked Lukung Trading Centre on 18 April 1995,
killing 24 people, most of whom were women and children,
and abducting over 30 others.

At River Nyimur, the same rebels killed 16 wives of
soldiers of the Uganda People's Defence Forces and two
men who happened to be around. The rest of the women
were abducted. The LRA has also been abducting
Ugandan children and taking them into Sudan in
exchange for guns. One of the markets for this evil trade
in the Sudan is in a place called Gong and Katiri.

On 20 April 1995 the LRA attacked Atiak, murdered
over 200 civilians and carried out atrocities of such wide
magnitude that they attracted international attention and
concern.

On 20 July 1995 about 500 rebels of Lords
Resistance Army, armed by the Sudan with anti-aircraft
missiles, mortars and personal weapons, and fully dressed
in Sudanese Armed Forces uniforms, crossed into Uganda
from Palutaka in Sudan and invaded Padibe in Uganda on
28 July 1995. During this attack the LRA murdered three
civilians, inflicted injuries on four others and abducted 10
more. Thereafter, the rebels carried out acts of arson -
burning homesteads and setting granaries on fire -
looted merchandise in the trading centre and vandalized
what they could not carry. Two motorcycles from a
missionary hospital were also looted.

After committing these crimes against innocent
civilians, the rebels withdrew to their safe haven in the
Sudan on 30 July 1995. The Sudanese Armed Forces
based in Palutaka sent trucks to the rebels, which picked
them up from River Amur with their booty on 31 July
1995.

On 11 August 1995 a group of 500 LRA rebels,
again heavily armed by Sudan, entered Uganda through
LellabuI and ravaged Lukung Division in Kitgum District.
It is also important to note that all the captives in all
these incidents were herded to Palutaka, where they were
forcibly put on military training.

In the north-western Ugandan districts of Arua and
Moyo, the Sudanese Government is grooming the West
Nile Bank Front, numbering between 1,000 and 1,500
men, under Colonel Juma Oris. In a similar manner as in
the case of Kony, the Sudanese Government offers
sanctuary and training facilities to these rebels in and
around Morobo, at Atende, Mahajub and Alebo.

Their operational force is in Kaya at places called
Kimba, Poki and Arabamiji near the Uganda-Sudan
border under Lieutenant Colonel Yasin Noah, and also in
Baazi, on the Sudan-Zaire border. The Sudan intends to

 

use, and has in fact used these rebels, not only to
destabilize Uganda, but also to harass Sudanese refugees in
the camps in Koboko and Adraga and to provide its
territory as a safe rear base for support and logistics. These
rebels are under instructions to step up acts of insecurity,
such as laying mines and perpetrating other acts of sabotage
in Uganda.

The latest of the horrendous incursions into Uganda by
the Sudanese-assisted rebels was when over 500 LRA
rebels crossed into Uganda from Am in the Sudan via
Mogali on 7 February this year. So far over 50 innocent
civilians have been killed, with many others abducted and
millions of dollars' worth of personal and State property
looted or destroyed. Others, most of them women and
children, have been maimed by anti-personnel mines
planted in their farmlands by the rebels, who are all well
supplied by the Sudanese regime with these and various
other types of explosive devices.

In the north-western part of the country, rebels of the
West Nile Bank Front based in southern Sudan and led by
Colonel Juma Oris entered Uganda on 17 April this year at
a place called Kei Hill in Midigo, Arua District. The rebels,
numbering between 300 and 500, were all armed and
dressed in Sudanese military combat fatigues. They planted
anti-tank and anti-personnel mines along the route after
attacking Ikafe refugee camp and abducting nine workers
from Oxfam, whom they later released.

Our people in the north-western districts have
mobilized themselves to support our security forces to
defeat this aggression from Sudan. Armed with bows,
arrows, spears and pangas, they have assisted the Uganda
People's Defence Forces in routing the rebels sent by their
masters in Khartoum to wreak havoc in our country.

As a result of the patriotic sacrifices of our people and
armed forces, several of these bandits have been killed and
others captured, while 70 of those remaining fled to Zaire
on 23 April this year.

Our people and security forces have played and will
continue to play their appropriate roles in defending the
country against foreign aggression, but we also need the
support of the international community, and the Security
Council in particular, to put an end to the evil designs of
the regime in Khartoum.

The Sudanese regime has not stopped at training,
arming and sending rebels into Uganda to wreak havoc but
has also, on several occasions, shelled, and its air force
bombed, our territory. The latest such acts of aggression
were perpetuated between 8 and 10 April, when Sudan,
using various types of artillery pieces, shelled Ugandan
territory between Keri and Oraba in north-western Uganda
for three consecutive days. Sudanese air force planes also
dropped bombs in the same area on 9 April.

We are preparing for presidential and parliamentary
elections to be held in our country between early May
and early June, but the activities to which I have referred
have not made it easy for our people in the affected
districts to prepare to freely exercise their democratic
rights as citizens for the first time in about 30 years, and
to elect a Government of their choice.

As a result of Sudanese activities and those of its
supported rebels, economic, social and political activities
in north and north-western Uganda have been disrupted,
and there is general panic. This situation cannot be
allowed to continue.

We have always stressed that efforts to improve and
normalize relations between Uganda and Sudan would be
helped if Sudan disbanded and disarmed the Ugandan
dissidents or rebels in the Sudan, confined them in camps,
capable of being monitored and verifiable, and confined
the leaders of these rebels - or, better still, resettled
them in a country of asylum in accordance with
international conventions on refugees.

As the evidence clearly shows, the Sudanese
Government has not heeded our advice and has, in fact,
stepped up its destabilization programme against Uganda.
Its pretext for these actions has been the alleged Ugandan
Government support for the Sudanese Peoples Liberation
Army (SPLA), a pretext which we have dismissed as
unfounded and lacking any basis in fact. The whole world
knows that the conflict in the Sudan is purely an internal
matter, and that its solution will have to be found by the
Sudanese people themselves through dialogue.

Uganda condemns in the strongest possible terms the
unprovoked acts of aggression visited on us by the
Sudanese Government and calls upon the Security
Council and the international community at large to do
the same, and to take the strongest possible measures to
halt them completely.
The matter before the Council is further evidence of
the actions of a regime that has set as its policy the
destabilization of its neighbours, using whatever means it
deems necessary. It is the duty of this Council to live up

 

to its responsibilities with regard to maintaining
international peace and security by sending a clear and
strong signal to the regime in Khartoum that terrorism and
aggression will not be rewarded in today's world, and that
those who make these an integral part of their policies will
be held accountable by all peace-loving people.

We have looked at the draft resolution before the
Council, and wish to express our disappointment that it
does not send the strong signal that we had hoped for. Our
terrorized and brutalized people are looking to this Council
and the international community for an assurance that the
Sudanese air force will no longer bomb their homes, that
the Sudanese armed forces will no longer shell their
villages, and that the Sudanese-sponsored rebels will no
longer kill, rape or maim them, rob them of their property
or abduct their children, simply because the international
community has finally prevailed on the Sudanese regime to
desist from all acts of terrorism and aggression against all
its neighbours.

We would like, therefore, to reiterate the need for the
Security Council to take any measures necessary, including
an arms embargo against the Sudan, to ensure that it desists
from engaging in activities that are not only destabilizing
Uganda but plunging the entire subregion into chaos.

