I would like to thank Special Envoy Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and Executive Director Beasley for their briefings. I also look forward the presentation by Mr. Badokhon. At the outset, I would like to welcome the exchange of over 1,000 prisoners between the Government and the Houthis in mid-October. I commend the successful negotiations lead by the team of Special Envoy Griffiths and the International Committee of the Red Cross. This was an important moment of hope in the midst of this prolonged crisis. We call on the Houthi authorities also to unconditionally release the four remaining journalists who have been arbitrarily detained and are facing the death penalty. In this context, we remind all parties of their responsibility to comply with their obligations under international human rights law and international humanitarian law and to ensure accountability for all violations and abuses. The prisoner exchange was an important humanitarian measure that, hopefully, will also help build confidence between the parties in order to finally reach an agreement on the joint declaration. We reiterate our call on the parties for an immediate nationwide ceasefire and to agree to the United Nations proposal, thereby allowing for the meaningful resumption of peace talks, involving the full inclusion of civil society, including women. As we have just passed the one-year anniversary of the signing of the Riyadh agreement, we reiterate our call on the Government and the Southern Transitional Council to implement the remaining elements of the agreement, which is an essential step, including on the path towards reaching a wider peace. Unfortunately, the fighting on the key front lines has not decreased but resulted in reportedly ever more civilian casualties. The targeting of civilian infrastructure, like the recent shelling of a hospital in Taiz, contravenes international humanitarian law and is completely unacceptable. Besides the direct impacts and suffering, the hostilities are also the primary reason for the worsening of the economic and humanitarian situation. It is most worrisome to hear the reports by United Nations agencies that Yemen is again on the brink of a food-security crisis and that acute malnutrition rates among children under 5 are the highest ever. We have noted that the funding situation of the humanitarian programmes has slightly improved, although significant gaps remain. Estonia has contributed to the World Food Programme in order to help alleviate the humanitarian situation. However, in order to respond to the humanitarian situation, including the famine, there is a need to strengthen Yemen's economy and find a long-term solution to ensure the import of fuel and commercial items through the ports. We also stress the urgency of granting formal approval to the United Nations mission to access the FSO SAFER oil tanker, as such a decision by the Houthis is already long overdue.
