Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I would like to thank Minister Nasser
Judeh for convening this debate. It in honour to have
him here. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his unceasing efforts to address the conflict
in the Middle East.

My comments will focus on the peace process
between Israel and Palestine, which lies at the heart of
our concerns, but I will also refer to the situations in
Syria and Yemen, given their dramatic impact, as well
as to the need for support to Lebanon and to the ongoing
threat that violent extremism poses to the region as a
whole.

From the moment when the two-State solution
began to be accepted almost 25 years ago as a result
of the Madrid Peace Conference and the commitments
undertaken by the parties, not only have we been
unable to implement it, but we are on the verge of
seeing it become an unattainable chimera. If there is a
single clear message that should emerge from today's
debate it is that there is no alternative to the two-State
solution, which is the only one capable of guaranteeing
comprehensive global peace based on respect for the
legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people to
establish their own State and of Israel to live in peace
and security with its regional neighbours. That means,
first of all, that we must all work to re-establish trust
between the parties, which has gradually been worn
away and damaged by decisions and events whose
end result has been the absence of a common ground
for dialogue. Trust cannot be restored without clear
signs from both parties designed to help change their
perception of one another and to generate the climate
necessary for the resumption of negotiations.

We must recognize that over the past few weeks
both sides have gone out of their way to demonstrate that
they hope to get their relations back on track. I trust that
the new Government to emerge from the democratically
expressed will of the Israel people will ratify that
hope and that it will take the brave decisions that will
signal a change in its policy concerning settlements on
occupied territories, especially in the most sensitive
areas. Similarly, I trust that the Palestinian Authority
will be capable of meeting the challenges it faces
by prioritizing the process of reconciliation and the
establishment of an effective Government of national
unity, which is the key to building a Palestinian State.
Furthermore, we trust that the political will to commit
to the peace process will take precedence over other
possible routes, such as the legalization of the conflict.

Gaza demands its own mention. Despite a few
minimal signs of progress at the logistical and
operational levels, we are far from establishing the
bases for promoting the profound transformation
that the Strip requires. I would like to offer just one
statistic. With an unemployment rate of more than
47 per cent, we must inevitably acknowledge that there
will be no solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict if the
population of Gaza does not have some hope for the
future. To that end, we must all take responsibility; that
includes the Palestinian authorities themselves, without
whose reconciliation very little can be achieved; the
authorities of Israel who, to be fair, are helping with
the Reconstruction Mechanism but who must move
ahead with lifting the blockade; and the international
community, which must make good on its promises of
financial aid.

What is to be done? Robert Serry outlined the
path in his farewell remarks to the Council (see S/PV.7417). The solution must be comprehensive, not
partial, and in order to achieve it there needs to be a
new political framework that revives the peace process
and stimulates dialogue between the parties. The goal
is clear - the end of the occupation that began in 1967
and the creation of a democratic, economically viable
Palestinian State whose existence will contribute to
Israel's peace and security.

Many actors need to play key parts along the way to
achieving that goal. The leadership of the United States
has been and will remain crucial. The European Union
is also playing an essential role, and the regional focus
is indispensable. The Arab countries, through the Arab
Peace Initiative, must take the lead in the process. I am
convinced, however, that the Security Council needs to
take the greatest responsibility at this critical time. I
would like to reiterate that the aim of all our efforts is
to reach consensus among the members of the Council,
as reflected in a resolution that brings together clear,
comprehensive parameters as the basic framework for
reviving peace negotiations. It will take time, effort and
above all flexibility to achieve it, but only by providing
clear evidence of the Council's resolve to pursue that
goal will we be able to offer the Palestinians and
Israelis the political vision that grows more necessary
with each passing day.

The alternative is to do nothing or to do so little
that we simply end up managing a failure - and by
failure I mean a new intifada or a new conflict in Gaza,
which would feed violent radicalism and be yet another
open conflict in the region. That leads me to a second
issue. As a matter of moral imperative and political
responsibility, the Security Council must be involved
in the fight to combat violent extremism in the Middle
East and the protection of minorities and the most
vulnerable populations. Any decision we adopt must
that take into account.

With respect to Lebanon, Spain feels particularly
close to that country and is firmly committed to
Lebanese unity, stability and security. I take this
opportunity to express my support to the Government
and institutions of Lebanon, in particular to its armed
forces. It is vital for the Lebanese political authorities
to redouble their efforts to guarantee institutional
continuity through the election of a new President. We
are aware of the challenges involved in managing the
Syrian humanitarian crisis. Precisely for that reason,
we are working actively within the Security Council
on the basis of a strategy to alleviate the impact on
neighbouring countries that, like Lebanon, are suffering
the consequences of the Syrian tragedy. I listened very
closely to the President when he referred to the refugee
problem in his country.

Concerning Syria, I await with great interest the
information we are due to receive later this week from
Staffan dc Mistura, who enjoys our full support and
trust. That will be a good moment to evaluate the
political options and various efforts already under way,
such as the discussions recently held in Moscow. But I
cannot speak today of the situation in the Middle East
without reiterating our call on all parties to respect
international humanitarian law and human rights. I call
in particular on the Government in Damascus not to
shirk its inescapable responsibility to protect its people
from the atrocities being committed in that country.

The situation in Yarmouk is horrendous, but it
should not surprise us. The continuous denial of access
to humanitarian assistance for the inhabitants of the
Yarmouk refugee camp, by both the Syrian regime
and other armed groups, is intolerable. More than a
year ago, through resolution 2139 (2014), the Council
demanded an end to the siege of hundreds of thousands
of people and a guarantee of immediate, unhampered
access to humanitarian assistance, with respect the
very basic principle of medical neutrality. Perhaps the
moment has come for us to consider adopting further
measures. The adoption ofa press statement (SC/11865)
yesterday is a good first step.

Finally, I want to mention the situation in Yemen.
Last week, by adopting resolution 2216 (2015), we gave
the Secretary-General 10 days to report on the degree
of compliance with the Council provisions on Yemen.
For now, the Houthis have continued their advance
towards the south, openly defying the international
community while severely worsening the humanitarian
situation in the country. We fully support the efforts
of the Secretary-General to seek a political solution in
Yemen and welcome the new Special Envoy. However,
if the Houthi defiance continues, the Council will have
to take action; the very credibility of this organ is at
stake.

