Mr. Rosselli F rieri (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank the presidency of the United
States for organizing this debate on a topic of particular
importance to the Organization and to which my
country has been firmly committed for more than 60
years. I also thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his
detailed briefing and his proposals on actions to pursue,
and Ms. Sarah Blakemore for her impassioned briefing,
which has made an impression on our hearts and minds
because, at the end of the day, we are responsible for the
behaviour our personnel.

Since the adoption of resolution 2278 (2016),
we have observed a number of developments that
we believe are already having a clear impact on
peacekeeping operations. I will mention but a few, such
as the Secretary-General's proposal for restructuring
the peace and security pillar and reforming the
management of the Organization; the discussions in
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
on the security of peacekeepers, the performance of
missions and the protection of civilians; the setting
out in the Fifth Committee of the annual budget for
peacekeeping operations; Secretariat initiatives, in
consultation with Member States, for the development
of an integrated policy framework on the execution of
mandates based on clear rules for all personnels - an
integrated performance policy framework, which will
make it possible to quantify and monitor the results
of peacekeeping operations; and the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative, launched by the Secretary-
General and supported by several Member States,
including my country, and its Declaration of Shared
Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations, which identifies future courses of action.

Today's debate focuses on one of the most critical
aspects of peacekeeping operation reform, namely,
the performance of peacekeepers. For Uruguay, it is
clear that ensuring the good performance of peace
missions is the collective and shared responsibility of
all those involved and depends upon numerous critical
factors, such as well-defined, realistic and achievable
mandates; political will, leadership and performance
and accountability at all levels; sufficient resources
and equipment; and guidelines and training on policies,
planning and implementation. It is essential that all
actors shoulder, rather than shirk, their responsibilities
by working together. That is the very spirit of the Action
for Peacekeeping initiative.

Uruguay attaches particular importance to the
responsibilities of troop- and police-contributing
countries, with the understanding that they are the ones
who act on the ground and must discharge the mandates.
In that regard, the training of personnel deployed in
peace missions is essential. They must be trained to
carry out the complex tasks necessary to fulfil the
entire mandate. We stress in particular the centrality of
the protection of civilians in peace operations. In that
regard, I would like to emphasize the contribution of
the Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians to
the reform process.

We also recognize that ensuring the effective
participation of women in peacekeeping operations
at all levels is essential to improving operational
effectiveness and enhancing the performance
of missions. Uruguay is working to increase the
proportion of women in its personnel. We currently
have 96 women in peacekeeping missions, only 7 per
cent of our country's total deployed personnel, but we
will continue to work diligently to change that.

Peacekeepers must be properly trained and
equipped, but they must also behave in a manner that
safeguards the credibility, impartiality and integrity of
the United Nations. Any misconduct by peacekeepers,
including allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse,
undermines the credibility, effectiveness and reputation
of the Organization. In that connection, I would like to
acknowledge the enormous efforts that the Secretary-
General and his team, as well as Member States, are
making to combat the scourge of sexual exploitation
and abuse.

Uruguay actively supports all the efforts being
made, having signed the voluntary compact against
sexual exploitation and abuse, and participating
through our President, Mr. Tabare Vazquez, in the
Secretary-General's leadership circle. Uruguay also
works closely with the Conduct and Discipline Unit to
facilitate access to justice for alleged victims of sexual
exploitation and abuse.

The security of deployed personnel is another
central aspect that affects the performance of peace
operationas. In that regard, I wish to highlight three
key elements.

First, the procurement of the necessary equipment
for each mission cannot depend solely upon the
financial situation of each troop-contributing country.
Greater cooperation must be fostered among troop-
and police-contributing countries, the Secretariat
and donor countries. Many of the new technologies
required for adequately equippping a mission come at
an exceedingly high cost, and hence the need to find
alternative ways to obtain them.

Secondly, all the necessary measures and protocols
must be considered to adequately deal with instances of
deliberate attacks against United Nations personnel and
facilities. Those who choose to attack United Nations
contingents must know that they will be forcefully
repelled by an equal or superior force. We must make
every effort to provide the different contingents with
as many tools as possible to deal with new realities,
be they passive defence measures, enhanced rules of
engagement, or assurances that the appropriate bodies
will hold the perpetrators accountable for their crimes.

Thirdly, it is necessary to ensure that the State
hosting peacekeeping operations cooperates with
them. Any violation of the status-of-forces agreement
by either party can pose serious risks to the security
of peacekeepers. We must remember that the status-
of-forces are documents that ensure the protection of
the personnel that a country voluntarily contributes
to peacekeeping operations. Therefore, the entry of
personnel or equipment into a country and the free
movement of the same within the country must not
be hindered, especially when it comes to medical
evacuation and the evacuation of victims.

In conclusion, I pledge Uruguay's commitment to
continuing to work on the process of reforming United
Nations peacekeeping operations.

