Mr. Manis (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to express the appreciation of the Government
of National Unity for the importance that the United
Nations and the Security Council attach to the question
of peace in the Sudan.

I should also like to take note of the important
Security Council mission to the Sudan. We consider it
to have been a positive visit, because the mission was
able to see the facts of the situation in terms of the
implementation of both the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement and the Darfur Peace Agreement. The
mission held meetings with Government officials,
various civil society groups and leaders of political
parties and the opposition. We believe that visit will be
an important step towards strengthening cooperation
between the Sudan and the United Nations.

The visit to southern Sudan and the meeting with
the First Vice-President of the Republic and President
of the Government of southern Sudan and his
colleagues enabled the mission to follow the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement on the ground, to see the obstacles to
reconstruction, rehabilitation, the return of refugees
and internally displaced persons and the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process. It was also
an opportunity to see how urgent projects are not being
implemented due to a lack of resources resulting from
the failure of donors to fulfil their obligations. The
mission was also able to take into account the absence
of all necessary basic resources and infrastructure in
the south, which compounds the current difficulties
faced by the Government.

The mission's visit to Darfur made it possible for
members of the Council to see with their own eyes the
realities of the Darfur conflict, away from the glare of
the media and publicity.

In addition to the statement made by the chairman
of the mission, and the transparency that has helped us
to understand the various aspects of the conflict, we
also wish to note that the terms and definitions of this
crisis do not convey the complexity of the economic,
political and tribal realities of the conflict. I would also
add the external dimension to that, which arises from
tribal overlapping and cohabitation between Chad and
the Sudan.

The Sudanese Government has always been
proud to be a bridge of communication and association
between our two brotherly peoples. However, the well-
known domestic problems facing the Government of
Chad have prevented that cohabitation of civilizations
and cultures, giving rise to hostile actions and various
accusations.

The Darfur Peace Agreement on the whole was a
major historic achievement. It was the result of great
efforts, during which the President of the Government
of National Unity showed flexibility in order to reach
agreement. The Government of National Unity
emphasized that the Agreement would be implemented
fully. At the same time the Government is keen to
protect the Agreement from any danger posed by
groups that oppose it, as well as from foreign hostile
activities. The Government of the Sudan continues to
expect that the Security Council will carry out its
activities and exert pressure on the various parties that
refused to sign the Agreement and are hindering its
implementation.

Secondly, the Sudanese Government expects the
Council to attach particular importance to the external
challenge posed by Chad's support for groups that
reject the Agreement.

Thirdly, the Government expects the Council to
support the African Union Mission and to conduct
activities that conform to the Darfur Peace Agreement.

The Sudan is aware that its neighbour Chad, prior
to its domestic crisis, had been making efforts to help
resolve the conflict in Darfur. However, we must point
out that the Sudan took the first step and undertook
various initiatives to contain the crisis and resolve the
conflicts within the Government of Chad. Sudan's
commitment to establish peace and stability in Chad
did not take the form of a bilateral or regional
commitment or initiative but was due to a strategic
vision according to which internal stability in Chad is
essential for the Sudan's stability. The Government of
Chad, a brotherly country, is fully aware of that fact.

I would like to briefly give some examples of the
Sudan's initiatives and its contributions during 13
years to preserve internal stability in Chad. I should
like to point out that the Sudan did not raise the
question of Chad before the Security Council because
the African Union is working to resolve tensions
between our two fraternal countries. However, our
brothers in the Chad Government have forced us into
this situation. I should therefore like to give a few
examples of the Sudan's initiatives to maintain stability
in Chad.
6

First, on the initiative and sponsorship of the
Government of the Sudan, reconciliation between the
Government of Chad and opposition groups made
possible the signing, on 14 May 1993, of the
N'Djamena agreement between the National Front of
Chad, led by Dr. Elharith, and the Government of
Chad.

Secondly, the Sudan took the initiative to use its
good offices to contain the dispute between the
President of Chad, Idriss Deby, and his Minister of
Defence, Abbas Koty. Those efforts led to the signing
of the Tripoli agreement on 14 August 1993. The
Minister of Defence was able to return to Chad under
that agreement.

Thirdly, Sudan carried out reconciliation efforts
between President Deby and the group of the national
reform council. That resulted in the signing of the
reconciliation agreement in 1995.

Fourthly, Khartoum supported the reconciliation
meeting on 22 October 1997 between the Government
of Chad and four opposition parties in Chad. That led
to the signing of the Khartoum agreement between the
parties and the return of opposition parties to
N'Djamena, accompanied by a senior Sudanese
official.

Fifthly, in July 1999 the Sudan sponsored
reconciliation between Chad and the National
Movement for Democracy and Development, led by
the rebel Moussa Madela.

Those are just a few examples of efforts at
reconciliation carried out successfully under the
sponsorship of the Sudan.

Many agreements - at least, the initial contacts
between the Government of Chad and its opposition -
have been facilitated by the Government of the Sudan,
and I shall not list them here. Chad has made false
accusations against the Sudan concerning the Tripoli
Agreement signed between the two countries. The
Government of Chad has stepped up contacts with
groups that have not signed the Agreement and are
seeking to undermine it and to disrupt the peace
emerging in Darfur. I should like to cite a few
examples of the hostile acts carried out by Chad
following the signing of the Agreement.

The Government of Chad is in contact with the
rebel group led by Adam Bakhit, which opposes the
Darfur Peace Agreement. It supplied that group with
small arms and light weapons of various types in May
2006, encouraging the rebels to cross into Sudanese
territory, where they carried out a military operation
against the Bir Mazza and Graida regions of Darfur.

Secondly, the Government of Chad contacted the
Movement for Justice and Equality, which, as members
know, opposes the Agreement and has threatened to
hinder its implementation. With Chad's support and
provision of armoured vehicles and personnel
transports, the Movement carried out military
manoeuvres and attacked various regions, particularly
in Bahai. The region of Tultul, in Western Darfur, 15
kilometers from the town of Beida, was attacked with
heavy weapons by a Chadian military unit. Nine
members of the Sudanese army were killed and 14
injured, only two days after the signing of the Darfur
Peace Agreement.

It is extremely unfortunate that I must come
before the Council to offer these sad details and list the
hostile acts carried out by Chad against the Sudan and
its people. We have no alternative, however, because,
at a time when we are striving to help peace to take
root and to assist the African Union in promoting such
developments, the Government of Chad has referred its
complaints to the Security Council.

The priority of the Sudanese national
Government is successfully to implement both the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement and the Darfur Peace
Agreement. Two days ago, a high-level delegation of
60 representatives of the Sudan Liberation Movement
came to our capital, Khartoum, to participate in five
discussion groups to identify ways to implement the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement and the Darfur Peace
Agreement. We will involve the opposition in the
implementation of those Agreements so as to establish
peace, security and stability on the basis of equality
and peaceful cooperation and coexistence with all
neighbouring States, without exception.

Consequently, the Security Council should take
into account the fact that we have our own urgent
internal priorities. The accusations made by the
Government of Chad have also painted a false picture
of reality. Chad should focus on its own internal
problems and halt its hostile actions against the Sudan,
especially given the fact that we have supported
President Deby in his most difficult moments.
The Council should address the domestic and
external threats to the Darfur Peace Agreement. The

Government of the Sudan will continue to work with
an open mind and in a spirit of commitment and to
respect the African mechanisms in order to resolve the
problems between us and Chad.

