First, I would like to thank the permanent delegation of Estonia, which holds the presidency of the Security Council in this month of May, for holding this important meeting. It comes at a time when conflicts and armed struggles are multiplying around the world and the international community is facing the challenges of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which particularly affects civilians in conflict-affected countries. We welcome the participation in this meeting of Her Excellency Mrs. Kersti Kaljulaid, President of the Republic of Estonia. I must also thank the briefers, His Excellency Mr. Antonio Guterres, Secretary- General; Mr. Peter Maurer, President of the International Committee of the Red Cross; and Ms. Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, former President of Liberia and member of The Panel of the Wise. The Secretary-General, in his report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2020/366), presents a picture of the human suffering of civilians, especially children, women, the elderly and people with disabilities, in conflicts around the world. They are compelled to migrate or are displaced and face food insecurity; in some countries, civilian facilities and populated areas come under attack. The COVID-19 outbreak has only added to the suffering of civilians caught up in armed conflicts and poses a direct threat to them, given the destruction of the health sector, the proliferation of crowded camps that provide an ideal environment for spreading the virus, and the various obstacles hindering access to humanitarian aid, especially now with the pandemic. Bearing that in mind, Bahrain supported the Secretary-General's sincere appeal for an immediate global ceasefire and the harnessing of international efforts to counter and eliminate COVID-19. The possession by non-State armed groups and terrorist organizations of the very latest weaponry serves only to worsen and prolong conflicts, and results in heavy casualties among innocent civilians. Bahrain condemns terrorism, whatever form it may take, in particular when it is backed by States that fund, arm and equip terrorist groups and provide them with mercenaries and political and media coverage. Modern technology has helped such groups to create platforms from which to spread their poisonous ideology, stoke violence, recruit followers and launch cyberattacks on official institutions. Member States must therefore make a concerted effort to tackle hate speech and share security information. In that regard, we must also take note of the United Nations Strategy and Plan of Action on Hate Speech. The protection of civilians is a key priority for Bahrain and its sovereign, His Majesty King Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa. Bahrain is party to the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and two of their Protocols Additional, which are the cornerstone of international humanitarian law. In 2004, it acceded to the Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography, and on the involvement of children in armed conflict. In 2018, it passed Decree Law No. 44 on international crimes, underlining the importance of combating the most egregious of international crimes: genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and crimes of aggression. Prompted by the noble initiative of the Prime Minister, His Royal Highness Prince Khalifa Bin Salman Al Khalifa, the United Nations, at the seventy-third session of the General Assembly, declared 5 April as the annual International Day of Conscience. The initiative arose from the belief of His Highness that the international community must shoulder its moral responsibility to put an end to the wars and conflicts afflicting the world today, which have had such tragic consequences for whole peoples plagued by poverty, hunger, disease, epidemics and displacement. In conclusion, Bahrain affirms that the protection of civilians, in particular that of the most vulnerable groups, in armed conflict must remain a priority for the international community. We renew our support for the Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire, for which there is now a more pressing need than ever.
