The Republic of Korea welcomes the continuation of these open debates on climate and security, as they provide opportunities to discuss the climate and environmental risks to international peace and security. We would like to highlight the following three points on this important topic. First, the Republic of Korea believes that climate change and environmental degradation are an ever-growing threat to international peace and security. We are witnessing the adverse impacts of climate change and environmental degradation all around the world, many of which are on an unprecedented scale. This year alone, Asia saw one of its worst monsoon floods; North America was struggling with historic wildfires; Europe was suffering from heat waves and droughts; and Africa experienced gigantic swarms of locusts. All those will have severe humanitarian consequences, including, to name just a few, forced displacement, food insecurity and public health problems, which are increasingly spiralling into regional instability. Secondly, the Republic of Korea believes that we need a United Nations system-wide approach to climate and environment-related security risks, and we need more concrete actions. In that respect, we welcome the continued engagement of the Security Council on the climate change-related agenda and the establishment of the Climate Security Mechanism and its initiatives. We also support the Secretary- General submitting a timely and comprehensive report to the Security Council regarding climate-related security risks. Regarding concrete actions, we would like to reiterate that we can find a good example in the recently adopted Economic and Social Council resolution 2020/2, on international support to the Sahel region. The resolution sets out closer cooperation between relevant United Nations bodies and Member States, leading to more concrete actions. The Republic of Korea will continue to play an active and constructive role concerning the follow-up and implementation of the resolution. The Peace Forest Initiative, which was launched at the fourteenth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in 2019 and promotes peace and trust through collaboration on the rehabilitation and restoration of degraded land and forests in fragile and conflict-affected regions, provides another good example to that end. Thirdly, we believe that our recovery plan from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) needs to place at its core the requisite consideration of climate change and environmental degradation. The pandemic is causing damage to our societies and economies at an unprecedented scale, but our recovery efforts should not put us back to where we were before. Instead, to help recover from the damage of COVID-19 and build back better, we need a green recovery plan. In that regard, the Korean Government recently launched the Korean Green New Deal, which pursues a low-carbon and sustainable economy by investing in green sectors and creating green new jobs. That will ultimately put the Korean economy in line with the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, which we believe are essential to reduce climate- related security risks worldwide. Climate change and environmental degradation are increasingly becoming the drivers of regional instability and threatening global peace, and we cannot cope with them alone. Indeed, humankind and our planet are collectively vulnerable to those global threats, and we must act in solidarity in response. The Republic of Korea will continue to actively participate in international cooperation to prevent climate and environmental crises from further spiralling into threats to peace and security.
