Mr. Cabral (Portugal): I, too, would like to
welcome High Representative and European Union
(EU) Special Representative Mr. Valentine Inzko and
to convey to him Portugal's appreciation and support
for his work in the interests of peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. In that context, we also thank him for his
recent report (see S/2011/283) and for today's
presentation, all of which deserve our full support.
Portugal aligns itself with the statement to be made
later today by the European Union representative.

Today's debate finds Bosnia and Herzegovina
facing a particularly difficult political situation that
may have dire implications for national, regional and
international peace and security. We appeal to the
leaders of all three constituent peoples to work together
constructively and to refrain from using divisive
rhetoric in order to overcome the general political
deadlock in that country, and in particular to urgently
form a Government at the State level. The current
stalemate harms the prospects of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's future prosperity and the region's
stability.

The decision taken unilaterally to hold a
referendum in Republika Srpska on an issue that
pertains to national sovereignty and the powers of the
High Representative is a serious threat to political
balance within the country and a challenge to the
established constitutional order. The international
community is rightly concerned by that threat to the
Dayton framework, and the options available to deal
with it are well known to all parties. In that context,
Portugal reaffirms its support for the High
Representative's authority. It is our belief that the
national interests of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
country's territorial integrity and sovereignty must be
preserved.
Today is Europe Day, and Portugal strongly
believes that Bosnia and Herzegovina's future is with
the European Union. It is our conviction that tangible
progress at both the political and the technical levels is
in Bosnia and Herzegovina's best interest, as it is a
precondition to Euro-Atlantic integration. The EU's
role in Bosnia and Herzegovina in general and in
relation to the current situation is vital. It reflects a
consistent political and economic commitment and
deserves the international community's full support.

Portugal is proud to have participated in the
international community's efforts to bring peace to the
Balkans and to Bosnia and Herzegovina. Fifteen years
of hard work and costly sacrifice by the Bosnian
people and the international community should not and
will not be reversed. The Bosnian people deserve peace
and prosperity. Portugal trusts that the international
community will continue to be fully engaged in
working for a united, independent and peaceful Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

