Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): We too welcome the
unanimous adoption today of resolution 2439 (2018), on
the Ebola outbreak in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo, and the ongoing efforts to respond to this
crisis. We appreciate the close collaboration with our
Ethiopian partners and we thank all Council members
for their constructive engagement and the sponsorship
of the resolution by all 15 members.

The resolution sends a clear, coherent and
comprehensive message of support to all those involved
in front-line response efforts on the ground in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in neighbouring
countries. I should like to highlight four key elements
in that regard.

First, it points to the extremely challenging security
situation in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo and strongly condemns all attacks by armed
groups against civilians, including humanitarian and
health personnel. Let me be clear - the women and
men who are working on the front line to battle this
disease, and who risk their own lives to save those of
others, deserve our respect and our protection. They
must never themselves become targets - not in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, not anywhere.
Humanitarian principles must be upheld everywhere, at
all times and with no exceptions.

Secondly, it commends the efforts undertaken by the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo (MONUSCO),
the World Health Organization (WHO) and other actors
in response to the outbreak. The continued leadership
of the WHO remains essential. In order to prevent the
deterioration of the present outbreak, the resolution also
reminds us of the importance of strengthening national
health-care systems.

Thirdly, it stresses the crucial importance of
continued international engagement and regional
cooperation. To address the overall humanitarian
crisis, we need full, safe, unhindered and sustained
humanitarian access, as well as adequate humanitarian
funding. At present, the humanitarian appeal for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo remains severely
underfunded. As the third-largest humanitarian donor
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Sweden
stands ready to consider additional humanitarian
funding and calls on others to do the same.

Fourthly and crucially, the resolution highlights
how men and women are affected differently by the
Ebola outbreak. Women must be fully engaged in the
development of gender-sensitive response efforts.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo is at a pivotal
moment in its history, and the latest Ebola outbreak
adds an additional challenge to an already challenging
situation. The support expressed through resolution
2439 (2018) therefore comes at a pertinent time, and
our common task is now to fully support the efforts of
the WHO, MONUSCO, the Congolese Government and
other actors on the ground to combat the further spread
of Ebola and thereby contribute to promoting long-term
peace and stability in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and in the region.

The meeting rose at 10.10 a.m.
