Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation expresses its
satisfaction at the Security Council's decision to convene
this formal meeting today under your presidency, Sir, to
consider the dispute between the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
and the United States and the United Kingdom, with the
participation of Member States which are not members of
the Council. This provides an opportunity for Member
States not members of the Council to present their views
on this important issue. This open formal meeting of the
Council represents a positive and welcome step towards
increased transparency and openness in the work of the
Council, which we all seek, and for this we commend the
Council.

It has been almost 10 long years since the tragic
incident over Lockerbie, Scotland, which claimed the
precious lives of 270 people to whose memory the
Council appropriately paid tribute this morning. During
these years the relatives and friends of the victims of that
heart-rending tragedy have been waiting in great anguish
and anticipation to see justice meted out to the
perpetrators of that heinous crime. At the same time, it
has been an agonizingly long wait for the two Libyan
nationals who have been accused of committing the
crime, while the people of Libya have gone through a

 

decade of travail and hardship as a result of the sanctions
imposed upon their country by the Security Council. In the
wake of the historic procedural decisions of the
International Court of Justice on 28 February 1998, this
meeting provides an opportunity for the Council to
reconsider the issue in all its aspects, with a view to finding
a peaceful resolution of the dispute in the best interests of
all the parties concerned.

As we understand it, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya is
not refusing to abide by the rules of international law. It
simply wants to ensure that the interests of its two nationals
accused of the crime are safeguarded and, equally
importantly, that Libya's sovereign rights and dignity are
respected. Pursuant to this, Libya has made a number of
concrete proposals to resolve the dispute, consistent with its
obligations under international law, particularly the
Montreal Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts
against the Safety of Civil Aviation of 23 September 1971.

Unfortunately, these offers are not acceptable to the
United States and the United Kingdom on account of their
own principled positions, which have been clearly restated
today. In our view, the proposals by Libya are reasonable,
constructive and pragmatic. As Libya has pointed out, the
conduct of a trial away from the place where the alleged
crime took place is not abnormal and has precedent in State
practice for the purpose of ensuring that the accused will be
assured of a free and fair trial in a neutral place. What is
being asked in respect of the two accused Libyan nationals
is an extension of that State practice and precedent to the
international level. While unprecedented, this offers a
practical way of resolving the dispute.

My delegation appreciates the efforts of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the League of
Arab States in trying to find a resolution to the dispute. We
support their proposals conveyed to the United Nations
Secretary-General by the OAU, as contained in Security
Council document S/1998/202 of 6 March 1998, and those
jointly made by the OAU and the League of Arab States,
in document S/1997/497 of 27 June 1997, both of which
proposed the holding of a trial of the two Libyan suspects
in a third or neutral country to be determined by the
Security Council, a trial by Scottish judges at the
International Court of Justice in accordance with Scottish
laws or a trial by an ad hoc criminal tribunal to be
established for this purpose at the World Court. These
proposals, which are also supported by the Organization of
the Islamic Conference and the Non-Aligned Movement,
are fair and reasonable and deserve serious consideration.
If accepted, any one of them would offer a practical way
out of the current stalemate.

My delegation also supports the call jointly made by
the OAU and the League of Arab States for the Security
Council, pending the final solution of the crisis through
one of the above-mentioned modalities, to undertake a
review of the sanctions regime against Libya so as to ease
the severity of the impact of the air embargo on the
country's public-health and social conditions by
exempting flights for medical, humanitarian-relief and
religious purposes - particularly in respect of the
performance of the Umrah and obligatory Hajj
pilgrimages, which are important to Muslims and should
not have been included in the sanctions regime in the first
place, out of respect for that religion - as well as for
flights in connection with participation in official
missions.

My delegation commends the Secretary-General for
his decision to dispatch a fact-finding mission to Libya in
December 1997, led by Director-General Vladimir
Petrovsky, to obtain the views of the Libyan Government
and to see the situation on the ground. It is clear from
Mr. Petrovsky's report, based on his interviews and his
own observations, that the sanctions, particularly the air
embargo, have had an adverse impact on the Libyan
economy, especially in the public-health, social and
agricultural sectors. My delegation would therefore urge
the Council to give the report careful consideration in its
continuing and periodic evaluation of the effects of the
sanctions regime upon the Libyan people, who, while not
destitute, should not continue to be deprived of the full
enjoyment of the fruits of economic development because
of an international legal/political dispute involving their
State for which they are not responsible and therefore
should not be blamed or punished.

From the legal perspective, it is clear from the
overwhelming majority decisions handed down by the
World Court that there does in fact exist a dispute
between Libya and the United States and the United
Kingdom concerning the interpretation of the Montreal
Convention and that the Court has jurisdiction to hear the
dispute. The Court, again by overwhelming majority
decision, also rejects the objection raised by the United
States and the United Kingdom with regard to
admissibility, derived by those two countries from
Security Council resolutions 748 (1992) and 883 (1993).
These decisions should pave the way for a hearing of the
dispute by the International Court of Justice so that the
matter can be resolved in a peaceful manner, once and for

 

all, in the interests of all the parties concerned, including
the relatives and friends of the victims, the two accused
men and the international community as a whole, thereby
strengthening the system of the rule of law which underpins
our entire international system.

Libya and its people can go on being punished for
another six years, or more, but we will be no nearer the
truth; nor will the cause of justice and fairness be properly
served, nor the system of the rule of law be any better
advanced, under the present circumstances. In the view of
my delegation, the dispute has both legal and political
dimensions which necessarily require a mutually acceptable
mechanism for its resolution. The mechanism provided by
the Court's decisions, or the modalities proposed by the
OAU and the League of Arab States, offer a judicious and
practical way out of this diplomatic and legal quandary.
The place where the trial takes place should not be a major
issue.

As a country enjoying warm and cordial relations with
all three countries involved, Malaysia earnestly hopes that
sooner or later - sooner, we hope, rather than later - the
principled positions of the parties concerned will be
tempered by wisdom and pragmatism in the interest of
bringing this unhappy situation to an end so that justice will
not be any further delayed or denied.

