Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French):
My delegation would like first of all to thank
Ambassadors Mayr-Harting, Apakan and Heller for
their respective briefings. We commend the remarkable
role they have played in leading the work of the
counter-terrorism committees. As their mandates come
to an end, we pay them well-deserved tribute for their
important contributions.
My country welcomes the progress made by the
international community in fighting terrorism, even if
the daily reality reminds us that the terrorist threat
continues to weigh on our collective security. We
should therefore remain active in our determination to
put an end to this scourge.

Gabon fully associates itself with the efforts
made by the Security Council to that end through its
relevant subsidiary bodies. In that regard, my
delegation reiterates its support for counter-terrorism
mechanisms.

Thanks to the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, the Council has made available to Member
States tools to more effectively combat this
phenomenon. My delegation would like to say a few
words about the work of those three Committees.

With regard to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), we welcome the
progress made since the last debate on this issue
(S/PV.6310), namely, the comprehensive review of the
consolidated list and the appointment of Ms. Kimberly
Prost as Ombudsperson, whose role will be to review
requests for the de-listing of persons and entities
covered by sanctions. My delegation supports the
Committee's efforts to improve its methods with regard
to the listing and de-listing of incriminated entities and
persons. The report of the Monitoring Team that will
soon be submitted to the Council will be devoted
entirely to that. We encourage the Committee to
strengthen its cooperation with Member States,
regional organizations and specialized counter-
terrorism bodies.

With regard to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), my delegation
welcomes the results obtained since various aspects of
its working methods were streamlined. Those
improvements now make it possible for the Committee
to devote more time to substantive work while
continuing to focus on preliminary assessments
prepared by the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate in the context of the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).

Similarly, we welcome the establishment of the
Committee's website, which serves as a tool for
training and awareness-raising of our common efforts
to combat terrorism. We also support the Committee's
practice of organizing regional workshops in order to
take into account various challenges in the process of

combating terrorism. In that regard, a regional
workshop organized jointly by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime was held in
Libreville this past June. The workshop was an
opportunity for Member States of the Central African
subregion to familiarize themselves with legal
provisions applicable to illegal acts against maritime
security and navigation and off-shore platforms.

As Chair of Subcommittee C of the 1373
Committee, Gabon appreciates the efforts made by
many Member States to implement the provisions of
the resolution. In that regard, we call on Member States

to strengthen their cooperation with counter-terrorism
bodies.

With regard to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), Gabon welcomes
the work to update the matrices that will constitute the
database to be included in the report that the
Committee will submit to the Security Council in April
2011. The establishment of new procedures for the
publication of reports and for dealing with requests for
technical assistance from States is another development
that should be highlighted.

Gabon, which is party to nearly all instruments
governing the disarmament process, reiterates its
commitment to work alongside other States to
completely eliminate weapons of mass destruction,
which are today a threat to international peace and
security.

Lastly, my delegation would like to reiterate its
appreciation for the work of the 1267, 1373 and 1540
Committees. We urge them to strengthen their
cooperation in the areas of information exchange,
country visits, organizing workshops, technical
assistance and relations with Member States and
regional organizations.

