Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
On behalf of my delegation, I should like to welcome
His Excellency Ismail Omar Guelleh, President of the
Republic of Djibouti, and his delegation, who honour
us by apprising us of developments in the conflict
between his country and Eritrea. We especially thank
him for the important statement he has just made to the
Council. I also welcome the presence of Ambassador
Araya Desta, Permanent Representative of Eritrea to
the United Nations.

We note that this is the second time that Djibouti
has appeared before the Security Council represented
at a very high level. The first time, it was represented
by the head of Government, and this time it is
represented by the head of State himself. I mention this
to show the extent to which the commitment of the
Government of Djibouti, at the very highest level,
bears witness to the trust which it places in the United
Nations to assist in resolving this unfortunate situation.
It is only right therefore to pay tribute to the authorities
of Djibouti for the good will they have always shown
in seeking a final solution to the dispute.

The region of the Horn of Africa is already
wracked by too many conflicts and many other
challenges, as the President of Djibouti so aptly
underscored, to suffer yet another adversarial front.
That is why the delegation of Burkina Faso deplores
the continuing tension between Djibouti and Eritrea,
which are brotherly countries united by historical and
long lasting ties.

But what can and must the Security Council do?
One thing is certain. The Council has already shown its
resolve to remain fully involved in the conflict,
particularly, through the dispatch of a fact-finding
mission to better understand the situation, even though,
unfortunately, that mission was not received by one of
the parties. Moreover, the Council has sent a clear
message to Eritrea and to Djibouti in its presidential
statement of June 2008 on the issue (S/PRST/2008/20).

Following the statements that we have just heard,
it is clear that it is incumbent upon the Council to
reaffirm to the international community the guiding
principles that can help in restoring normalcy: first, the
withdrawal of all forces to their initial positions, in
other words their positions before the conflict;
secondly, the demilitarization of the disputed area;
thirdly, the commitment in good faith and with the full
trust of both parties to refrain from the use of force;
and finally, the acceptance by both countries to sit at
the negotiating table to address their differences. And
if one of the parties refuses to engage in that direct
dialogue, the two States can resort to other forms of
conciliation, either arbitration or facilitation, which
are, as we know, two ways to settle disputes recognized
by international law, or even resort to litigation, which
has been successful in similar situations.

If the Council is not able to resolve the dispute -
and we hope that the Security Council will strive to,
and will succeed in, resolving it - but if that is not
possible, we believe that the Council should back, with
its full influence, the use of one or other of those two
options.

In conclusion, we should like to pay tribute to all
the initiatives and all the efforts undertaken in that
regard. We especially pay tribute to the efforts
undertaken by the African Union and the League of
Arab States. We reiterate our gratitude to Djibouti for
its cooperation with the United Nations fact-finding
mission and, naturally, we back the Secretary-General's
offer of his good offices to find a peaceful solution to
the crisis. We again invite both parties to accept that
offer.

