Mr. Laursen (Denmark): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Nordic countries - Finland, Iceland,
Norway, Sweden and my own country, Denmark.
The Nordic countries welcome this timely initiative
to discuss the role of the Security Council in conflict
prevention. We strongly support the adoption today of
resolution 2171 (2014), which lays out a framework for
further strengthening our shared efforts in the field.
We also thank the Secretary-General and the High
Commissioner for Human Rights for their clear and
forceful interventions.

The primary responsibility for addressing the
causes of violent conflict lies with Member States.
Conflict prevention is inherently a Government
responsibility, through the creation of representative,
legitimate and inclusive political and economic systems
and respect for human rights and the rule of law. But
there is no doubt that the Council must play a leading
role in preventing and responding to conflict.

We want the Council to make a real difference in
preventing the escalation of conflict. We welcome the
active role being played by the Secretary-General and
the Secretariat in ensuring that emerging issues are
brought to the Council's attention. We encourage the
use of regular horizon-scanning briefings as a way to
keep its members aware of potential crises and to offer
an opportunity for early action. The United Nations
system as a whole must contribute more to preventing
violent conflict. But Member States must make the
Organization fit for that purpose.

The Council has mandated many important special
political missions that have been essential to conflict
prevention. But it is crucial that such missions be
provided with adequate and predictable funding. In
general, preventive diplomacy deserves more resources
within the United Nations system. Despite broad
recognition of the fact that conflict prevention saves
both lives and money, there is still a striking imbalance
between the funding for conflict prevention versus that
for peacekeeping. We greatly value the work of the
Department of Political Affairs and believe it should be
able to strengthen its resources by diversifying its donor
base and by looking into the possibility of obtaining
more funding through the regular budget.

Early and concerted action can prevent the escalation
of conflict. That requires proactive involvement on the
part of the Council, the Secretary-General and others.
The Council should encourage the Secretary-General
to actively use Article 99 of the Charter of the United
Nations. Preventive diplomacy is also about getting the
international community to speak with one voice and
send a clear political message to the parties to a conflict.
The members of the Security Council have a special
responsibility in that regard. But too often we fail to see
any action from the Council. We should explore ways to
maximize the use of existing tools, as described in the
Charter. One such critical tool is mediation. The Nordic
countries welcome the General Assembly's recent
adoption of a resolution on strengthening the role of
mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes and in
preventing and resolving conflicts (General Assembly resolution 68/304).

The Security Council must also continue to
strengthen its close cooperation and engagement with
regional organizations. Lessons may be learned from
the African Union's efforts to establish a continental
early-warning system. Regional support and ownership
are vital to effective conflict prevention. In recent years,
we have witnessed many examples of cooperation with
regional organizations, particularly in Africa. That
includes cooperation with the European Union, which
actively supports United Nations conflict-prevention
efforts.

The United Nations system has a duty to promote
and encourage respect for human rights in all its work.
An early and holistic focus on human rights is crucial
to detecting potential political conflicts and mobilizing
action. The Nordic countries endorse the Secretary-
General's Rights Up Front initiative, which puts the
crucial issues of protecting people and preventive
efforts at the centre of United Nations strategies and
operational activities. Ensuring respect for international
humanitarian law and human rights on the part of States
and non-State armed groups is fundamental to conflict
prevention.

Women remain the single most underutilized
resource for more effective peacemaking and
peacebuilding. Experience shows that empowering
women and supporting their full and active
participation in peace-related political and economic
decision-making can lead to more inclusive and lasting
agreements. That must be a central component in any
conflict-prevention effort.

Sustained peace is not possible without promoting
justice, ensuring accountability and combating a culture
of impunity. The primary responsibility for that rests
with Member States. But the international community
should assist countries, at their request, to develop the
necessary capacities and institutions. The International
Criminal Court plays a central complementary role in
ensuring that those responsible for committing war
crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide are
brought to justice. The continued involvement of the
Council in that area is of critical importance to conflict
prevention.

The Council must remain engaged in a wide range
of factors that can cause armed conflict. A welcome
example of that was last year's debate on conflict
prevention and natural resources (see S/PV.6982). We
would like to see a strengthened focus by the Council
on the nexus between climate change and security.

Finally, conflict prevention and peacebuilding are
deeply intertwined, as some conflicts tend to be cyclical.
The Nordic countries welcome the upcoming review
of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture,
including the Peacebuilding Commission. We need
to ensure better coordination of all the elements of
the wider United Nations conflict prevention and
peacebuilding effort, including the Department of
Political Affairs, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the United Nations Development
Programme. Our focus must be on maximizing the
United Nations effectiveness and impact at the country
level to stabilize fragile States, avoid future conflict
and lay the foundation for lasting peace.

