Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan) (interpretation from Russian): Allow me to express our gratitude to you, Sir,
for convening this meeting of the Security Council
devoted to such an important topical problem.

Most modern-day conflicts are accompanied by acute
humanitarian crises, "ethnic cleansing" and the appearance
of millions of refugees and displaced persons. This
requires an appropriate response from the international
community, primarily the taking of preventive action.

It is a given that the Security Council, in carrying
out the immediate task of the maintenance of international
peace and security, must inevitably deal with acute

 

humanitarian problems in conflict regions. This entails
primarily action by the Security Council to facilitate and
protect urgent humanitarian assistance to relieve the
suffering of the civilian population.

The subject under discussion has many aspects and
gives rise to a number of questions, to which it is difficult
to give a single answer. If we talk about implementing
specific actions in providing humanitarian assistance within
the context of peacekeeping operations, there is here, I
think, a more or less proper understanding of the level and
scope of the task to be undertaken, the degree of
complexity involved and the need to allocate appropriate
resources. In this context, we have a certain amount of
positive experience.

However, there are a number of urgent questions
involved in providing protection to humanitarian assistance
within peacekeeping operations that have been established
by the Security Council. It is a given that the mandates for
these operations must be crystal-clear in order most
effectively and, if possible, without any loss of
humanitarian or peacekeeping operation personnel, to do the
job entrusted to them.

I wish to stress in particular that in this respect, it is
extremely important that security be provided to the
international personnel in charge of the delivery and the
protection of humanitarian assistance. Together with this,
we need a mechanism whereby the parties to a conflict are
made responsible for any disruption in humanitarian
activities.
I should also like to heighten the Council's awareness
regarding the problem of internally displaced persons,
which exists in many conflicts. This question requires
serious consideration, particularly in cases where a massive
displacement of civilians involves external aggression.
Internally displaced persons are particularly keen to return
to their homes, and the possibility of their doing so is
enhanced by the fact that a return involves no loss of
citizenship and that they continue to reside in the territory
of their country. We believe that in these cases, the
Security Council should take various types of measures -
be they political, military or economic - vis-a-vis the
aggressor State in order to get it to establish conditions for
the eventual return of internally displaced persons. We
believe that this would make it possible subsequently to
save significant resources from donor countries in regions
that are embroiled in protracted armed conflicts and also to
avert the threat of the emergence of new humanitarian crisis
situations.

With regard to the more general question - the
actual humanitarian component of conflict situations as
well as the military, political, legal and other aspects of
this problem - we must note that in a number of
conflicts, the humanitarian aspect has become the main
stumbling-block in the settlement process. This factor,
together with the nature and genesis of conflicts, requires
very serious analysis. Clearly we must adopt a
comprehensive, uniform approach to the problem.

In this connection, I should like to support the idea
expressed by the Ambassador of Japan, Ambassador
Owada, to the effect that in dealing with conflict
situations, we - that is, the international community -
must consider all related questions together, including
diplomatic actions, ceasefires, the protection of refugees
and humanitarian assistance as well as economic
restitution and the social rehabilitation of the country. All
of these constitute one single comprehensive issue, which
must be addressed.

The representative of Armenia who spoke earlier
accused my country of every possible mortal sin,
including a so-called blockade against his country. He
somehow forgot to mention that his country is a
neighbour not just of Azerbaijan, but of Iran, Turkey and
Georgia as well. What blockade can he be talking about
if Armenia is conducting aggression against Azerbaijan
and has occupied 20 per cent of the territory of my
country and is carrying out "ethnic cleansing" there? It is
well known that the total number of displaced persons
and refugees in Azerbaijan is 1 million, of which more
than 200,000 are Azerbaijanis who have been forcibly
ousted from Armenia.
Furthermore, for several years now Armenia itself
has been blockading the Nakhichevan area of the
Azerbaijani Republic. And as for the Nagorny Karabakh
area of Azerbaijan and its population, the way to resolve
that problem is well known. The basic principles for
settling that conflict were clearly expressed in the
statement the Chairman-in-Office of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) made at the
Lisbon summit
 

in 1996. These principles were supported by all members
of the OSCE. with the exception of Armenia. It is highly
cynical for Armenia to discuss or ask for humanitarian
assistance while it is illegally obtaining more arms than it
needs - including the notorious Scud missiles - to the
tune of $1 billion.

In conclusion. my delegation would like to note in
particular the great importance of the item under discussion
today. We express the hope that many of the interesting
ideas and useful proposals that have been put forward today
in this meeting of the Security Council will be
systematized. collated and reflected in a document of the
Security Council.

