Mr. Ahamed (India): At the outset, let me
express my deep gratitude for the strong condemnation
of and condolences for the recent heinous attacks in
Mumbai expressed by the members of this body.
The terrorist attack from 26 to 29 November in
Mumbai marked a qualitatively new and dangerous
escalation of the terrorism that India has faced for over
two decades. Throughout this period, as in the Mumbai
attack, major terrorist acts in India have been
sponsored and organized by groups and forces from
across our borders. The Mumbai attack also made it
clear that terrorism is a direct threat to international
peace and security.

Let me briefly recall what our investigations have
revealed so far about the attack.

A group of 10 terrorists from the global terrorist
organization Lashkar-a-Tayyiba reached Mumbai in the
evening of 26 November 2008. The group divided itself
into four smaller groups and proceeded to pre-selected
targets, which included a cafe' popular with Indian and
foreign tourists and two major hotels. Each terrorist
was armed and equipped with AK-47 rifles, pistols,
grenades, explosives and communications.

The terrorist attack was conducted like a
commando operation, indicating that the perpetrators
had received professional training both generally and
specifically for this attack itself. They were
indoctrinated with ruthlessness and barbarity. Innocent
passengers, including women and children, were
indiscriminately sprayed with bullets at the railway
station and other public places, and hostages were
taken in the hotels to be subsequently massacred. It is
significant that this was the first terrorist attack in
India in which foreigners were specifically segregated
and targeted.

Nine terrorists were killed in the action taken by
our security forces, while one of them was
apprehended. His interrogation has revealed that the
attackers were trained in Pakistan and sent in a ship
from Karachi. They travelled into Indian waters, took
control of an Indian boat and killed the crew.
Thereafter, they came to Mumbai to cause mayhem and
murder. One hundred and seventy-nine persons,
including 26 foreigners, lost their lives, while 296
persons, including 22 foreigners, suffered injuries in
the attack, which was designed to kill and maim as
many people as possible.

Other Indian cities, including Jaipur, Delhi and
Ahmedabad, have also been the victims of terrorist
attacks. We have requested the Security Council to
proscribe the Pakistani group Jamaat-ud-Dawa, since it
is a terrorist outfit and should be proscribed under

Security Council resolution 1267 (1999). All those who
were in any way responsible for the Mumbai terrorist
attacks, wherever they may be, should be brought to
justice.

The fight against terrorism demands effective
international cooperation so that those who are
responsible, wherever they may be, are brought to
book. The organizers, financers and logistics providers
of these terrorist attacks have to be punished. Those
who give ideological and moral support to this evil
phenomenon must also be brought to justice.

Terrorism does not happen by chance or at
random. Terrorism is planned and financed. It requires
meticulous organization, arms and safe havens. When
it occurs, the world is shocked. What is not easily
visible is the backstream of terrorist acts. Mumbai's
case is clear. The trail leading to the attack is marked
and definite, but in cases where terrorists' acts are
aided and abetted to cover their tracks, all of us
separately and together must ensure that they are
exposed and the terrorists brought to justice.

Nothing - no religious grievance, dispute or
ideology - can be used as a raison d'etre by anyone to
justify terrorism. This is totally unacceptable. Raising
dust to obscure the trail so that the merchants of terror
can hide is unacceptable to us and to any civilized
society.

Terrorists are the enemy of the people. When the
actions of terrorist groups are used to serve the
political interests of States, a deadly combination
emerges. A terror machine is created. India has had
experience of such machines, which need to be
eliminated. The nexus between State or elements
within the State and terror outfits must be broken, and
groups or individuals that indoctrinate, organize, plan
and finance terror have to be uprooted, along with
other measures.

Therefore, in the context of this discussion, we
call for the following actions by the Security Council,
the General Assembly, and the international
community.
First, Jamaat-ud-Dawa and other such
organizations must be proscribed internationally and
effective sanctions imposed against them. Their
country of origin needs to take urgent steps to stop
their functioning. A message must also go out that
perpetrators of terrorist acts must be brought to book
and not given sanctuary in some States. Practical
measures need to be immediately put in place at the
global and national levels to see to it that the menace
of terror is uprooted. The comprehensive convention
on international terrorism that India proposed in 1996
needs to be adopted immediately to provide a
framework of international law against terrorism. It
cannot be held hostage to definitions while terrorists
continue to take innocent lives.

Our people ask the international community to
determinedly pursue and eliminate terrorist
organizations. The world needs to act decisively and in
a coordinated manner to prevent further attacks. India
will act to safeguard and protect its people from such
heinous attacks, however long and difficult that task
may be. We have acted with restraint in the face of
terrorist attacks. We must do our duty by our people
and take all actions as we deem fit to defend and
protect them. The Charter of the United Nations and
the provisions of international law, including the right
of self-defence, give us the framework for fulfilling
those responsibilities.

That is the message to the Security Council that I
bring from my Government and my people.

