Mr. Cevik (Turkey): I shall deliver an abridged
version ofmy statement. The full text is being circulated
in the Chamber.

In recent weeks, we have been witnessing with the
greatest concern the deep human and humanitarian
suffering caused by Israel's operation in the Gaza Strip.
Since 8 July, more than 600 Palestinians have been
killed and nearly 4,000 have been wounded. Homes and
key infrastructure have been destroyed, hospitals have
been targeted and more than 100,000 people have been
displaced. The world's conscience has been shaken,
among other things, by the images of the killing of four
children, aged 9 to 12, on a Gaza beach, and later by the
attack on Shujaiya.

Turkey strongly condemns the inhumane attacks
on Gazans. They are more than alarming; they should
be condemned by the entire international community.
As of today, Turkey has declared three days of national
mourning in solidarity with the Palestinian people.

The Israeli operation in the Palestinian territory is
in violation of international law. In fact, it constitutes
collective punishment of the Palestinian people, who
are striving to sustain their lives under occupation.
We once again demand that Israel immediately halt its
operations in Gaza. A11 violence must end. The parties
should urgently engage in negotiations towards a lasting
ceasefire. Turkish authorities are constantly in contact
with Palestinian and regional leaders and other relevant
stakeholders to discuss solutions to that end.

The world should give the strongest response to
the human tragedy in Gaza unfolding before its eyes.
The international community, in particular the Security
Council, should assume its responsibility to take the
necessary measures to stop the Israeli aggression against
the Palestinian people without delay and facilitate the
provision of humanitarian assistance to the region.

Alleviating those gross humanitarian needs
should be our immediate concern. Turkey has already
accelerated its humanitarian aid to Gaza. The Turkish
Cooperation and Coordination Agency, the Turkish
Disaster and Emergency Management Presidency
and the Red Crescent are conducting humanitarian
operations bilaterally and in cooperation with the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East to that effect.

Of course, the establishment of peace and security
in the Middle East is possible only by taking viable
steps towards the settlement ofthe Palestinian question.
Turkey has always supported all efforts towards a lasting
solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict based on two
States living side by side in peace and security, on the
basis of the pre-l967 borders, the relevant resolutions,
the Madrid principles and the Arab Peace Initiative. In
that regard, we support the proposal of President Abbas
to find an appropriate international response to the
protection needs of Palestinian civilians.

The Syrian regime continues to brutally oppress
the Syrian people in flagrant violation of international
law by taking advantage of the lack of effective action
by the international community. Those violations
must be stopped and those responsible must be held
accountable. The elimination of Syria's chemical
weapons programme remains to be completed The
uninterrupted and effective delivery of cross-border and
cross-line humanitarian operations is key to responding
to the most urgent needs in Syria.

Unfortunately, the regime has also consistently
violated the provisions of resolution 2139 (2014). Those
violations led to resolution 2165 (2014). We hope that
the latter will not share the fate of resolution 2139
(2014). Turkey has already started to cooperate with
the United Nations on the implementation of resolution
2165 (2014).

A political settlement remains the priority for
achieving a peaceful end to the Syrian conflict. In that
regard, Turkey welcomes the appointment of Mr. Staffan
de Mistura as the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Syria and hopes that his appointment
will finally revitalize the efforts to reach a political
settlement on the basis of the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex).

I would like to take this opportunity once more to
call upon Israel to end its aggression against Gaza and
return to the negotiating table with a genuine desire to
put an end to the decades-long search for peace. As we
always have in the past, we will remain in solidarity
with the Palestinian people in the extremely difficult
days they are experiencing.

