I would also like to briefly make some additional points in my national capacity on the political situation in Syria. I should like to start once again by thanking the Special Envoy for his briefing and his lasting engagement. The situation in various parts of the country, 10 years after the start of the war, remains unstable. Syrian families are still not able to live their lives in dignity, and millions remain as internally displaced persons or refugees abroad. We call once again for a permanent, verifiable nationwide ceasefire monitored by the United Nations. There can be no military solution to this conflict. The only way to stop the cycle of violence and secure a peaceful future for Syria is an inclusive political transition, as outlined in resolution 2254 (2015). The Constitutional Committee was launched more than a year ago as a door-opener to a political process but has since then been bogged down in procedural squabbles without making any significant progress. That is simply unacceptable, all the more so in view of the approaching presidential elections in Syria. In that light, we welcome the fact that the Special Envoy has been able to get the agreement of both parties for the organization of a fourth session of the Committee as soon as possible, as well as a fifth session in early 2021. We must insist that all parties, in particular the Syrian authorities, take this opportunity to engage constructively. Discussions need urgently to move beyond the topic of first principles and to address constitutional reforms directly. No more procedural dallying is acceptable. No further delays are acceptable. No further obstruction by Damascus is acceptable. The Constitutional Committee must be able to convene at regular meetings that produce substantive outcomes. This simple demand is not the putting in place of artificial deadlines, as some Member States insist. On the contrary, it is calling out the artificial delays fabricated by the Syrian authorities. As my country has repeatedly underlined, the Committee is Syria-owned, Syria-led and facilitated by the United Nations. If we are to further regard the Committee as a genuine door-opener to the political process, it must deliver on its promises. The Council cannot tolerate Damascus's representatives actively avoiding the real points of contention and instead treating the Committee as a fig leaf. Syria is currently incapable of carrying out elections in a free, fair and transparent manner that would allow for the participation of the Syrian diaspora. Therefore, the Constitutional Committee needs to make progress - quickly. Finally, beyond the Constitutional Committee, tangible progress must be made on confidence-building measures, specifically the urgent release of political prisoners and missing persons. Access to detainees must be granted in accordance with international regulations. Their legitimate property rights and administrative rights must be restored, in particular those of women, who have borne the brunt of this war. Justice must be done for victims. Belgium fully supports all accountability initiatives, including the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, and supports the referral of the conflict in Syria to the International Criminal Court.
