Mr. A] Bayati (Iraq): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
would also like to thank the previous President of the
Council, the Permanent Representative of Portugal, for
his efforts during the month of November. I also
congratulate Mr. Martin Kobler on his assignment as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
Iraq, and I wish him success in his new position. In
addition, I thank Mr. Kobler and his team in Baghdad
and New York for their sincere efforts in helping the
Government and the people of Iraq.

After reviewing the important points mentioned
in the Secretary-General's report on the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) (S/2011/736),
my country's delegation would like to address the
following issues.

The political and security situation in Iraq has
witnessed tremendous and notable improvements in the
past few months. The coming year will bring great
challenges and responsibilities for the Iraqi
Government after the United States forces withdrawal
by the end of this year. However, the strategic
framework agreement between Iraq and the United
States will underpin the next stage of the relations
between the two countries at the political, economic,
technical, cultural, and scientific levels.

Here I would like to take this opportunity to
thank the United States forces and the United States
Government and all the countries that have helped Iraq
to bring about democracy, human rights, the rule of law
and stability in the country. As Mr. Kobler noted, some
of yesterday's challenges are still the same today for
Iraq and the Iraqi Government.

Regarding the implementation of the status-of-
forces agreement between the United States and Iraq,
on I October the United States air force transferred
control over the Iraqi airspace in the Baghdad/Balad
sector to the Iraqi Civil Aviation Authority. All air
traffic in this area, which is the busiest and most
complicated in Iraq, is now conducted by Iraqi air-
traffic controllers. With this step, Iraq has assumed
complete control over its airspace, for the first time
since 2003. Iraq also took over control of 485 military
bases from United States forces as part of the plan for a
complete withdrawal by the end of the year.

I would like to inform the Security Council that
my Government has worked hard in recent months to
improve its defensive capabilities to stand against
terrorist attacks, to protect internal security and to save
democracy in Iraq. In this context, I would like to point
to Mr. Kobler's praise of the improvements in the
security situation in Iraq, which are in line with the
perceptions of the United Nations about the future of
Iraq through 2015.

As part of the successes achieved by the Iraqi
security forces since they took charge of security duties
in the country, a statement by the Ministry of Health
showed that the number of civilians who were killed in
acts of violence had decreased to 110 in September
2011, compared with 155 in August 2011. That number
represents the second-lowest number of casualties in
the space of a month for this year; this shows clearly
the huge decrease in violent attacks, which reached
their peak in 2006 and 2007.

The Government of Iraq affirms that the duty of
officials in all Government sectors is to meet the
demands of citizens using all of the capabilities of the
Government. Although the Government inherited a bad
situation and a heavy burden of debt from the former
regime, it is working to alleviate the burden on citizens
and to provide them with the best possible services.

The General Secretariat of the Council of
Ministers in Iraq and the United Nations Development
Programme launched the United Nations Global
Compact in Iraq on 15 October 2011. The agreement is
aimed at empowering the private sector through
sustainable collaboration based on the principles of
human rights, a sustainable environment and business
transparency.

The Iraqi Government is moving forward to solve
the electricity crisis in Iraq through a plan that is being
implemented at a steady pace. In addition, the
Government has taken a number of urgent measures
aimed at relieving the intensity of the crisis until a final
solution is reached. Those urgent measures include the
distribution of additional quantities of fuel to a number
of sub-generator units in order to provide a relative

level of comfort to citizens, especially during the
summer.

My Government asserts that the oil is the
property of all Iraqi citizens, and that the duty of the
Government is to invest this energy in a way that
provides the best return for citizens. In this context, the
Southern Gas Company signed an agreement in
principle with the Shell and Mitsubishi oil companies
on 22 October 2011 to establish a joint company to
benefit from the natural gas associated with oil in the
province of Basra. That step was taken after decades of
wasting the natural gas wealth associated with oil.

The Iraqi oil industry maintained its monthly
production levels; crude-oil exports for the month of
September 2011 totalled 63.1 million barrels, with
average daily exports of 2.1 million barrels. The Oil
Ministry is currently aiming to increase its production
levels to 2.9 million barrels a day in order to reach this
year's goal, which is 3 million barrels a day.

Iraq is witnessing today a new era in which the
foundations of democracy, personal and private
freedoms, freedom of the press and expression, the
freedom to create political parties, political diversity
and a peaceful transition of power are being
established. We in Iraq are also working to strengthen
the foundations of the culture of human rights in all
sectors, so as to ensure that all Iraqis, from different
ethnic, religious and sectarian backgrounds, enjoy their
basic rights as stated in the Constitution.

As part of the efforts made by the Iraqi
Government to determine the fate of missing victims in
mass graves, the Ministry of Human Rights is
preparing, in collaboration with the Institute of
Forensic Medicine and the Martyrs Association, to
launch a national campaign in all Iraqi provinces and
the Kurdistan region aimed at establishing a national
database for victims in mass graves using DNA
samples to identify them. In that context, on 24
October the Ministry of Human Rights signed a
memorandum of understanding with the Institute of
Forensic Medicine and the Martyrs Association to
establish an organizational structure in order to begin
the process of identifying victims in mass graves.

The Iraqi Government has endeavoured to assist
social groups that are less fortunate, especially the
disabled. The Ministry of Human Rights announced its
readiness to hold training sessions in sign language at

Iraqi national institutions in order to support the deaf
and enable them to perform their role in society.

The Iraqi Government is also endeavouring to
spread and establish the culture of human rights. The
National Institute of Human Rights, along with the
Ministry of Higher Education and Scientific Research,
organized, on 18 October 2011, an advanced training
session for human rights professors at Mosul
University.

The Iraqi Minister of Human Rights stated,
during his meeting with Mr. Francisco Mota, Director
of the Human Rights Office of UNAMI, on 12 October
2011, that the Ministry was conducting regular visits to
detention centres and prisons. Those visits are
welcomed by the Office of the Prime Minister and the
Supreme Judicial Council. The Minister also expressed
the Ministry's readiness to arrange for joint visits with
the UNAMI Human Rights Office to Iraqi detention
centres and prisons to evaluate the human rights
situation there. For his part, Mr. Mota pointed out that
he had contacted Amnesty International and Human
Rights Watch to view the reports that they had issued,
and he stressed the need for the statistics and
information included therein to be accurate.

The political changes and reform movement that
began within the context of the Arab Spring prove,
without any doubt, that we have selected the correct
political process in Iraq since 2003. They also prove
that Iraq has been a pioneer in achieving political
change and in adopting democracy through elections
and the peaceful transfer of power as a process for
political life in the new Iraq.

Iraq asserts the importance of holding the Arab
Summit Conference in Baghdad on the designated date
at the end of March next year, as we have completed
all the preparations and finished all the necessary
projects for holding the Summit. My Government
believes that it is the time to hold the Arab Summit
because it is very important to the Arab world after the
changes that have taken place in the region. That
imposes a duty on Iraq, in line with its leading role, to
face the changes in the region in order to find
appropriate Arab solutions to deal with the situation in
a way that meets the aspirations and hopes of the Arab
people.
The Government of Iraq, based on its deep belief
in people's right to express aspirations and choose their
legitimate representatives, voted on 16 September in

favour of the General Assembly resolution that accepts
the credential documents of the Libyan National
Transitional Council as the legitimate representative of
the Libyan people to the United Nations (General Assembly resolution 66/1). That was preceded by my
Government's recognition of the Libyan National
Transitional Council as the legitimate representative of
the Libyan people.

I would like to point out that the Council of
Ministers, as part of its support for the democratic
changes in the region, issued a decision at its meeting
on 19 October to send a delegation from the Iraqi
Independent High Electoral Commission to Tunisia,
headed by Mr. Faraj Al-Haidary, Chair of the Board of
Commissioners of the Commission, to express
solidarity with the Tunisian people in their elections.
The Council of Ministers also decided to provide
$1 million as a contribution to the success of that
election.

Despite the challenges that it faces, Iraq is
committed to its humanitarian role in the world in
times of disasters and crises. That was reflected in the
Iraqi Government's decision to donate $10 million to
help the victims of the earthquake in Japan and by its
decision of 25 August to donate 22,500 tons of wheat
and $5 million to support the efforts of the Somali
Government in fighting the effects of drought and
hunger in the Horn of Africa. My Government also
donated $2 million to finance the activities of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East.

Iraq is committed to respecting the sovereignty of
neighbouring countries and to not allowing the use of
Iraqi territories to attack neighbouring countries. In
that regard, I would like to point out the statement of
the Iraqi Ministry of Foreign Affairs of 20 October that
denounced the terrorist attacks by armed groups
affiliated with the Kurdish Workers Party on Turkish
towns near the Iraqi border. At the same time, the Iraqi
authorities condemn the bombardment by Turkish and
Iranian forces of Kurdish villages on the border of the
two countries, which caused civilian causalities.

We would like to affirm that Iraq is committed to
solving all unresolved issues with our neighbour
Kuwait. I would like to assure the Council that there is
positive collaboration between the Iraqi and Kuwaiti
Governments to settle all unresolved issues between
the two countries that were the result of Saddam

Hussein's aggression against Kuwait and his invasion
in 1990. As Mr. Kobler said, he was encouraged by the
goodwill of the two countries. I reaffirm my country's
commitment to resolving the remaining issues under
the framework of the related resolutions adopted by the
Security Council. I also affirm that the relationship
between Iraq and Kuwait is developing positively.

In that context, I would like to point out the
approval in August by the General Secretariat of the
Council of Ministers to establish a committee to
coordinate efforts regarding the Kuwaiti national
archives. The committee is chaired by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and its membership comprises
representatives of the Council of Ministers, the
Ministries of Defence, Interior, Finance, Justice,
Higher Education and Scientific Research and the
Central Bank of Iraq.

Regarding the port of Mubarak, we assert that we
are dealing with the issue of the port through official
channels and collaboration with the Kuwaiti side. I
would like to point out that Prime Minister of Iraq Nuri
al-Maliki announced his acceptance of an invitation
from the Kuwaiti Prime Minister, Sheikh Naser
Al-Mohammad Al-Sabah, and stated that he intended
to visit Kuwait this month. However, the visit was
postponed after the resignation of the Kuwaiti Prime
Minister.

We affirm that Iraq has achieved great progress in
the field of disarmament and non-proliferation,
resulting in the adoption of resolution 1957 (2010),
which lifted all restrictions and sanctions imposed on
Iraq after the invasion of Kuwait. That has paved the
way for Iraq to return to the international community.
That was affirmed by the Director-General of the
Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
during his meeting with Mr. Hoshyhar Zebari, Foreign
Minister of Iraq, in The Hague on 7 September, when
he stated that he valued the complete cooperation of
Iraq in fulfilling its obligations as a member of the
Organisation. He also affirmed the cooperation of the
competent Iraqi authorities to close the file on weapons
of mass destruction. He expressed his appreciation of
Iraq's supportive and positive role in getting rid of
such weapons.

I would also like to mention the successful visit
by the inspection team of the Technical Secretariat of
the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons from 1 to 5 May, the assertion of the head of
the inspection team of the success of the visit at all
levels and his praise of Iraq's flexibility.

I would also like to mention the letter dated 3
December 2011, sent by Foreign Minister Hoshyar
Zebari to the Secretary-General and, through him, to
the members of the Security Council, regarding the
steps taken by Iraq to implement its obligations under
resolution 1957 (2010). In that letter, Mr. Zebari
mentioned decision No. 119 of the Council of
Ministers, dated 12 April, to approve the first stage of
the removal process for the decommissioned
Al-Muthanna facility, which was used by Saddam
Hussein's regime to produce chemical weapons. The
Council of Ministers also designated approximately
$5 million for the project. The letter also discussed
Iraq's outstanding cooperation with the International
Atomic Energy Agency inspection team.

With regard to Camp Ashraf, which was
addressed in detail by Mr. Kobler, I would like to
assure the Security Council that my Government does
not want to force anyone to return to Iran. Moreover,
we believe that approximately 900 of the residents hold
dual nationality. We very much encourage them to go
back to the countries of which they hold the
nationality. The relocation decision, which will be
implemented by the end of the year, will help the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees to interview the people in the camp and to
decide of their own free will what they intend to do.

With the camp residents preventing the Iraqi
forces and Government from entering, we do not know
exactly what is going on. That is Iraq's sovereignty.
There is no country in the world that, with respect to
sovereignty, allows people to be in the country without
that country's authority. However, we believe that we
need the help of the countries and members of the
Security Council to assist us in taking some of the
residents of the camp so that we can conclude this
issue once and for all. According to our Constitution,
we cannot allow any group inside Iraq that attacks
neighbouring countries. That will cause great
problems.

In conclusion, I would like to affirm my
Government's appreciation for the role performed by
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq and for
the efforts of the Special Representative in providing
the support requested by the Iraqi Government, in

accordance with the mechanisms agreed upon by the
two parties.

