Mr. Ipo (C6te d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation thanks Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), for the quality of his briefing. We
also welcome the presence of His Excellency Mr. Ivica
Dacic', First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and Ambassador Vlora
Citaku of Kosovo.

My country welcomes the great progress that
has been made in Kosovo in recent years in the
political, security and economic spheres, thanks to
the support of the international community and the
outstanding work of the UNMIK staff in supporting
the Government's efforts for reconciliation among
the various communities and a return to peace and
stability in the country. My country also welcomes the
full commitment of the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo to the consolidation of multi-ethnic,
transparent and democratic institutions in the country
since 2008. That commitment has strongly contributed
to the return to institutional normalcy and stability, as
evidenced by the successful organization of municipal
elections on 22 October and 19 November 2017.

My delegation notes with satisfaction the
ratification in March by the Parliament of Kosovo of the
bilateral agreement on the demarcation of the border
between Kosovo and Montenegro, which was signed
in September 2015. However, it remains concerned
about the paucity of progress in the normalization of
relations between Kosovo and Serbia. Cote d'Ivoire
therefore urges those two countries to overcome
their differences and give priority to cooperation,
particularly within the framework of the Central
European Free Trade Agreement, in order to stimulate
their economic development.

On the security front, my delegation welcomes
the efforts that have been made by the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) since 1999 to contribute to the maintenance
of a safe and secure environment in Kosovo and ensure
the free movement of goods and persons. My country
notes with regret the slow progress of the investigations
into the murder on 16 January of Mr. Oliver Ivanovie,
the leader of the civic initiative "Serbia, democracy,
justice". It therefore encourages the Kosovar authorities
to take all appropriate measures to ensure that the
perpetrators of that crime are apprehended and brought
before the competent courts.

We take this occasion to welcome the indictment
by the Kosovo Specialist Prosecutor's Office on
5 October of seven individuals planning terrorist
attacks in Serb-majority areas and against KFOR
troops. Furthermore, Cote d'Ivoire reiterates its call
for the rapid operationalization of the association/
community of Serb-majority municipalities, which will
undoubtedly contribute to the easing and relaxation of
the sociopolitical climate.

My country would like to see the continuation of
high-level meetings between the political authorities
of Pristina and Belgrade, under the leadership of
Ms. Federica Mogherini, High Representative of the
European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy,
in order to significantly advance reconciliation and a
final settlement of the Kosovo issue. Those meetings,
in addition to the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo, have contributed to the significant progress
made in the area of human rights and reconciliation
among communities.

In conclusion, my country calls on the international
community to make a significant contribution to the
trust fund to support the Roma, Ashkali and Egyptian
communities in Kosovo.

