Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the
outset, Mr. President, I would like to thank you for
organizing this annual debate. Its importance is even
greater, given the five-year review of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) in 2010. I would also like to take
this opportunity to welcome the Chair of the
Commission, Ambassador Munoz, and the new
Assistant Secretary-General, Ms. Cheng-Hopkins, two
people whose vision and tireless efforts are very much
appreciated. Belgium fully aligns itself with the
statement made by the representative of Sweden on
behalf of the European Union (EU), which sums up the
starting point of the EU's contribution to the United
Nations five-year review of the architecture of the
Commission.

As Chair of the Central African Republic
configuration I often have an opportunity to remind my
listeners that the Commission must report to two
bodies, the General Assembly and the Security
Council. I am in front of one of them right now.
Moreover, the thematic nature of the Commission
makes it a natural interlocutor for the Economic and
Social Council.
Last week, during the debate in the General
Assembly on the reports we are discussing here today, I
had the opportunity to present the principles that will
guide the efforts of Belgium in the context of the five-
year review process: first, to draw on the vision which
in 2005 was the basis for the establishment of the
Peacebuilding Commission; secondly, the evolving and
dynamic nature of the efforts of the Peacebuilding
Commission; and, thirdly, the need to view the
activities of the Peacebuilding Commission in the
context of the overall picture, taking into account in
particular the developments over the past years in the
other areas of United Nations reform.

Today, I should like to take these thoughts a little
further by focusing on the relationship between the
Commission and the Security Council. In recent years,
the Council has shown growing interest in
peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflicts. This is a
welcome development. Both within the Council and
beyond, there is broad consensus on the purpose of the
Peacebuilding Commission: the task of filling the
institutional void that arises during post-conflict
transition by giving attention to security, development,
good governance and the rule of law. Successive
presidential statements of the Council have mentioned
the role that the Peacebuilding Commission should
play in various contexts, such as addressing problems
relating to gender, children and armed conflict, conflict
mediation and resolution, and the role of regional and
subregional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security. We have taken these
areas fully into account in the Central African Republic
country-specific configuration.

However, relations between the Security Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission should be better
articulated and further intensified despite the already
frequent participation of Chairs of country-specific
configurations in Council debates. In this connection,
the report of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding in
the immediate aftermath of conflict states that:

"The Security Council should consider more
proactively how the advice of the Commission
could contribute to its work during the early
phase of the Council's consideration of post-
conflict situations, for example, by providing an
integrated peacebuilding perspective and specific
suggestions for the Council's own engagement
with the country on its agenda". (5/2009/304, para. 82)

Following this report, the Council asked the
Commission, inter alia, to make more room on its
agenda for its advisory role. We believe it is important,
in the context of the five-year review, to consider and
to specify in greater detail the modalities of the
relationship between the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission.

I should like to speak of the links between the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Council in the
various stages of United Nations and international
responses to post-conflict periods: start-up, follow-up
and the gradual withdrawal of the international
presence.

First of all, I shall concentrate on start-up. As
stressed in the report of the Secretary-General, once
the main conflict has ended, many critical
peacebuilding activities are only beginning. The
Peacebuilding Commission is well placed to act as a
point of contact for the various stakeholders involved
in putting together the international response. At the
request of the Security Council, the Commission could
make recommendations to the various stakeholders and
consider the immediate needs that a United Nations
presence would have to meet. United Nations missions
in countries on the agenda should be equipped with
mandates and tools sufficient to effectively assist the
efforts of the Peacebuilding Commission on the
ground. Recent efforts to transition towards integrated
missions and mandates that incorporate support for the
Peacebuilding Commission, as in Sierra Leone,
Guinea-Bissau and the Central African Republic, are
aimed at responding to precisely this need.

In the follow-up period after the initial phase, the
role of the Peacebuilding Commission should include
the monitoring of progress, coordination and advice.
Here the Secretary-General's report states that the
establishment of national peacebuilding and
reconstruction frameworks should lay the groundwork
for a follow-up mechanism which international and
national partners could draw upon. In this context, the
Peacebuilding Commission would have the role of
strengthening the reciprocity of commitments and
coordinating the monitoring and evaluation of progress
made. So that this process may be oriented more
towards partners of the Commission, in particular the
Security Council, we will need to strike the right
balance between benchmarks that are too detailed and
objectives that are too general. There is no doubt that it
would be worthwhile for the Council itself to
endeavour to define what its needs are in this area, as
the delegation of Japan has just suggested.

In the countries on its agenda, the Peacebuilding
Commission can strengthen the legitimacy and
coherence of the activities of the various units of the
United Nations system and other stakeholders
involved. This task of coordinating the efforts of the
international community is a difficult one but it is
indispensable for making international support both
more predictable and more flexible.

With regard to its advisory role, the Commission
could be involved to a greater degree by the Security
Council in the preparation of Council documents
relating to countries on the Commission's agenda. In
the same vein, the Commission could participate in the
consideration of and follow-up on cross-cutting issues
relevant to its work, such as issues relating to children
and armed conflict or to sexual violence. To that end,
more significant collaboration between the relevant
working groups of the Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission should be developed.

Finally, I shall address the gradual withdrawal of
the United Nations presence. The last phase that the
Peacebuilding Commission should help to plan and
implement is the withdrawal of the United Nations
presence. We should bear in mind that a premature or
ill-conceived withdrawal can in very quickly destroy
the foundations of development that it took many years
to build. That is why the best strategy for exiting a
post-conflict country is to strengthen its national
capacities while gradually removing international
assistance. The Peacebuilding Commission is the
foremost advocate of rapid development of national
capacities.

In conclusion, it would, without a doubt, be
useful for the Peacebuilding Commission, the
Secretariat and the Security Council to engage in a
dialogue on strategies and instruments for the
prevention of conflicts, since, as we have long known,
preventing violent conflicts is far preferable to, as well
as much less costly than, curing their aftermath.

