Mr. Anshor (Indonesia): My delegation wishes
to thank you, Sir, for convening this open debate on a
highly important subject, and we congratulate you on
Uruguay's accession to the Council presidency for the
month of January.

My delegation also wishes to express its
appreciation to the Deputy Secretary-General and the
representatives of the International Committee of the
Red Cross and Oxfam for their respective briefings.

This debate is timely in light of the fact that
civilians now constitute the vast majority of victims
in today's armed conflicts and of the continued trend
of violations of international humanitarian law at an
alarming level in current conflict zones. In that regard,
my delegation very much welcomes the fact that the
Council is continuing its efforts to ensure that this
critical issue remains at the very top of its agenda. My
delegation hopes that today's debate will send a strong
and clear message to all parties to conflicts on the
imperative of respecting international humanitarian
law without preconditions.

My delegation is of the views that the assessments
and recommendations contained in the latest
Secretary-General's report on this topic (S/2015/453),
issued in June 2015, remain relevant. In particular,
my delegation supports the idea of strengthening
the monitoring, tracking and recording of civilian
casualties. My delegation believes that a common
system should be developed within the United Nations
to systematically record civilian casualties in the
framework of monitoring and reporting on violations
of international humanitarian law, in cooperation with
Member States and relevant civil society organizations.
These mechanisms could be instrumental in informing
the international community of the level of observance
of international humanitarian law by any party to
armed conflict, State and non-State actors alike, as
the basis for improving strategies and policies in this
regard, including by ensuring accountability of those
responsible. This would also serve as a means of
informing military strategy to reduce civilian casualties
in armed conflicts.

In the same vein, my delegation also supports the
intention of the Secretary-General to submit a report
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict on an
annual basis rather than every 18 months, as is the
current practice. Indeed, protection of civilian issues
in situations of concern, including the state of respect
for international humanitarian law across current
conflicts, require the international community's
sustained attention and action.

In light of the broader context of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, my delegation wishes to
stress that it is vital to ensure humanitarian access and
the protection of humanitarian personnel in conflict
zones. My delegation believes that the Council should
play a more effective role in ensuring that all parties
to armed conflict, including non-State actors, do their
utmost to respect international humanitarian law,
ensuring humanitarian access and guaranteeing the
security and safety of persons and facilities protected
under international humanitarian law. The Council
should provide active and consistent political and
operational support in this regard.
Regarding the protection of civilians in the
framework of United Nations peacekeeping operations,
my delegation believes that a common doctrine on
protection of civilians and practical guidelines are
important to the implementation of civilian protection
mandates. Missions should have clear, credible and
achievable mandates with an explicitly identified
protocol on the use of force. My delegation also agrees
with one of the recommendations of the High-level
Panel on Peace Operations that missions also need to
identify their limits. Along with closing the gap between
what is asked of and what is provided to peacekeepers,
my delegation underlines the impartiality of the Blue
Helmets and the importance of seeing to their safety
and security. These aspects are also essential to their
success in meeting their tasks.

United Nations peacekeeping operations should be
carried out in the broader context of conflict resolution
and conflict prevention. Credible political solutions
to conflict are the best and most lasting framework
for civilian protection. This perspective includes
addressing the root causes of conflict. It is therefore
important to give proper attention to the building of
national capacities in the fields of human rights, rule
of law and justice as a part of a country's inclusive
development and conflict-prevention frameworks.

Finally, my delegation shares the view that the
forthcoming World Humanitarian Summit will provide
an excellent opportunity to address this issue in a more
in-depth and comprehensive manner.

