Myanmar welcomes the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security. There is no question about the importance of the women and peace and security agenda of the Council in the fight against conflict- related sexual violence. At the same time, it is pertinent to review the achievements of the Council on the implementation of the agenda in the past 20 years, apart from the adoption of nine more resolutions following resolution 1325 (2000). Only durable peace and sustained stability can bring an end to conflict-related violence. Having experienced over seven decades of protracted ethnic insurgencies, Myanmar is striving to end decades-long conflicts and to achieve sustainable peace and national reconciliation. As women and children bear the brunt of armed conflict, we are trying to tackle the root causes of the conflict to mitigate the suffering of the most vulnerable. Myanmar upholds the policy of zero tolerance of any form of sexual violence, including conflict-related ones. To demonstrate its strong commitment to addressing conflict-related sexual violence, in December 2018 the Government of Myanmar signed a joint communique with the United Nations on the prevention of and response to conflict-related sexual violence. Subsequently, in March 2019, the National Committee on the Prevention of and Response to Conflict-Related Sexual Violence was established to implement the joint communique. A national work plan has been drafted with technical assistance from the United Nations and is currently under review. As domestic legal reform is essential for the effective implementation of the protection of the rights of women and girls, a bill on the prevention of and response to violence against women has been drafted and is currently under review by the Bill Committee of the Parliament. The new bill reinforces the protection of women from all forms of violence, including domestic and sexual violence. The One-Stop Women Support Centres and 24-hour help lines have been set up to provide women and girls with physical, legal, psychological and social support. The One-Stop Women Support Centres and help lines are operating 24 hours, 7 days a week, even during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, to provide crucial services, as women and girls are more vulnerable during lockdowns. Victims of sexual violence are also provided with one-time financial support for rehabilitation. To assist with case management for gender-based violence, a new set of standard operating procedures has been developed since 2019 using a survivor-centred approach. Clinical guidelines are also being developed for responding to rape. The new child rights law, which was adopted in July 2019, criminalizes sexual violence, requiring the Government, the Tatmadaw and armed groups to take necessary measures to protect children from sexual violence. The Government is working closely with UN-Women on formulating and implementing the National Strategic Plan for the Advancement of Women (2013-2022) for gender equality and women's empowerment. Moreover, reports on the protection of the rights of women and the prevention of sexual violence against women and girls have been regularly submitted to the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women and included in the Universal Periodic Review process of the Human Rights Council. With the aim of ending ethnic armed conflict and ushering in a democratic federal union, the Government has been convening the Union Peace Conference - the 21st Century Panglong. Even in the midst of formidable challenges caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, the Government is making relentless efforts to advance the peace process. The fourth session of the Peace Conference is slated to be held in August 2020. The Government is also promoting the meaningful participation of women in the peace process, with more women delegates now involved in different committees on the basic principles of the Union Peace Accord. In response to the Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire during the pandemic, the Tatmadaw announced a three-month nation-wide ceasefire, from 10 May to 31 August, to help fight the COVID-19 pandemic. The unilateral ceasefire applies to all conflict areas except where terrorist groups have taken positions. In terms of accountability, the Independent Commission of Enquiry submitted its final report to the President in January. The Criminal Investigation and Prosecution Body, led by the Union Attorney-General, is undertaking investigations in prioritized places and cases out of 13 locations included in the report. The court-martial to prosecute the Gutarpyin incident was completed in April this year. Three military personnel, including one senior military officer, were found guilty in the incident, and actions have been taken against them. Also, in July this year, another court-martial was formed to conduct an investigation into the incidents of Maung Nu village and Chut Pyin village. It is regrettable that this year's annual report of the Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2020/487) did not properly reflect the situation on the ground, especially the challenges faced by the Government of Myanmar. It is disappointing that the atrocities committed by terrorists against women and children were not reflected in the report. My delegation believes that accountability is an important component of preventing sexual violence in conflicts. However, it is not the only solution to prevent or stop sexual violence. The countries concerned have the primary responsibility to protect and prevent such crimes against innocent people in conflict situations. A holistic approach led by the country concerned is the best way to bring about a definitive end to conflict-related sexual violence. In tackling the issue of sexual violence in conflict, the international community should be guided by universally accepted norms of impartiality, non-selectivity and non-politicization of the issue. Only a constructive approach undertaken through dialogue and by providing assistance to the country concerned would bring about positive results in efforts to resolve the problem. With the constructive cooperation and engagement of the international community, we are confident that we will be able to reduce, and ultimately end, the suffering of the victims of sexual violence. We look forward to continuing to work closely with the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict in order to advance in addressing conflict-related sexual violence in Myanmar. My delegation rejects the statement of the briefer Khin Ohmar, which is based on unfounded, biased and politically motivated narratives and does not in any way contribute value to the debate. Her views are mainly based on narratives from the Independent International Fact-finding Mission on Myanmar and other mechanisms with which my Government has refused to cooperate owing to their lack of objectivity and independence.
