Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I am pleased to welcome your
decision, Sir, to convene this wrap-up meeting on a
matter of primary importance, following a long
interruption of such meetings. Indeed, we believe that
this meeting offers a great opportunity to assess the
work of the Security Council for this month.

I welcome the presence at this meeting of the
Secretary-General and the Presidents of the General
Assembly and of the Economic and Social Council.
Their participation reflects the importance of
coordination among the main organs of the United
Nations in a manner that serves the purposes and
principles of the Charter and the interests of the entire
world.

I am also pleased to pay tribute, Sir, to your wise
leadership of the work of the Security Council during
your presidency.

The question of the role of the United Nations in
post-conflict situations is of growing importance.
There is no doubt that the United Nations has played a
truly important role in helping many countries to
overcome the consequences of conflicts that have
afflicted them and in restoring the institutional
structures of those countries. We believe, however, that
the role of the international community in addressing
the root causes of conflicts and in preventing such
conflicts should continue to be of high priority on our
agenda. That role is necessary in order to avert a great
deal of suffering for millions of people that could have
been prevented in advance, in accordance with the
Arab proverb to the effect that prevention is better than
treatment. This reflects the fact that money spent to
address the effects of destruction is better invested in
the economic and social development of those
countries, preventing the eruption of conflict and
sidelining narrow, selfish interests.

The United Nations has had many successful
experiences in post-conflict peace-building, the
benefits of which are crystal-clear to all in many
instances. I shall mention but a few examples, such as
that of Sierra Leone, although there remains a great
deal to do there. There are also the examples of Timor-
Leste, Kosovo, Afghanistan, Angola, the Congo and,
most recently, Iraq. Iraq sorely needs the United
Nations to assume a significant role in helping the Iraqi
people to rebuild their country.

The success of the United Nations in such cases
can clearly be attributed to the assertion of political
will by the international community to assist those
societies and countries and to implement an ambitious
development programme, including programmes for
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
ex-combatants and the reintegration of internally
displaced persons and refugees; development projects;
and the restoration of State institutions. Such ambitious
programmes could not have been even partially
successful without international political and financial
assistance or the availability of resources.

We now turn to the question of Iraq. In his
statement today, the Secretary-General focused on this
problem. The United Nations must assume a prominent
role in helping the Iraqi people to maintain its
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence. We must enable the Iraqi people to elect
its own Government in total freedom, to conduct its
own business and to return Iraq to the international
arena. Iraq is a country with a prominent place in
history.

I support the vision of the Secretary-General, as
outlined in his statement this morning, of the role that
the United Nations and the Security Council have to
play, as well as his appeal to the Security Council to
regain and preserve its unity, because the settlement of
the Iraq question cannot be fair or just without the
effective participation of the United Nations. The
United Nations has helped to achieve much progress in
rebuilding State structures in Afghanistan, Sierra
Leone and Timor-Leste, not to mention its steps to
transfer authority from the United Nations to the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in Kosovo.
The establishment of authority and the two rounds of
elections that took place there along with the
independence of Timor-Leste, are among the United
Nations success stories that must be recognized.
However, much remains to be done to achieve further
success. That can be accomplished by means of
coordination among all the international organizations
and agencies concerned.

The results of recent elections in Sierra Leone
and the assistance given to the Government to extend
its control in the face of great difficulties, would not
have been successful without the political will and the
financial and human resources that were invested in the
country. We feel satisfaction at the progress achieved in
Afghanistan with respect to establishing a new
constitution, the preparatory work for elections and the
further progress in the implementation of the
transitional political programme established at the
Bonn conference. However, it is of prime importance
that ownership of the constitutional and political
process should be fully in the hands of the Afghan
people. They themselves must freely take the decisions
on political issues affecting the future of their country,
as reflected in the Kabul declaration. On the other
hand, maintaining those achievements depends on the
ability to deal with similar challenges.

In conclusion, we must reiterate the need to
respect the sovereignty of post-conflict States, to pay
special attention to specific national conditions and to
let the people participate in deciding their own destiny.
It is also necessary for the United Nations to provide
all forms of assistance to those countries. That will
help maintain the sovereignty and political
independence of the peoples of those countries and will
provide for their future. In that respect, I would like to
recall the regional role to which Ambassador Sir
Jeremy Greenstock referred. Cooperation is necessary
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
on which a special Council meeting has already been
held.

In that respect, we would like to underline the
final communique issued by the countries neighbouring
Iraq at the end of their meeting in Istanbul. The
communique expressed the complete agreement among
the countries neighbouring Iraq on the need to preserve
the unity and territorial integrity of Iraq and to enable
the Iraqi people to elect their own legitimate
Government according to their own free will and in
complete freedom. The communique set out other
important principles in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations. We believe that the communique
could provide a frame of reference for Security Council
consultations when the Council deals with the question
of post-conflict Iraq in the framework of cooperation
between the Security Council and regional
organizations with respect to the importance of a
regional role concerning Iraq and other countries.

