Mr. Saint-Hilaire (Haiti) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
kindly inviting me to participate in this meeting of the
Security Council in order to present the observations
of the Government of the Republic of Haiti on the
report of the Secretary-General contained in document
S/2019/805 and dated 9 October, issued pursuant to
Security Council resolution 2466 (2019).

I welcome the presence of Mr. J can-Pierre Lacroix,
Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations,
Ms. Mona Juul, President of the Economic and Social
Council, and Mr. Silvio Gonzato, charge d'affaires of
the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations. I thank Mr. Lacroix for his very informative
briefing and would like to ask him to convey my
warmest congratulations to Ms. Helen La Lime, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti, on
her exemplary commitment.

(spoke in Spanish)

I also welcome and congratulate His Excellency
Mr. Gustavo Meza-Cuadra, a career diplomat, on his
appointment as Minister for Foreign Affairs of Peru,
and wish him every success in his new role.

(spoke in French)

This meeting of the Security Council comes at
a pivotal moment, after 15 years of United Nations
peacekeeping operations in Haiti and 15 years since the
reactivation of the Economic and Social Council Ad
Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti. The temptation to take
stock is extremely strong because today more than ever,
the country is facing a multidimensional crisis. For the
past few weeks protests on an enormous scale, and
sometimes marred by multiple forms of unacceptable
violence, have been going on all over the country. In
the view of many, the closure of the United Nations
peacekeeping mission is taking place at the height ofthe
crisis and at a delicate time of increasing uncertainty.

There can be no doubt that the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti and the United Nations
Mission in Support of Justice in Haiti (MINUJUSTH)
played a major role in the country over the past 15
years. They contributed to undeniable progress in a
number of areas, but we are still far from achieving
stability and long-term development in my country. On
behalf of President Jovenel Moise, I would like to thank
the Security Council and the Secretariat, especially
Secretary-General Antonio Guterres. I also want to
thank all the Member States that contributed to the
implementation of those two peacekeeping missions.
My special thanks go to all who served with dedication
in the two missions, and my thoughts go to all United
Nations personnel who perished in the earthquake of
2 January 2010.

Before I comment on the Secretary-General's
report, I want to stress that the United Nations must
continue to comprehensively consider the root causes
of the Haitian crisis in order to contribute to the
implementation of lasting solutions. The resources
made available so far are not enough to respond to the
challenges we face. It is vital that our Organization,
inspired by the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, redouble its efforts in Haiti in line with
the priorities outlined by the national authorities. Its
actions should be based on the three pillars ofpeace and
security, human rights and sustainable development.
Beyond the current circumstances, the Haitian crisis is
a result of an incoherent, indifferent, grossly unequal
and exclusionary system that is incapable of capturing
and channelling the legitimate aspirations and hopes
of the Haitian people. We are a people who have been
impoverished throughout our entire history, a people
who have suffered too much and have often been
branded as rebels whereas, in reality, we have always
asked only to be able to live in human dignity.

The Government of Haiti welcomes the excellent
report of the Secretary-General and takes note of all the
concerns it expresses. The points in the report deserve
the full attention of all of Haiti's national institutions
and major partners. The Secretary-General is reporting
on the main developments in Haiti since his previous
report (S/2019/563), and he puts a strong emphasis on
the protracted political crisis. Among other things,
he highlights the decline in agricultural production,
food insecurity and the growing difficulties facing the
national economy. In that regard, we are unanimous
in recognizing that enormous efforts will be needed
to build essential agricultural infrastructure, promote
rural development, increase agricultural production
and ensure access to food, especially for vulnerable
populations. Our President is fully aware ofthe delicate
political situation in the country and its negative
consequences for every aspect of national life, and
the resulting need for a inclusive, good-faith dialogue,
which is the only way will we be able to emerge from
the current crisis.

The Secretary-General painted an encouraging
picture of the progress made in the implementation of
MINUJUSTH's mandate and the efforts of the Haitian
authorities in the areas of human rights, justice and the
strengthening of the Haitian National Police. However,
much remains to be done. Reducing community
violence is a major challenge. The Haitian National
Police is doing its best, but it needs ongoing training
and adequate resources and equipment to protect and
serve all segments of the Haitian population. We must
urgently restore State authority, without clashes or
bloodshed, in the areas that have sadly been described
as lawless.

The Secretary-General expressed concern about
the evolving food and humanitarian situation, while
acknowledging the efforts of humanitarian partners
and development agencies in support of the Haitian
Government. He also reported on the progress made
in the implementation of MINUJUSTH's mandate,
highlighting the challenges that remain with regard to
combating community violence, strengthening public
institutions, professionalizing the Haitian National
Police, fostering justice and fighting corruption,
managing prisons, ensuring human rights, preparing
elections and planning the transition.

We particularly welcome the progress noted by
the Secretary-General in the context of the United
Nations strategy in support of the national plan for the
elimination of the cholera in Haiti. In that connection,
we strongly encourage Ms. Josette Sheeran, Special
Envoy for Haiti, to conduct the country visit that was
originally planned for 6 to 8 October as soon as possible.
The people and the Government of the Republic of
Haiti hope that the responsible support of the United
Nations under track 2 of the new approach to cholera
in Haiti will continue as planned after the closure of
MINUJUSTH with an adequate level of resources. In
that connection, we note the memorable regrets voiced
by former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon in his
last address to the Assembly during the 2016 general
debate (see A/71/PV.8), regarding the heinous acts of
sexual exploitation and violence and the introduction of
cholera in Haiti.

The United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti
(BINUH), which will take over from MINUJUSTH
tomorrow, will be called on to provide its good
offices, offer advice and raise political awareness. The
Haitian Government will focus special attention on
the strategic objectives outlined in the report related
to the tasks assigned to BINUH. We would do well to
recognize that the new mission will begin its operations
in a national context that is characterized by major
political, economic, social, security, humanitarian and
environmental emergencies, which are compounded
by the disturbing disaffection of an overwhelming
majority of the population with public institutions and
a climate of mistrust.

The discussions held in the Council (see S/PV.8559)
at the time of the adoption of resolution 2476 (2019),
which established BINUH, highlighted the importance
of acting quickly and decisively to address the root
causes of those emergencies. In the past few years,
several United Nations missions in Haiti, including
those of the Economic and Social Council Ad Hoc
Advisory Group on Haiti, have made a compelling
assessment of the main challenges facing the country.
On behalf of the Haitian Government, I would like to
commend the exceptional work done by the Ad Hoc
Advisory Group under the chairmanship of Canada. We
hope that BINUH will also collaborate closely with the
Advisory Group. Today more than ever, the problem of
the country's long-term development looms large. I am
convinced that the United Nations can go even further
in support of Haiti's national vision and priorities.

In conclusion, I want to convey the President's
call to all Haitians for dialogue and unity, in which he
said that it is no accident that he and we belong to the
same country, the unique and indivisible Republic of
Haiti. Despite painful moments and difficulties in our
daily lives, he said, we all remain firmly committed
to the ideals of the founding fathers of our national
independence. Many peoples have gone through dark
times. What is most important is not how they have
been affected, but the wisdom, sense of self-sacrifice,
humility and spirit of unity they have developed in
order to chart a path to a better tomorrow. As Haitians
at home and abroad, he continued, it is our primary
responsibility to seek healthy and sustainable solutions
together, through genuine dialogue, to the problems
that undermine the political, economic, social and
environmental stability of our country, once the pearl
of the West Indies. It is up to us to set and maintain
the course, but we cannot do it without appropriate
and enhanced international support, he added, for the
mobilization of sufficient resources is critical to the
implementation of the objectives that will help us to
rebuild mutual trust and ensure the security, stability
and long-term development of our dear Haiti.

He concluded by expressing the hope that our
international partners will understand the urgent
need for a paradigm shift and enhanced support.
International support must match the realities and
genuine needs of the country and must respect the
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and
unity of the Republic of Haiti.

