Mr. Mar Dieye: Today, we are dealing with a
region that, after almost 10 years of conflict, has,
overall, lost 25 per cent of its gross domestic product
(GDP), with acute losses in countries such as Liberia
and Sierra Leone of more than 50 per cent of GDP in
real terms. We are also dealing with a region with an
alarming rate of HIV/AIDS prevalence. We are
reaching the rate of 13 per cent in Liberia and of 7 per
cent in Sierra Leone. One can understand the spillover
effect that might cause in Guinea. This is also the
region that ranks lowest on the human development
index, hence a region with socio-economic
development trends that are not so bright. Yet it is a
region with promising development opportunities,
given the recent return of peace in Sierra Leone. It thus
behoves us to seize the moment and to help transform
the emerging glimmers of hope into real development.

This Security Council workshop is very timely
because it provides a unique opportunity to bring the
peace and development dimensions together in helping
shape and chart the way forward in the Mano River
Union zone. It will not be the work of a moment to
undo the accumulated destructive work of 10 years of
evil forces. Not only will we need to act immediately,
but we must also set our action within a longer time
frame in order to integrate progress towards the
achievement ofthe Millennium Development Goals.

The United Nations system, including the Bretton
Woods institutions, is actively engaged in this process
and is implementing various strategic initiatives and
programmes on the ground to support the
reconstruction and recovery process. These include the
United Nations Development Assistance Frameworks
in Guinea and Liberia, the poverty reduction strategies
in Guinea and Sierra Leone and the United Nations
strategy to support national recovery and peace-
building in Sierra Leone.

But from a development perspective, we are
currently facing the following constraints on the way
forward: first, insufficient financial resources to
implement, at the national levels and on a wider scale,
quick-impact projects that would help consolidate
peace and prevent the risk of reversal; secondly, weak
institutional capacities which then limit the various
economies' absorptive capacities. In the three countries
we have absorptive capacity ranging from 40 per cent
to 60 per cent, and one can see how limited our
effectiveness may be; thirdly, dysfunctional productive
capacities, including the basic economic and social
infrastructures such as roads, schools and health
facilities; and fourthly - and this is critical - the
absence of an adequate coordinating policy mechanism
at the regional level to synchronize the various
programmes in the three countries and to deal with
cross-border issues.

To address these various constraints, we see the
way forward as follows.

First, programme funding should be secured at
the national level through the following mechanisms.

The first mechanism is the donor forum on the
Sierra Leone strategy document for recovery and
peace-building, which is scheduled for the last quarter
of this year in Paris, which we are organizing with the
World Bank and the Government. I wish to inform the
Council that at the end of this month, on 31 July and
1 August, we will be holding an in-country round table
in Freetown to discuss the governance programme that
the Government is putting forward to deal with civil
service reform, the problem of accountability in
rebuilding the failed State, the problem of corruption,
the problem of local governance and so on.

Efforts should be made to revive the project of
organizing a special consultation on Guinea to address
the impact of the conflict. The economy of Guinea has
been severely taxed by the conflict in the subregion. It
has affected its public finances and its productive
capacity. I think that we have once again to put on the
table the issue of special consultations, which we were
discussing two years ago.
Also important is the implementation of a policy
of constructive engagement in Liberia - and again,
here we agree with the Department of Political Affairs
that we cannot have a long-term policy of containment.
This can be done by addressing on a wider scale the
humanitarian crisis, community development
programmes that promote sustainable livelihoods and
the creation of job opportunities, peace education, and
the promotion of a system of just and accountable
governance. This policy can leverage upon existing
United Nations programmes on the ground, which,
unfortunately, lack sufficient funding.

The second line of strategy, in my View, would be
to mandate the United Nations Office for West Africa
to prepare, jointly with the United Nations country
team, and in association with the Mano River Union
secretariat in the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), a coordinated and
integrated United Nations strategic framework
document that will not only back the Rabat peace
process but also help in building confidence among the
parties by focusing on key cross-border initiatives on
issues such as HIV/AIDS, fishing rights and cross-
border trade. This would include, of course, supporting
the parties, civil society and entrepreneurs on the
ground.

I will conclude by highlighting the fact that
UNDP, through its Regional Cooperation Framework,
is finalizing a support programme for ECOWAS and
the United Nations Office for West Africa to address
some of the various challenges in the subregion that I
have outlined. This would complement the support that
we are already providing for the implementation of the
ECOWAS moratorium on small arms, and the
involvement of civil society, including the Mano River
Union Women's Network, in the peace process.

UNDP will also lead the efforts of the United
Nations country teams on the ground in advocating for
the attainment ofthe Millennium Development Goals.

