Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Like others, I would like to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Carlos Ruiz Massieu for his briefing. We warmly recall
our visit to Colombia and appreciate his help and that
of his team in facilitating that very important trip.
Let me also welcome Foreign Minister Carlos Trujillo
Garcia to the Security Council and thank him for the
warm hospitality that was accorded to us in Colombia. I
would also like to thank Mr. Gustavo Meza-Cuadra and
his able team for their excellent arrangements. I need to
mention that in the presence of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Peru, who is presiding over this meeting. I
thank them once again.

From the briefing and the Council's visit to
Colombia, I would like to address several key
issues. First, Indonesia welcomes the many positive
developments that have occurred in fulfilling the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable
and Lasting Peace, especially the strong commitment
to the reintegration process by the Government and the
Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Comun (FARC).

We also welcome the statutory law of the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace, which was enacted in June,
which was the last missing piece in the legal framework
for Colombia's restorative model of transitional justice.
It will provide the tribunal with a solid legal framework
to work independently and autonomously.

We strongly commend the people of Colombia for
their courage and resolve to achieve peace and stability
in their own country. Their commitment to the peace
process is exemplary. I certainly concur with my
colleague, the representative of the Russian Federation,
who mentioned the importance of a nationally led
Colombian peace process.

Secondly, we acknowledge the very timely mission
of the Security Council to Colombia last week. It
gave us the unique opportunity to witness first-hand
the accomplishments achieved thus far, as well as the
challenges in implementing the peace agreement. We
were able to demonstrate the unified solidarity of the
international community with the Government and
the people of Colombia in their effort to restore peace,
stability and security. Our presence was a positive
affirmation and sign of support for the determination of
the Government and the FARC in a peace process that
benefits all Colombians. Many at this table and in other
contexts during our visit to Colombia have mentioned
requests for continued assistance from the Council and
the United Nations, including the continuation of the
mandate of the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia, a request that I believe the Council will
certainly grant.

Thirdly, like others, we are concerned about the
ongoing attacks on and killings of former combatants,
community leaders and human rights defenders. But,
as the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/530) also
noted, we are very much encouraged by the intention,
expressed by President Duque Marquez, to respond
swiftly to ensure that all responsible individuals are
brought to justice. We had a very open discussion on
the intention to provide protection, which is a very
positive sign when it comes from the President himself.

We believe that the Colombian Government has
the capacity and capability to resolve all issues on the
ground. However, it cannot undertake that enormous
task alone. Indonesia calls upon the international
community to mobilize adequate resources in that regard
and also to assist in bringing peace to Colombia. We
have always stood ready to assist, including by sharing
our experiences and best practices on reintegration and
reconciliation and with illicit-drug crops, with which
we have also had experience in the past. We share
the plight of the Colombian Government, as well as a
programme on crops for peace, including palm oil.

We concur with Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Carlos Ruiz Massieu on the need to
redouble efforts to reintegrate former combatants and
to implement development programmes and additional
projects to substitute for the cultivation of illicit drugs.
My colleagues have mentioned only tomatoes - I do not
know why tomatoes are so important - but especially
since we have also seen other projects, involving,
namely, local handicrafts. I believe we improved the
economy of the wives of former combatants by buying
all of their nice bags and caps. I bought one myself and
I know the representative of the United States did so as
well. I think many other projects of this type have to be
carried out.

During our trip, we heard a great deal about
challenges, difficulties and obstacles, but in our open
discussion with the former combatants on coca, there
was a plea by the wife of a former combatant and a
member of a women's non-governmental organization
on the need to also prioritize the inclusion of women
in the peace process. And I certainly concur with the
representative of Poland on the need to focus on the
plight of women combatants, which is an important
point that I would like to underline once again.

Lastly, we must not lose the existing positive
momentum as we encourage the parties to redouble
their efforts to implement the peace agreement. The
Security Council should also continue to effectively
assist the Government with its peacemaking efforts.
Let Colombia continue to be a success story for the
Council - a nationally led story of peace.

