Saint Vincent and the Grenadines thanks Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC), for her presentation on the twentieth report to the Security Council pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011). Today's meeting emerges against the backdrop of positive developments in Libya, in particular within the framework of the Organization's three-point plan. We commend the Libyan parties for their efforts in reaching a permanent ceasefire agreement and encourage them to continue exhibiting the spirit of compromise and good faith, capitalize on the positive momentum and advance in finding a Libyan-owned and-led political solution to the conflict. We reiterate our support for the current Libyan Political Dialogue Forum in Tunisia and look forward to the convocation of a Libyan national reconciliation conference. The international community continues to support the Libyan people in their quest for just and lasting peace and stability, which is reflected in the ICC Prosecutor's latest report. As an essential component of our multilateral architecture, the ICC remains an independent and impartial court and has an integral role to play in assisting Libya to overcome its difficulties, especially in the fight against impunity and the pursuit of justice, which are crucial for sustainable peace, security and reconciliation. However, the ICC continues to face enormous challenges in Libya. To that end, we stress the importance of full cooperation and the principle of complementarity of the Rome Statute, which are fundamental for the ICC to effectively discharge its mandate, including the operational activities of the Office of the Prosecutor. Additionally, we call on all State and non-State parties to the Rome Statute to comply with their international obligations and adhere to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, including compliance with international humanitarian law and international human rights law. My delegation denounces the grave injustice against the world's first and only permanent international criminal court and its officials through unilateral coercive measures in the form of sanctions. We remain steadfast in our stance that those sanctions are unjustifiable and wrong. They flagrantly violate our international rules-based system and seek to undermine the work of the ICC. We therefore call for their immediate removal. Finally, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines reaffirms its commitment to upholding the principles and values of the Rome Statute and encourages non-State parties to the Rome Statute to become members of the ICC.
