Mr. Begec (Turkey): Like many ofmy predecessors,
Mr. President, I thank you for organizing today's
meeting.

The impact of global challenges to Africa has been
profound due to the lack of institutional capacity and
resilience in many parts of the continent. The challenges
are of a transnational character, so our response needs
to be holistic. With this understanding, the United
Nations has acknowledged, through General Assembly
resolution 70/262 and Security Council resolution 2282
(2016) of 27 April, the importance of peacebuilding
efforts at the national, regional and international levels
and of addressing all phases of the conflict cycle. I
would like to stress the necessity of implementing these
resolutions with a special emphasis on Africa.

Turkey provides personnel and contributes
financially to seven of the existing nine peacekeeping
missions in Africa and takes part in five out of six
country-specific configurations of the Peacebuilding
Commission. In addition, since 2011, we have
co-chaired the Horn of Africa Working Group within
the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum with the European
Union. Since 2008, Turkey has been providing financial
assistance to the African Union for projects in the
areas of trade and investment, peace and security,
rural development, empowerment of young people
and women, infrastructure and transportation. In this
framework, we allocated $300,000 last year to support
the Eastern African Standby Force and the African
Union Peace and Security Architecture.

Regional endeavours within Africa should be
encouraged and supported by the international
community. The decision by the Assembly of Heads of
State and Government of the African Union on 18 July
in relation to the African Union's peace and security
budget constitutes an important step in this regard.
This is also in line with the African Union's principle
of "African solutions to African problems".

I would also like to share a few examples of
Turkey's concrete action in favour of peacebuilding
in Africa. Turkey hosted the National Independent
Electoral Commission of Somalia in 2015 for an
event that featured experience-sharing and capacity-
building. The delegation also had the chance to observe
the Turkish general elections of November 2015. In
addition, Turkey provided financial assistance to the
National Election Commission ofBurkina Faso in 2015.

We have also been providing training to the
military personnel of African countries. By the end of
2014, some 2,202 African personnel received training
in Turkey. The number of trainees in these programmes
has increased significantly in recent years, reaching
to 600 in 2015. The Turkish International Cooperation
and Coordination Agency established a vocational
training centre in the Sudan, which graduates over 300
technicians every year. Similar centres are planned
for other African countries. We also share knowledge
on protecting and promoting small- and medium-size
enterprises with least developed countries in Africa. In
this regard, a unit of the Turkish Small and Medium
Business Development and Support Administration
organizes training programmes and field trips to
Turkey for its African counterparts.

The Turkish-Sudanese Hospital with a ISO-bed
capacity was opened in 2014 in Nyala, Darfur, and
the Turkey-Somalia Hospital with a 200-bed capacity
was opened in January 2015 in Mogadishu. These
training and research hospitals are jointly run with
the local authorities. The Turkish Ministry of Health
has initiated a project for creating a nationwide patient
database in 20 sub-Saharan African countries. The
$3-million project, to be implemented over the next four
years, consists of establishing the system, training the
health personnel and providing consultancy services.
Furthermore, Turkey has been providing a substantial
number of higher education scholarships to African
students. There are currently 5,500 students in higher
education and 116 visiting professors from African
countries currently residing in Turkey.

International efforts in peacebuilding in Africa
should be scaled up since some countries of the continent
will have elections this year and in 2017. During this
delicate process, the international community cannot
allow the recurrence of conflicts and humanitarian
tragedies. Turkey will continue to assist Africa in its
efforts to overcome the existing difficulties.

