Mr. Strommen (Norway): Like others, we are
grateful to Under-Secretary-General Jan Egeland for
his most useful introduction this morning.

Important progress has been made since the
protection of civilians in armed conflict was first put
on the agenda of the Security Council five years ago.
However, there is still much to be done, and the
challenges have become increasingly complex.

Norway welcomes the recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2004/431). We strongly endorse
the candid review of implementation of the ten-point
platform that was presented by the Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs in December 2003.
We agree with the proposed way ahead and are looking
forward to the outline of an enhanced monitoring and
reporting framework. We support these and other
efforts to promote risk management.

I would like to mention some issues that are of
great concern to us.

Norway is deeply concerned about the increased
targeting of humanitarian personnel in situations of
armed conflict. We are being forced to rethink our
approach to the security of United Nations and other
personnel in humanitarian crises. It may be necessary
to rely more on armed guards and other protective
measures in extreme cases, but that cannot be our only
recourse. In fact, such measures may prove
counterproductive as they create greater distance from
the civilian population, at the cost of legitimacy and
local support. We must avoid a situation where
strengthened security measures prevent the United
Nations from acting effectively on the ground in
complex emergencies.

The prevalence of sexual violence and abhorrent
human rights abuses against women and children in
armed conflicts are extremely worrying. In addition to
the immediate suffering caused by those appalling
crimes, they have long-term impacts on society and on
reconciliation processes. It is also very disturbing that
the use of sexual and gender-based violence as a means
of warfare has been increasing. We agree with the
Secretary-General that sexual violence is one of the
most complex issues confronting the international
community and that the time has come to address it
comprehensively.

Within the United Nations context, the need to
achieve a clear division of labour between
humanitarian actors on the one hand and political and
military actors on the other is of particular relevance in
the ongoing debate about integrated United Nations
missions. Norway supports the goal of achieving
greater coherence and effectiveness in United Nations
crisis response. However, while striving for greater
coherence, we must not compromise humanitarian
integrity. Liberia is a case in point where this issue
deserves careful attention. We wish to commend the
work done by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), in cooperation with
other United Nations departments, to elaborate generic
and conflict-specific guidelines for civil-military
relationships in complex emergencies. We urge other
parts of the United Nations system and Member States
to take this work into account in the planning and
implementation of international operations.

The objective must be to create complementarity
and avoid confusion and duplication of effort in United
Nations operations. Complementarity must be built in
from the early stages of planning and be reflected in
clear mandates. The Security Council has a particular
responsibility to ensure such clarity of mandates.

In addition to short-term measures, we need a
broader approach to sustaining and increasing the
protection of civilians. Norway believes that more
needs to be done to promote the awareness and
ownership of humanitarian principles and to broaden
support for humanitarian action worldwide. That is
why we are supporting the ideas presented by OCHA
for partnership arrangements between new donor
countries, the United Nations and traditional donors to
facilitate increased contributions of humanitarian
personnel, financial support, logistical services,
emergency food aid and other in-kind contributions.
