The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of France for his kind words addressed
to the delegation of Cameroon and to the presidency.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
the representative of Cameroon.

Today's discussion of the results achieved by the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism
one year after the Committee's creation, attests to our
refusal to yield.

Humankind, thirsting for the culture of
civilization, solidarity and social justice, had just
celebrated in a spirit of enthusiasm and joyfulness its
entry into the third millennium. We all thought that a
new era had been born, one free of everything that had
endangered the future and the hopes of humankind.

On 11 September 2001, in the space of an hour,
we were awakened by brutal reality and the horror of a
new transborder and transterritorial curse: terrorism.
We were shown proof that hatred, the cause of the
crimes and the wars of the twentieth century, had not
disappeared: racial hatred, ethnic hatred, religious and
political hatred, hatred of others, hatred of foreigners.
It is that hatred which shaped and nourished the
terrorism that emerged on 11 September, a terrorism of
a new type. It is new in terms of its global scope, its
intolerance and its cowardice. The revolutionary and
the anarchist of yesterday or the resistance fighter from
the Second World War spared children and civilians.
The terrorist of today attacks society itself. With utter
and indiscriminate folly he strikes children, the aged,
men and women, rich and poor, believers and non-
believers without any distinction whatsoever. Such
terrorism cannot be justified by anything, neither as
means nor as an end.

The terrorism of 11 September 2001 was also
motivated by the will to force itself on others, and to
force them to do its will, a will to impose its own law
on people, communities and countries through
humiliation and by causing crowds and individuals to
tremble in fear of that unknown.

Finally, the terrorist who showed his face on 11
September is, despite external appearances, a coward
who dons a mask to make his move, then fades,
disappears and sinks into anonymity. He is a coward,
for, even if he is willing to die, he does so in order to
more effectively kill men, women and children who
have done nothing to him and whom he does not even
know. That is the terrorist who emerged on 11
September.

Those who train the terrorist, educate him, urge
him on, give him shelter and provide him with the
means to perpetrate his acts are all equally guilty.
Giving in to that terrorist means giving up and
abdicating our national sovereignty as States. It means
abdicating our ethics, our awareness as human beings.

It is that refusal to yield that underlies the vast
process of mobilizing our energies begun by the United
Nations the day after 11 September 2001 and that
underlies Security Council resolution 1373 (2001).

Cameroon remains fully committed to the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), welcomes
the largely positive results of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) and we wish to renew our backing
and support.

My country wishes to pay well-deserved tribute
to the CTC's Chairman, Sir Jeremy Greenstock for his
commitment, his creative imagination, his enthusiasm
and his impartiality. Cameroon also wishes to welcome
and congratulate the chairmen of the three
subcommittees.

Finally, Cameroon commends those States
involved in the anti-terrorist struggle. We call for all
States to adhere to the twelve international conventions
against terrorism. We express a heartfelt call for
specific international cooperation to strengthen the
national capacities of those States which are in need of
this.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The President (spoke in French): I now call on
Sir Jeremy Greenstock to reply, either to questions
raised or to the comments made this morning.


