Mr. Ryan (Ireland): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The candidate
countries Bulgaria, Romania and Turkey, the countries
of the Stabilization and Association Process and
potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Croatia, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
and Serbia and Montenegro, and the EFTA countries
Iceland and Norway, members of the European
Economic Area, align themselves with this statement.

The European Union is grateful for the customary
informative briefing provided by Ambassador Mufioz
this morning. As Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999), and in the assiduous and diligent manner in
which he discharges his often difficult responsibilities,
he may continue to rely on the wholehearted support of
the European Union.

Regular travel to, and interface with, relevant
countries and regional organizations is an essential
component in the effective conduct of the work of the
Committee. This morning Ambassador Mufioz has
given us an overview of his recent mission to Tunisia,
Algeria, Senegal and Spain. Evident from this
overview is the fact that significant and productive
dialogue took place during that mission. Regarding
Tunisia, Algeria and Senegal, we wish to confirm that
the EU remains fully aware that these States have been
threatened by terrorism for some time.

We are committed to cooperating closely with the
Maghreb countries in meeting this challenge. The
Declaration on Combating Terrorism, adopted by the
European Council on 25 March 2004, commits the
European Union to developing technical assistance
strategies to enhance the counter-terrorist capacity of
third countries, in coordination with other international
organizations and donor States. The European
Commission maintains an ongoing programme of work
in that regard, as do a number of member States on a
bilateral basis. The EU will continue to cooperate
closely with our international partners, including the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and this
Committee, to identify those countries where our
assistance might most effectively be directed.

The European Union also remains committed to
meeting in full our counter-terrorist commitments
under the relevant Security Council resolutions. We
will continue to cooperate with the Committee and
with partner countries to halt the flow of funds and
other economic resources to terrorists and terrorist
groups, prevent their access to the arms necessary to
carry out their attacks and ensure that terrorists will be
unable to find safe haven either within the EU or
externally. The EU also wishes to recall that any
amendments or additions made to the consolidated list
of the 1267 Committee are automatically included in
the annex of the relevant European regulation.

It is a longstanding position of the European
Union that counter-terrorism actions must at all times
be accompanied by respect for due process and the rule
of law. We reiterate once again that there can be no
trade-off between human rights and effective security
measures; indeed, respect for human rights must
remain an integral part of any comprehensive counter-
terrorist strategy. We therefore fully subscribe to the
views expressed by the Chairman today on this
important matter.

The European Union agrees fully with the
conclusion contained in paragraph 12 of the
Chairman's analytical summary contained in document
S/2004/349 that reports from States are essential in the
international struggle against the scourge and the threat
posed by terrorists to the world community.

While we are encouraged to hear of an increase in
State compliance, every effort must be made by all
concerned to facilitate the submission of outstanding
reports. Any confusion regarding reporting
requirements must be dispelled. Assistance in the
preparation of these reports should be given, where
needed. While it is recognized that there may be
legitimate reasons precluding timely submission of
reports by some States and that these difficulties
should be promptly addressed, an unfortunate signal is
sent to the outside world by the uneven or inconsistent
submission of reports by States. The European Union
therefore strongly urges the States concerned to liaise
closely with the Committee and the Monitoring Team
so that all outstanding reports may be submitted
without further substantial delay.

As the Chairman has observed, a new Monitoring
Team has been constituted since he last addressed the
Security Council on the activities of the 1267 (1999)
Committee. The work of the Monitoring Team will be
vital to ensuring the long-term success of the
Committee itself. In addition to analysing means of
ameliorating the level of submission of national reports
and their quality, the Team has an equally important
role in assessing how effective existing resolutions,
legislation and controls have been in combating
terrorist financing, hindering the movement of
terrorists and upholding arms embargoes. In that
regard, we encourage the Monitoring Team to continue
to develop its working relationship with the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate in order to
maximize synergies and avoid duplication in their
closely related work. The European Union very much
looks forward to receiving the Monitoring Team's
detailed reports over the coming months and will, as
always, analyse them most carefully.

Before closing, it would be remiss of me were I
not to thank Ambassador Mufioz most warmly, on
behalf of the European Union, for agreeing to meet
recently, and at some length, with both the European
Union Coordinator on Counter-Terrorism, Mr. Gijs de
Vries and, only a few days later, with a high-level
European Union Troika counter-terrorism delegation.
We look forward to continued close consultation and
cooperation with him, the Committee and the
Monitoring Team.

