Mr. Djumala (Indonesia): Today's meeting of the
Security Council holds special significance, as it is
being held against the backdrop of the recent
presidential elections in East Timor. The people and the
Government of Indonesia look forward to joining the
East Timorese in the historic celebrations of their
Independence Day, on 20 May 2002.

East Timor's journey towards sovereign statehood
is, of course, inseparable from the successful
conclusion of the mandate of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET),
under the leadership of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello. In
that regard, I should also like to take this opportunity
to congratulate Mr. Kamalesh Sharma as he embarks on
his new assignment as head of the proposed United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor (NMISET).
My delegation wishes to express its cooperation and
support as he undertakes the challenging tasks ahead.

Since the last Council meeting on this item,
positive cooperation at all levels of governance and
through the implementation of understandings reached
between my Government and UNTAET/East Timor has
led to the substantive progress achieved to date, most
notably the two recent important agreements. That, we
believe, augurs well for a forward-looking and
reconciliatory relationship between the two sides.
Having said that, my delegation deems it necessary to
stress that the important aspects of a bilateral
relationship should grow and develop in line with the
mutuality of interests of the concerned sides.

Indonesia reaffirms the need to address the
complex multidimensional issue of refugees in a
comprehensive manner. While more than 8,000
refugees returned to East Timor during the period
January to April 2002, about 50,000 remain in the
province of East Nusa Tenggara. The basis for a
comprehensive solution to the refugee issue is the 27
November 2001 joint appeal of the Government of the
Republic of Indonesia and the United Nations on
solutions for East Timorese refugees. The expedited
resolution of this matter would be in the best interest of
all parties concerned. Thus, my Government believes
that we should move beyond rhetoric and platitudes
and request the international community to respond
positively to the joint appeal.

Moreover, refugee returns in large numbers have
been made possible by effective security at borders.
More importantly, good cooperation between the
Tentara Nasional Indonesia (TNI) and UNTAET has
been a key component in assuring security, as reflected
in the Secretary-General's report. The latter should
have been the report's focus, rather than irrelevant and
unnecessary references to "militias", because using
such terminology gives an inaccurate impression that
lawlessness exists at the border, and this is simply not
the case.

Similarly, we believe that the report should have
stressed the good cooperation between Indonesia and
UNTAET, with the holding of regular working-level
meetings to deter criminal activity, instead of depicting
criminal activity absent any concrete evidence. Just
recently, on 24 April, trilateral talks on regional
security issues were held between Indonesia,
UNTAET/East Timor and Australia, aimed at deterring
cross-border crimes such as drug smuggling, money-
laundering and people-smuggling. This is a significant
development indeed for promoting regional
cooperation.

Furthermore, we place great importance on joint
border cooperation, as evidenced by keeping various
agreements. However, border agreements should not in
any way be tied to security issues, let alone related to
downsizing of the military component of UNTAET's
successor mission. Agreements, due to their arbitrary
nature, cannot be imposed on either of the respective
sides and have to be considered within the context of a
developing bilateral relationship.

At the same time, our commitment to upholding
justice by prosecuting human rights Violations that
occurred in East Timor in the period leading up to and
immediately following the popular consultation held in
August 1999 was reflected in the beginning of the
proceedings of the Ad Hoc Human Rights Tribunal on
14 March 2002. On the eve of the trials, my
Government adopted two important regulations
governing witness protection and compensation for
Victims and human rights abuses.

In my delegation's View, such considerable
progress attained specifically for the effective
functioning of the Tribunal should be received
positively, as it undeniably attests to the sincere efforts
of the Indonesian Government and parliament, judicial
institutions and civil society alike to implement this
judicial process in a prompt and fair manner. Let us
therefore respect the independence of the national
judicial system, let it take its course, and refrain from
impromptu and hasty judgements. Furthermore, we
welcome bilateral and international assistance to
enhance the capacity of the human rights courts, as was
recently provided by France.

As a new chapter opens in the lives of the East
Timorese people, my Government is committed to
adopting a forward-looking approach based on
cooperation and partnership, rather than on dwelling on
issues of the past. To this end, Indonesia extends its
support for the efforts of the new Government in Dili
and its endeavours for good governance, which, among
other things, should include adopting relevant
legislation to decide status of land and property rights
in East Timor, and respect for basic rights of the East
Timorese people regardless of their political
persuasions, the rule of law, the smooth functioning of
the administration and sustained efforts undertaken to
promoting reconciliation among its people.

Finally, Indonesia reaffirms its readiness to work,
in a spirit of cooperation, partnership, harmony and
amity, towards building a peaceful, unified and
sustainable society in East Timor.

