Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to express my appreciation for the
valuable briefing given by Mr. Said Djinnit, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes
Region, and for his relentless efforts to develop
cooperation among the States of the region.
The Great Lakes region is in the heart ofthe African
continent. Therefore, building peace in the region will
have an impact on the development and stability of the
entire continent. Despite their considerable capacities,
the States of the region continue to face tremendous
security, stability, democracy and development
challenges. Most prominent among those challenges
are armed groups, which are the main obstacle to State
authority and which pose a great threat to the lives
of civilians. They also play a role in stealing natural
wealth, thereby depriving the people of the region of
a significant development resource. Moreover, the
humanitarian situation is a source of serious concern,
with the presence of a great number of refugees and
displaced persons.

Egypt believes that efforts to face those challenges
require, first and foremost, cooperation among the
States of the region, in line with their collective
responsibility to work to achieve stability. Nationally
owned sustainable solutions must also be sought
through the promotion of regional and international
partnerships, in particular with the African Union and
the United Nations.

Therefore, and in line with our position as a
co-opted member of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region, we hosted a high-level
workshop on 27 February in Cairo. Many ministers
and officials of the States of the region participated,
along with representatives of the United Nations, the
African Union and other regional organizations. In the
discussions on a global response to threats to peace
and security in the Great Lakes region, emphasis was
placed on three key areas.

The first was to address current challenges and
proactively exploit opportunities to transform the
region into one of stability and prosperity. The most
fundamental of those opportunities is provided by
the ongoing political processes, such as those in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi and the
Central African Republic. Those processes enjoy great
attention from the international community. Moreover,
there is a considerable institutional structure and a
valid political framework for cooperation among the
States of the region, which should be put to use.

The second area offocus was the role ofpeacekeeping
operations and sustaining peace, especially given that
the region hosts a great number of such operations. The
workshop stressed the importance of developing and
ensuring the consistency of peacekeeping-operation
mandates, so that they align with the actual needs
of the countries concerned at the various phases and
can help to preserve and build peace in line with the
relevant principles, thereby laying a strong foundation
for sustainable peace. Diverse and integrated regional
efforts, as well as security, political, development and
humanitarian tools, are also of importance.

Lastly, the workshop stressed the importance of
promoting the role of society in conflict settlement and
peaceful coexistence, including in the fight against
terrorism and extremism, and in efforts to prevent new
fighters from joining armed groups, in mediation, and
in promoting the role of women and young people in
peacebuilding frameworks. We stress the importance of
the Peace and Security Council Framework agreement
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the region. It is the basic framework
for stability. We also agree that the States of the region
should commit to the Framework agreement and
continue their efforts.

On the other hand, several developments require
the attention of the international community, including
the hurdles facing the African initiative to eradicate the
Lord's Resistance Army after several regional actors
and partners announced that they wanted to withdraw
from that initiative. The situation calls for an ongoing
dialogue among the members of the initiative so as
to overcome those hurdles and prevent the loss of the
progress achieved in efforts to halt that movement.
Moreover, the growing security challenges in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo attest to the great
responsibility of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, and in that regard we need to provide the
Mission with the necessary capacities and resources.

At the political level, we are fully confident in the
ability ofthe Congolese people to get through this critical
crossroads. We take note of the latest developments,
especially the appointment by the new President of
a Prime Minister and the reactions to that decision
by various political forces. We stress that all parties
should shoulder their responsibilities, give priority to
the national interests and settle their differences. That
will enable the full implementation of the political
agreement of 31 December and national concord. We
also stress the important role of international and
regional partners in helping the Congolese parties to
overcome their differences, and of the good will of the
African Union and the region.

With regard to the situation in Burundi, despite
the progress in the security situation there is no
alternative to a sustainable political solution through
a comprehensive national dialogue in line with the
mediation of the East African Community. We also
call on the international community to pay heed to
the economic and humanitarian consequences of the
conflict in the country and to establish a constructive
dialogue between Burundi and its partners. We
stress the importance of the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission, which has assisted in putting together the
Government and its partners and in building trust.

Egypt presides over the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and we want to
promote the role of that committee, which seeks to
ensure stability and security in the country. In that
regard, we express our deep condolences to the families
of the two experts who lost their lives in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

