Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation would like
to echo our colleagues by first of all warmly welcoming
the presence here of His Excellency the Vice-President
of the Republic of Colombia, Oscar Naranjo, and of
the Permanent Representative of Colombia, Maria
Emma Mejia Ve'lez. They have contributed to writing
one of the most outstanding pages of the history of not
only Colombia, but also our region. We also welcome
the presence of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Jean Arnault, and we thank
him for his briefing and for his tireless work on behalf
of our Organization in Colombia. We also welcome the
presence at this meeting ofa number of colleagues from
my region - ambassadors who are closely following
the progress made on this issue in our work here in
the Council.

Since the signing of the final Agreement, in 2016,
the peace process in Colombia has yielded positive
results that are unprecedented in any other peace
process. These include a definitive ceasefire between the
Government and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP); the laying
down of weapons by FARC-EP; the setting up of a new
political party, the People's Alternative Revolutionary
Force (FARC), its participation in the 2018 electoral
process and the assumption by its representatives of
their new legislative posts; and a reduction in the level
of violence in the country. According to the Victims
Unit, prior to 2012 clashes had led to an estimated 3,000
deaths per year. Since the signing of the agreement in
2017, 78 fatalities have been recorded. Furthermore, it
is worth underscoring the significant progress made
in the area of humanitarian demining. To date, more
than 264 municipalities have been declared mine-free,
which represents 40 per cent of the total number
of municipalities.

Every situation is different, but if we compare the
process at hand with various issues that we deal with
daily in the Council, we know from experience that
merely consolidating a definitive ceasefire takes years
to become a reality. That gives us an idea of how much
basic progress has been made thanks to the leadership
and the political will of President Juan Manuel
Santos Calderon and the FARC. The Government has
established institutions and developed an important
legal framework aimed at implementing what is, by all
accounts, an ambitious peace agreement. The agreement
not only establishes an understanding between the
two parties to end the violence, but also offers an
opportunity to address the fundamental problems in
Colombia comprehensively, and seeks to eliminate the
deep and historical differences between rural areas and
cities, poverty, inequality and the absence of the State
in areas affected by the conflict. That is why continuing
the process is a priority.

It should be noted that during the recent holding of
elections, as some of my colleagues have mentioned,
there was wide voter participation among citizens in an
environment marked by calm that had never been seen
before. In our opinion, that demonstrates the benefits
of the peace process, which benefit not only one sector,
but the entirety of Colombian society and the region.

Bolivia would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate Mr. Ivan Duque on his election as President
of the Republic of Colombia. We reiterate our sincerest
wishes for his success and reaffirm the brotherly bonds
that link our countries. We know that the challenges
ahead are many, but I believe that I speak for everyone
when I say that both the Latin America and Caribbean
region and the rest of the international community, as
a whole, are committed to working with Colombia,
for which consolidating stable and lasting peace is an
imperative. Clearly, the present situation presents a
very complicated landscape. I will refer to the issues
that my country believes to be of concern at this time.

First, concerning the murders of social leaders,
former FARC members and human rights defenders, we
are deeply concerned about and condemn such acts of
violence. Despite efforts made, it is necessary to work
even harder to extend the presence of public order beyond
territorial reintegration areas, as well as to consolidate
a State presence in areas formerly under FARC control.
We urgently call for pursuing investigations to find
those responsible and for the courts to punish them to
the full extent of the law. We would be remiss if we did
not mention and commend political leaders' unanimous
support for the pact of repudiation of violence against
social leaders, as it demonstrates unity in responding
to such acts.

Secondly, there is a feeling of uncertainty and fear
among former FARC combatants with respect to legal
and political guarantees. Although it is a historical fact
that eight members of the FARC political party have
assumed their respective seats among the ten that were
created for them in the Congress, the controversies
resulting from the transitional justice system became
more acute during the reporting period, partially owing
to the detention of J esus Santrich. Undoubtedly, that fact
has created frustration among former FARC members.
We therefore believe that is essential to respect the
spirit of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict
and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace with regard to
the Special Jurisdiction for Peace.

Thirdly, concerning the modest progress made in
the area of economic reintegration, we welcome the
issuance of a decree enabling access to landownership
for former FARC members organized in cooperatives.
Although that is an essential step forward, more than
a year and a half have passed without that part of the
agreement having been realized. It is necessary to ensure
timely access to that benefit and move forward in the
implementation process of the decree on cooperatives,
as only 8 of 70 such projects are reportedly operating,
according to the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/723).

Similarly, additional supportis needed forproductive
projects and income-generating opportunities for
former FARC combatants - a situation complicated
by the fact that thousands of ex-members are scattered
throughout the country. The importance of promoting
and supporting a gender and ethnic perspective in
realizing productive projects deserves to be mentioned.
In that regard, the adoption of the strategy for the long-
term reintegration of former combatants, covering an
eight-year period until 2026, will provide the incoming
Government with a plan ensuring a sustainable
economic future for ex-combatants.

My delegation hopes for the successful outcome
of discussions and negotiations currently under way
between the Government of Colombia and the National
Liberation Army. We are grateful for the contribution of
the Republic of Cuba in this and other peace initiatives
in our region.

Lastly, the challenges concerning this issue are
many, but we can state that this peace process is the
most important in the history of Colombia and requires
the continued support of the international community
not only to consolidate stable and lasting peace, but
above all it must continue with the leadership and the
political will that has been shown thus far.

