Mr. Hachani (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): The
Security Council is meeting once again to review
Israel's actions against the Palestinian people and its
flouting of the principles adopted by the international
community in its search for a just and lasting solution
to the conflict in the Middle East.

The numerous meetings of the Security Council
on the Middle East and the increasing deterioration of
the situation there are clear evidence of the need for the
Council to adopt a stern position with a View to
resolving the issue. The situation is most grave and we
must ensure that a settlement be found. On a human
level, the circumstances are most sad, because the
brotherly Palestinian people have been deprived of
their lands, homes and incomes.

Tunisia has followed with concern reports from
various quarters, official and unofficial, on the Israeli
Government's construction of a separation wall that
cuts into land beyond the 1967 borders. This is a
flagrant violation of international law, the Fourth
Geneva Convention in particular, as it constitutes the
confiscation of occupied land and restricts the freedom
of movement of the Palestinians. The wall is a brazen
flouting of the road map and the two-State vision
adopted by our Council. The Israeli Government's
attempt to impose a fait accompli upon the Palestinian
people is unacceptable and may move them to even
greater despair and frustration. Accordingly, the
Council must adopt a resolution that sends a clear
message to the current Israeli Government.

The Middle East sorely needs initiatives of good
will rather than separation walls. Security cannot
prevail in the face of continual psychological and
material obstacles. Rather, it requires Israel to
demonstrate true political resolve to engage in the
peace process and to end the occupation, thereby
enabling the Palestinian people to establish their
independent State on their own soil, with Jerusalem as
its capital, in the context of international legitimacy
and the relevant resolutions.

