The report of the Secretary-General on youth and peace and security (S/2020/167) paints a mixed picture. On the one hand, we see some encouraging developments. In many countries, the political participation of young people is greater than it was five years ago. Young voices are taken more seriously, especially in conflict-prevention and peacebuilding processes. That is very good. Building perspectives for young people is crucial, especially in conflict and post-conflict situations. We would like to encourage all United Nations missions, peacekeeping and political alike, to adopt a mission-wide youth and peace and security strategy, establish focal points for this issue and regularly report on it. The United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia is exemplary in this respect. The fact that Governments are stepping up projects involving young peacebuilders acknowledges the role that youth needs to play in building and sustaining peace. In this vein, we very much welcome the written advice on youth and peace and security submitted to the Security Council today, which encouraged the Peacebuilding Commission to continue youth and peace and security work in its respective considerations with a view to complementing and supporting efforts undertaken in the Security Council. When it comes to building and sustaining peace, Germany is funding a wide range of projects for youth in many countries, for example, in the Sahel region, particularly Mali. Let me cite just a few examples. In Burundi, we support a project strengthening trust and positive relationships between youth and the police. In Colombia, we support the United Nations Institute for Training and Research in their youth-led peace and reconciliation approach. In the Palestinian territories, we support efforts to create safe spaces for youth to initiate and run their own projects, while enabling them to constructively engage with their communities - for example, by establishing a community clinic for elderly persons with disabilities, by revitalizing community gardens or by developing and running awareness campaigns in their own communities. Let me also say in this context that Germany is currently the strongest supporter of the Secretary-General's Peacebuilding Fund, which has a proven track record of engaging in projects that advance the inclusion of women and young people. Moreover, when it comes to humanitarian assistance, we attach particular importance to projects that involve young people and take their specific needs into account, for example, one in the Lake Chad region addressing psychological support, or another, which built an educational centre for Rohingya children living as refugees in Bangladesh. Still, the Secretary-General's report paints a mixed picture. On the one hand are these very positive developments, but on the other hand huge challenges and injustices clearly persist, which can be real obstacles to sustainable peace. Let me refer to just a few. One in four young people are still affected by violence or armed conflict. They lack educational and economic opportunities, and their human rights are often violated and curtailed. Young women, especially, experience patterns of intimidation and harassment when exercising their political rights and participation in peace processes. These are attempts to silence their activism. In post-conflict as well as conflict settings, young women are particularly affected by sexual violence. All barriers to the political participation of young women need to be brought down. Conflict-prevention and peacebuilding must therefore include diverse perspectives and involve youth from all backgrounds, including young women; lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex persons; and young persons with disabilities. Let me say a few words on youth and the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). With schools closed and families confined to their homes, young people are being assigned additional tasks, providing for their communities, often based on the impression that they can bear increased health risks. In addition, with schools closed, young people in all parts of the world are being deprived of education, and young women and girls, in particular, are taking up care work at home, which often interferes with their education. The Secretary-General called for "an aggressive back-to-school strategy" in his report on the socioeconomic impacts of COVID-19. We can only underline and emphasize the need to heed that call. Before concluding, I would like to mention three very short sets of thoughts. First, young people are a decisive pillar - as beneficiaries and as agents of change - in numerous projects in the context of our crisis-prevention and stabilization work. Across countries and continents, our world is witnessing a rise in youth engagement and even a so-called youthquake. We look at the young climate activists, for example, who are taking their activism from the streets to the digital world. This is very encouraging. Secondly, we look forward to the Dominican Republic's draft resolution on youth and peace and security, with the aim of institutionalizing this agenda. Thirdly, and lastly, I would like to pick up a few of the recommendations of German youth delegates Eva Croon and Paul Klahre regarding the advancement of the youth, peace and security agenda. The role of young people as meaningful stakeholders in building peace must be recognized and promoted. The German youth delegates ask for youth participation to be diverse, inclusive, democratic, meaningful, timely and trusted. To conclude my statement, I would like to quote Eva Croon and Paul Klahre: "Encourage, promote and institutionalize the meaningful participation of young people in matters of peace and security" in the United Nations as well as in Member States.
