Mr. Powles (New Zealand): Mr. President, at the
outset I would like to express my delegation's appreciation
for your successful endeavour to hold this open meeting of
the Security Council. In addition, as to the procedure being
followed, I would like to associate my delegation with the
remarks of the Permanent Representative of Canada made
earlier today.

My Government has expressed its condemnation of the
nuclear tests carried out by India and Pakistan. This is
consistent with New Zealand's long-standing opposition to
nuclear testing by any country, anywhere. We do not
believe that nuclear testing is ever justified in any
circumstances.

In the same way, my country considers that nuclear
weapons have no legitimate place in our world. We have
called for urgent progress towards a nuclear-weapons-free
future, and we repeat that call now. The International Court
of Justice has confirmed, in a unanimous decision, the
obligation to pursue in good faith and bring to a conclusion
negotiations leading to nuclear disarmament in all its
aspects and under strict and effective international control.
That obligation applies just as much to India and Pakistan
as it does to other States.

India's and Pakistan's actions in testing nuclear
devices, planning for weaponization and deployment of
nuclear weapons and claiming an entitlement to nuclear-
weapon status are inconsistent with that obligation. At a
time when countries like New Zealand want to accelerate
the pace of nuclear disarmament, those two countries are
looking backwards to an era of nuclear arms build-up,
confrontation and deterrence. It is unbelievable that, as
President Clinton has said,

"we are about to start the twenty-first century by

having the Indian subcontinent repeat the worst
mistakes of the twentieth century, when we know it
is not necessary to peace, to security, to prosperity,
to national greatness or personal fulfilment".

We are gravely concerned that India's and Pakistan's
actions are leading to a nuclear arms race in South Asia,
which would constitute a major threat to international
peace and security. And we deplore both countries'
disregard of international norms against nuclear testing
and nuclear proliferation.

We are particularly disappointed that India and
Pakistan have acted contrary to their stated commitments
to nuclear disarmament. Continued calls for a global ban
on nuclear weapons lack credibility coming from a
country which has displayed its nuclear ambitions. What
is now needed from India and Pakistan are tangible acts
of commitment, not words.

If India and Pakistan want to repair the damage they
have caused to their international standing, they must
forthwith renounce their nuclear-weapons programmes,
and adhere unconditionally to the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, as well as engage in
multilateral negotiations on a fissile-material cut-off
treaty.

Until that time, India and Pakistan must understand
that their behaviour is unacceptable to the international
community. For example, their actions inevitably raise
questions about their qualifications for membership of the
Security Council.

New Zealand supported the request for this meeting
because we consider that recent nuclear testing and the
developing crisis in South Asia represent the most serious
challenge to international stability since the end of the
cold war. We therefore welcome the adoption today by
the Security Council unanimously of resolution 1172
(1998) and warmly congratulate its sponsors: Japan,
Sweden, Costa Rica and Slovenia. We urge the Council
to continue to act decisively and effectively to defuse this
dangerous situation and to uphold nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation.

