Mr. Alvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, allow me to congratulate the Council for
having convened this debate on such an important
topic. Peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of
conflict is crucial in guaranteeing peace, security and
the minimal conditions for human development for
millions of people who have emerged or who are
emerging from conflict, as well as in preventing such
conflicts from reoccurring.

In that respect, Uruguay would like to take this
opportunity to highlight certain aspects of the report
(S/2009/304) presented this morning by the Secretary-
General that we find to be particularly relevant.

Probably the most striking point in that report
relates to the need to give greater coordination and
coherence within and beyond the United Nations
system to peacebuilding efforts. That point,
summarized in the need to approach this issue from a
comprehensive standpoint that encompasses the
various key areas to stabilize a country and to begin to
give it concrete steps in its economic and social
development, is crucial for the international
community's peacebuilding efforts to be effective and
sustainable.

In that regard, we are convinced that the
Peacebuilding Commission is a key tool to improving
the current situation, and we hope that the 2010 review
process creates a favourable climate for that body to
fully engage in the area of coordination.

In that respect, let me stress that the
Peacebuilding Commission is unique in being probably
the only intergovernmental forum that brings together
developing and developed countries to jointly discuss
peacebuilding and reconstruction; that links political
aspects, such as those of security and development;
that so closely involves itself in specific countries; and
that has a level of legitimacy that probably no other
body has.

Meanwhile, we fully agree with a number of
concepts highlighted in the report, such as the need to
strengthen national ownership and to give priority to a
country's own needs, which goes hand in hand with
strengthening national capacity from the start.

Likewise, we appreciate that issues linked to
security, undoubtedly indispensable to providing a
minimum framework of stability, be only one area in
which the Secretariat has proposed seeking
considerable progress in the coming months. Support
for governmental institutions that serve essential
functions, the reintegration of returnees, early
employment generation, the rehabilitation of basic
infrastructure and various aspects of economic
revitalization are activities of equal priority, without
which peacebuilding is not sustainable.

As we have already stated in other thematic
debates, it also seems important that dialogue and
peace processes be inclusive and representative, and
we agree that regional organizations can play a positive
role in that respect.

From the standpoint of a developing country that
has actively cooperated in peacekeeping as well as in
early recovery activities, primarily through valuable
human resources, we particularly appreciate the
emphasis placed on the need for the United Nations to
draw more on/take better advantage of the capacities in
the southern hemisphere in order to contribute to the
task of peacebuilding. In that regard, we hope to see
the realization of the idea put forward by the Secretary-
General in the report of creating new systems of
outreach to appropriately qualified personnel from
developing countries. Uruguay, along with the rest of
our region, has valuable human resources to contribute
in various areas key to peacebuilding.

Somewhat linked to the aspect mentioned earlier,
there is one matter that caught our attention it was not
covered properly in the report of the Secretary-General.
It concerns the support that military personnel deployed
in peacekeeping operations could contribute, precisely in
that early period, when there is a transition towards a
peacebuilding phase or when both tasks - peacekeeping
and peacebuilding - occur simultaneously.

The role of peacekeepers as early peacebuilders
must not be underestimated. The support that such
personnel can contribute in key areas such as providing
security and strengthening the rule of law, including
areas such as disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, as well as security sector reform and
even expanding State authority, must be drawn on. The
positive effect of quick-impact projects should also be
taken into account. There are over 100,000 women and
men deployed in 16 missions who can provide a
resolute contribution in the early stages of restoring
stability.

To conclude, as is clear from the report and this
debate, much remains to be done with respect to
mechanisms of the management, financing and
coordination of peacebuilding. That is only natural,
bearing in mind that this Organization has undertaken
systematic and institutionalized efforts in this area for
only a short time. For that reason, Uruguay believes
that it is extremely timely for all of us to take this
opportunity to renew our support to the Peacebuilding
Commission and take advantage of the approaching
2010 review to strengthen it and make it an even more
effective tool for the Organization.

