Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): First and
foremost, I wish to thank the Peruvian presidency of the
Security Council for convening this important debate.
I also wish to thank the Secretary-General's Envoy
on Youth and the other briefers for providing us with
valuable information.

Egypt has duly taken note of the Secretary-
General's progress study on youth and peace and
security (see S/2018/86) and its recommendations.

Egypt has a young population, with about
22 million people between the ages of 18 and 29,
namely, 24 per cent of the total population. We
believe that young people are the main driving force
that societies need for development and progress, for
avoiding wars and conflicts and for peacebuilding. For
that reason, article 82 of our Constitution stipulates
that the State guarantees the care of youth and must
help them discover their talents and develop their
cultural, scientific, psychological and physical abilities,
including encouraging them to engage in group and
volunteer activity and enabling them to take part in
public life.
Egypt celebrated International Youth Day last
August, under the slogan "The 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development". In that regard, Egypt
hosted the World Youth Forum for the period from 4 to
11 November 2017, with more than 3,000 participants
from all over the world, including Heads of State
and Government, personal envoys, thinkers, public
figures and academics, as well as the participation of
research centres and private sector. The Administrator
of the United Nations Development Programme also
participated in the forum representing the Secretary-
General.

The Forum discussed aspects of the study prepared
by the Secretary-General. It simulated five Security
Council meetings on topics such as means to address
the threats to world peace and security posed by
terrorist organizations, irregular migration, challenges
faced by states and immigrants, as well as the impact of
conflict on peoples and nations, with the means to limit
their danger on development and the youth.

Resolution 2250 (2015) represents the starting
point for a legal framework for the youth, peace and
security agenda. However, such a framework will bear
fruit only if it is accompanied by a set of practical steps
that will help to strengthen the role of youth and their
participation in their societies, and protect them from
extremism and conflict. In that context, I would like to
make the following observations.

It is important to give young people economic and
educational opportunities to break the vicious cycle
of extremism and violence. We must include them in
the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals
locally and internationally, and harness their innovative
capacities in forming new international partnerships
between States and international financing entities
to spur economic activity and address post-conflict
rebuilding. It is also important to acknowledge young
people's needs and address the root causes of conflict.
Moreover, we must safeguard and respect their national
and cultural identities with a view to preventing them
from sliding into extremism.

In his forthcoming report, the Secretary-General
would be well-advised to especially focus on young
people in occupied Arab territories, as is noted briefly
in the progress study. They are subjected to violations by
the occupying Power when they stand up for their cause.
We must also include young people in decision-making
processes. To that end, we have launched a leadership
programme that aims to build upon and mobilize
their capacities to take decisions in governance,
administration and public policy. Civil society
organizations, especially those led by young people,
also play an important role in preventing extremism.

Furthermore, it is also important to incorporate
the gender dimension in all youth programmes through
capacity-building, particularly of women and young
people. Volunteer opportunities contribute to the
development of young people's skills. In that regard,
we commend the efforts undertaken by United Nations
Volunteers. Media can also play an important role in
raising awareness on a culture of peace and combating
violent ideologies.

We reiterate the call of the World Youth Forum,
held in Sharm El-Sheikh, Egypt, to establish an
international electronic forum to develop strategies to
tackle the challenges facing young people worldwide.
The various international conferences throughout
the world strengthen opportunities for dialogue
among youth, but also between young people and
their Governments, as well as with civil society and
international organizations. In that regard, Egypt
emphasizes the importance of holding the World Youth
Forum in November of each year. We call on everybody
to participate in the forum.

In conclusion, we acknowledge that there are many
conflicts that draw in young people. They might spill
beyond conflict zones and borders. The issue under
consideration today is the first step to creating a
practical framework to engage young people in working
towards a more peaceful world. We must cooperate to
counter the adverse consequences of an environment
that pulls young people towards violence.

