Mr. Ryan (Ireland): So rich was the discussion
this morning on the theme of lessons learned that it was
not possible, as intended, to have a discussion and
exchange of views. But there are a few moments
remaining, and perhaps, although I touched on these
points during our discussion at lunch, I might be
permitted to register my points of concern on the theme
oflessons learned in this more formal framework.

First, regarding the usefulness of Security
Council missions on the ground in conflict regions
generally: in recent years - including in Kosovo, East
Timor, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and, of
course, Sierra Leone - they have played an important
part in galvanizing adequate response by the United
Nations system, including the Security Council and the
international community, to such conflicts.

Under-Secretary-General Guehenno covered the
question of mandates. The case of Sierra Leone, like
that of East Timor, demonstrates the key importance of
strong and very clear mandates. We have learned from
Sierra Leone that troop-contributing countries must
have the clearest picture of their mission in the interest
of efficiency, transparency and accountability. Our
healthily developing procedures in the Council for
consultations with troop-contributing countries before
mandates are adopted or renewed show that this key
lesson is being learned, but I believe that we must
continue to develop our thinking and good practice in
this regard.

A third lesson certainly from Sierra Leone, and
also, I believe, from East Timor, is that we must not be
tempted, for budgetary reasons or for reasons of strain
on capacity, to allow the components of relapse to
reassemble themselves. I think that we now see more
clearly from Sierra Leone, East Timor and other cases
that transition from peacekeeping to peace-building
and beyond is a continuum, as I think Sir Kieran was
saying earlier, which includes capacity-building in the
host State. Of course, that goes very far beyond the
security and defence sectors alone.

