Mr. Matjila (South Africa): Let me begin by thanking Special Coordinator Mladenov for his useful and frank briefing on the current situation in the occupied Palestinian territory. I join my colleague from the United States in offering our heartfelt condolences to Kuwait for the passing on of His Highness the Amir of Kuwait. During the recently held general debate of the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session, we heard many Member States reflect on the birth of the United Nations and its shared values of peace, justice, equality and dignity for all, as well as the notion of saving successive generations from the scourge of war. However, despite those august ideals, Palestine and its people remain under illegal occupation and continue to be deprived of the shared values and ideals we spoke about. Palestine is one of the world's oldest unresolved international conflicts, firmly entrenched in the agendas of both the General Assembly and the Security Council for almost as long as the United Nations has been in existence. Nevertheless, 72 years later, the status quo remains and little progress has been made to ensuring the right of Palestinians to self-determination, independence, territorial integrity and sovereignty. Despite numerous agreements and newly forged partnerships, it is shameful that Palestinians continue to live under occupation and are denied their very basic civil and human rights. We should ask ourselves - do these agreements that some of us welcome change the day-to-day lives of those living under occupation? In that regard, South Africa reiterates its position that no peace plan or initiative can have any merit or succeed if it does not include all parties to the conflict in the talks as equal partners from the very beginning. Any initiative aimed at a resolving the Israeli occupation must take into account the needs and aspirations of thePalestinian people. In addition, any such peace plan must ensure that Palestinian statehood is not reduced to an entity without the basic tenets of sovereignty, territorial contiguity and economic viability. A realistic and credible peace plan will result in a genuine two- State solution; not one viable State and a Bantustan. South Africa will continue to work with like-minded countries to support international efforts aimed at the establishment of a viable Palestinian State existing side by side in peace with Israel within internationally recognized borders, based on those existing on 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as capital of both States, in line with all relevant United Nations resolutions, international law and _ internationally agreed parameters. We therefore support President Abbas' call in his statement at the general debate of the seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly for the Secretary-General, together with the Middle East Quartet and the Security Council, to begin preparations for an international conference with the participation of all the parties concerned and for discussions on a genuine peace process, including to resolve all final-status issues. Turning to the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), South Africa once again calls for the full implementation of this and previous resolutions on the question of Palestine. The Council heard today that, while settlement activity may have slowed slightly due to the ongoing coronavirus disease pandemic, this illegal practice by the Israeli authorities continues, in contravention of international law. With regard to the demolition and seizure of Palestinian property, the recent statement by Mr. Jamie McGoldrick, Deputy Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, is deeply disturbing. From March to August 2020, we saw the demolition or seizure of 389 Palestinian-owned structures, the highest average destruction rate in four years. This activity took place despite the Israeli authorities' indication that they would refrain from such actions during the global pandemic. As Special Coordinator Mladenov indicated, these demolitions and seizures have left 442 Palestinians homeless, at a time when Israel and the occupied Palestinian territories are under lockdown. Where are these Palestinians, deprived of their rightful homes, meant to go? Where must they go? Of additional concern is the destruction of critical infrastructure, such as water, hygiene and sanitation facilities, during a pandemic where universal guidance leans towards the need for regular hand-washing and social distancing. All resolutions adopted by the Security Council, be they unanimous or not, must be uniformly implemented. We cannot pick and choose which Council resolutions should be implemented. In a similar vein, overt violations of Council resolutions, as is the case with the continued settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian territory, usually evoke stricter measures on the party responsible for the infringement. In conclusion, South Africa reiterates its position that direct dialogue and negotiation between the relevant parties on an equal footing is the only credible and sustainable path to peace in the Middle East. We must all do our part to bring the parties together, instead of driving them further apart.
