Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to place on record that our participation in this
meeting does not in any way indicate our recognition
of the International Criminal Court (ICC) or its work.
The Sudan is not a party to the Rome Statute, and I am
addressing this statement to the Security Council alone.

Today's briefing was fraught with false claims and
illogical demands. We therefore believe it appropriate
to address the Council in order to clarify the situation
and provide the correct information. We reiterate that
this entire issue has been based on a faulty assumption,
as confirmed by eminent international personalities
whose testimony refutes the charge of ethnic cleansing
and genocide, as previously stated.

The Prosecutor's demand that we implement
the arrest warrants issued against President Omer
Hassan A. Al-Bashir and other Sudanese officials is
unacceptable because it is based on faulty logic. What
is based on wrong is of necessity wrong itself.

The conflict in Darfur is an internal conflict
that has not overspilled our national borders and has
been wrongly described as a threat to international
peace and security. It is incorrect to cite a lack of
willingness or effectiveness on the part of the Sudanese
judiciary to ensure justice and uphold national and
international criminal law. I reiterate the efficiency
and professionalism of the Sudanese judiciary and its
ability to upholdjustice in accordance with our national
legislation and international criminal law. In that
context, we wish to reiterate our oft-repeated assertion
that our initial objective is to render justice through the
national judiciary, and that the ICC has a role to play
only when the national judiciary is unable or unwilling
to do so.

We also note the erroneous approach adopted by the
Office ofthe Prosecutor in addressing issues of concern
to African countries. It entirely disregards Africa's
legal heritage and the independence, professionalism
and abilities of its judiciary. This faulty approach has
been rejected by Africa and led to the call, issued at the
African summit held in Addis Ababa in May, to refer
all issues of concern to the continent to the African
judiciary.

The Sudanese Government is strongly convinced
of and deeply committed to combating impunity, and
to that end has established a special court in charge
of investigating serious violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law in Darfur. It has
appointed a Prosecutor to the Court, in implementation
of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. He is
assisted by 12 legal advisors, who act with complete
independence in the five states of Darfur.

I would also note that the Prosecutor has received
more than 53 criminal complaints. Thirty of these cases
come from Northern Darfur, where 17 accused have
been sentenced to death, and 14 from Southern Darfur,
where 11 have been sentenced to death. Six cases in
Western Darfur are still under investigation, while
in one case in Eastern Darfur three people have been
sentenced to death. There has been only one criminal
case in Central Darfur, which remains pending. All
of this legal activity bears witness to the willingness
and capacity of the Sudanese judiciary to prosecute
criminals in Darfur.

References to aerial bombardment are also
unacceptable. The Sudanese Government exercises its
sovereign right to defend the security and territorial
integrity of the country. References to the humanitarian
situation and sexual violence are equally unacceptable,
since the perpetrators are rebels of the so-called Sudan
Revolutionary Front, who assassinated Commander
Mohamed Bashar and his Deputy Suleiman Dahiya.
This group kills anyone who has chosen the path of
peace, which in itself speaks clearly to its terrorist
leanings. It has also attacked cities in Northern and
Southern Kordofan, Umm Ruwaba and Abu Karshola,
committed crimes against humanity, violated human
rights, plundered homes and displaced populations,
including vulnerable groups. In spite of these atrocities,
however, the Security Council has not lifted a finger.

The statement concerning sexual violence is
based on media reports and is truly bewildering. How
could any judicial entity rely on media reports in its
prosecutions? In one Council meeting, Mr. President,
you personally rejected any reliance on media reports.
Other claims that the Sudanese Government is not
making the required effort to cooperate are false. We
are cooperating in removing all obstacles facing the
Office of the Prosecutor. The visit ost. Valerie Amos,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
Emergency Relief Coordinator, to the Sudan in May is
proof of that cooperation.

Ms. Amos has shown herself to be an international
civil servant who embodies the principles of the
Charter and respects the immunities of high officials,
including Presidents. She has met with many officials
of the Sudanese Government, including the President
himself, and has led deliberations on the humanitarian
situation in Darfur. Following her visit, she reiterated
that the rebel movements under the banner of the Sudan
Revolutionary Front were indeed responsible for the
displacement of populations and the deterioration of
the humanitarian situation in Southern Kordofan and
Blue Nile States.

In conclusion, in spite of the remaining pockets of
rebellion and limited internal conflicts over resources,
the situation in Darfur has greatly improved since 2003.
We have achieved great success in implementing the
Doha Document and the establishment of the Darfur
Regional Authority, which is led by numerous dedicated
sons and daughters of Darfur representing all tribes
that have set out on the path of peace. They are all
working in coherence and coordination with the federal
and state Governments in Darfur to pursue that path.

We therefore appeal to the Council to support all
efforts to establish peace and security, as well as to
call on the rebel groups that have to date refused to
take that path to do so in order to enable us all to turn
our efforts to reconstruction and development and the
achievement of reconciliation, so as to restore peace,
prosperity and stability for the Sudan in general and for
Darfur in particular.

I hope, Sir,that I have kept to the five-minute limit
set for interventions.

