Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to join other
colleagues in thanking the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Lacroix, and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Patten for their briefings. We
also thank the Secretary-General for his latest report on
South Sudan (S/2018/1103). We share its observations
and recommendations.

Allow me to complement my statement as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015) concerning South Sudan with two additional
points on the political and security situation and the
situation of the civilian population.

Three months after the signing of the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan, we have seen some encouraging
developments. However, the peace process remains
fragile, and clashes between parties to the conflict still
occur. There must be an end to the violence. We call
on South Sudanese actors to immediately observe the
provisions of the cessation of hostilities agreement of
December 2017 and disengage and separate their forces.
We also believe that transitional security arrangements
need to be put in place without any further delay.

We are deeply concerned about the recent reports
of the targeting of civilians and serious human rights
violations and abuses, some of which may amount to
war crimes and crimes against humanity. Poland is
appalled by the recent incidents of sexual violence
against women and girls near Bentiu. We call on all
parties in South Sudan to hold the perpetrators to
account and to ensure that transitional justice and
accountability mechanisms are put in place. We also
believe that the Security Council should stand ready to
impose targeted sanctions against those who threaten
the peace and stability of South Sudan and target the
civilian population, including those who are most
vulnerable - women and children.

Despite years of war and disappointment, the people
of South Sudan have faith in the Revitalized Agreement.
They believe that it may be a stepping stone towards
rebuilding their lives and putting the conflict behind
them. With the Revitalized Agreement, the leaders of
South Sudan have a unique opportunity to restore peace
and rebuild the country. It is their sole responsibility
to ensure the full and timely implementation of the
agreement. It also provides them with a chance to
demonstrate real commitment and political maturity
and - by proving that they are finally putting the
people of South Sudan first - to restore the confidence
of the international community.
Last but not least, let me seize this opportunity to
convey my country's appreciation to the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan and to the humanitarian actors
on the ground for their tireless efforts and sacrifice.

