Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, Mr. Jan Kubis, and the Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC), Mr. Fedotov, for their briefings.

Mr. Kubis's absence from New York today is a telling
testament to the importance of following the situation
in the country hour by hour and of the ever-pressing
need of an attentive presence alongside Afghanistan.
I take this opportunity to thank the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for its
exemplary work and to commend all its personnel for
their commitment.

Afghanistan has just experienced a major turning
point in its political life. The holding of two elections,
presidential and provincial, has revealed the high degree
ofprofessionalism ofthe Afghan authorities responsible
for their organization. Moreover, the mass participation
of Afghans, especially women, in both rounds of the
presidential election bore witness to their courage and
to their desire to embrace democratic rules. We extend
our congratulations in particular to the Afghan National
Security Forces for their outstanding performance in
securing that democratic convergence. They thereby
frustrated the aims of those who refuse the resolute
choice made by the Afghans in favour of a future where
violence and coercion are not policy options.

The post-election phase will be as critical as the

preparations for the elections. It is essential that any
challenges to the results, if the latter have not been
arrived at according to the rules and procedures, do not
tarnish the success of Afghan democracy. There can
be no other manner of appointing the future Afghan
President than through full respect for the electoral
process. That holds true for future votes as well.

Both candidates must comply with current
operations and avoid all provocative rhetoric.
Confidence in the balloting and counting of votes
and in the announcement of the results is the key to
the legitimacy of the future President and hence of his
ability to take the reins of the country. In that regard,
we welcome the decision by Mr. Abdullah Abdullah to
resume cooperation with the competent institutions.
A draft presidential statement has been prepared to
that end at the initiative of Australia, welcoming the
commitment of all stakeholders to the success of this
phase.

Afghanistan's launch into a new phase must not
allow us to forget the many challenges the country is
still facing and for which the support of the international
community is necessary. We are concerned by the
upsurge in drug trafficking. I shall not expatiate on the
extent of the problem. We are aware of the efforts being
made by the Afghans on that front, as rightly recalled
by the Secretary-General in his report (S/2014/420).
We know above all that the challenge requires the
commitment of all, especially Afghanistan's regional
partners. All must be done to avoid the worst - that is,
leaving Afghanistan on its own to address an uprising
that, while surely weakened, has not been fully
suppressed. Nor can we abandon the Afghan National
Security Forces, which have proved their robustness
and efficiency, but are worried about the withdrawal
of the international community, with a rebuilt but still
very fragile socioeconomic and institutional fabric.

The draft presidential statement that we shall
adopt today, at the initiative of Russia, makes that
very assessment. It is not a criticism of the Afghans
as new authorities prepare to take power. It is not an
a priori directive framing the future of international
commitment. As one phase of intense international
involvement draws to a close, it is an invitation to
reflect on the shape of our future presence. The draft
presidential statement, which incorporates the broad
principles already laid down by the Council, stresses
that the subject of the fight against drugs will also be
part of our thinking.

The action of the international community in
Afghanistan must indeed adapt. The models applied
hitherto, characterized by a counter-insurgency
strategy, will necessarily evolve. However, we will
not renounce the values for which we fought alongside
Afghans for 10 years. I am thinking in particular of the
role and rights of women in Afghan society.

We have a few months before us to evaluate and
determine how the international community can
support Afghanistan in the long term. In that respect,
the place assigned to the fight against drugs in the
UNAMA mandate will have to be strengthened. All
possible synergies among the actors in Afghanistan
should be supported; while it must need evolve into a
counter-narcotics entity, UNAMA will have to assume
that role.

