Mr. Lake: I would like to begin by thanking the
Secretary-General for his strong words and his strong
commitment to this issue, and my colleagues Leila
Zerrougui for all her very determined work. All of us
at UNICEF are truly grateful for the continuous efforts
of the Security Council to protect the lives and futures
of children who are threatened by armed conflict. We
are also grateful to Malaysia for its leadership in the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.

Nearly 250 million - a number we often bear,
but that is 250 million - children are living in
countries and areas affected by war. Over 30 million
have been displaced by conflict. Millions more have
been physically and emotionally scarred by violence,
witnessing the worst of humankind and seeing things
in their young lives that no child should see. These
numbers alone, and the many others outlined in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2016/360), paint a
devastating picture.

But more, we can never forget that behind these
statistics are millions ofindividual girls and boys. Child
after child after child, millions of individual futures
are at terrible risk - at risk of being killed in attacks
on schools and hospitals; at risk of being maimed by a
landmine or an airstrike; at risk of abduction, sexual
violence and trafficking; and at risk of being recruited
to fight, including, outrageously, as suicide bombers.
They are victimized by warring adults who have lost
any sense of simple morality and legal obligation. We
are not human if we are not outraged by all of this. But
our outrage and anger must be matched by action, not
only, for example, to end the recruitment and use of
children in armed conflict, but also to support them as
they rebuild their lives and contribute to the future of
their societies, and to seek measures that will prevent
other children from suffering the same fate.

While the picture remains grim, we can be
encouraged by our progress to date. Last year alone,
thanks to the tireless efforts of so many of our partners
dedicated to this cause, nearly 10,000 girls and boys
were released from armed forces or armed groups,
and nearly 7,000 accessed services, such as medical
screening, psychosocial support and counselling,
family tracing and reunification, and education and
vocational training. This is all to get them back where
they belong - with loved ones, in school, in a safe
place where they can begin to heal and build the futures
they deserve.

We also welcome the progress that individual
countries are making on their action plans to prevent and
end the recruitment and use ofchildren in armed conflict,
including through the Children, Not Soldiers campaign.
Governments are enacting legislation and establishing
procedures to keep children from being recruited. That
includes age-assessment protocols to keep children
from entering the military in Myanmar, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Afghanistan, and legislation
enacted to criminalize child recruitment in countries
where no such laws existed before.

In Colombia, children's rights are being woven
into the peace agreement being negotiated in Havana,
including a pilot initiative to release and provide
assistance to children involved in the conflict. This is
an important first step not only for these children, but
for the many more who must follow - and indeed, a big
step for Colombia's future. Another example was the
signing just four months ago by the Government of the
Sudan of an action plan to prevent the recruitment and
use of children by its security forces.

But there is much more to be done beyond
preventing and ending recruitment. The scale of all the
violations against children - and indeed, the stakes
of the violations for their societies - demand that all
parties to conflict do far more to protect Children's
rights in conflict, whether they are tragically drawn
into the fighting as combatants or have their health,
education and very lives jeopardized by it. The United
Nations monitoring and reporting mechanism on grave
violations against children in situations of armed
conflict continues to help define the full scale of the
crisis by providing vital information on the unspeakable
atrocities they have experienced and witnessed. Using
that information, we must and will continue working
with parties to conflict to better prevent violations
of the rights of children in armed conflicts and help
shape programmes and services that can brighten these
children's futures. That includes focused action in three
particular key areas: explosive weapons and remnants
of war, health care and education.

First, I note the use of explosive weapons in densely
populated areas. These weapons accounted for almost
44,000 deaths and injuries last year alone. When they
were used in densely populated areas, nine out of ten
victims were civilians. Not only does the use of these
weapons kill and maim children; not only does it deny
these children safe access to hospitals, schools and
water facilities; but it also results in new and permanent
disabilities among children and makes life even more
difficult and dangerous for those already living with
disabilities. Children are the most disadvantaged and
vulnerable in any conflict, and children living with
disabilities are even more so.

We all should call on all parties to conflict to
commit to protecting children by changing the way
they wage their wars, including by ending the use of
explosive weapons in densely populated areas. We
should call on them to join the ban on landmines and
cluster munitions. Children make up about half of those
killed and injured by cluster munitions. We should call
on them to share information and include provisions in
ceasefire and peace agreements that will expedite the
clearance of unexploded ordnance and provide targeted
risk education to make communities safer. We should
call on them to protect children with disabilities during
military operations and in evacuation plans. And as
always, we should continue calling on them to allow
humanitarian aid to reach those most in need.

Secondly, I refer to health care. Beyond their
illegality and immediate devastating impact, attacks
against health workers and facilities have far-reaching
consequences for children, their communities and
health-care systems. All parties to conflict must protect
and allow for the safe delivery of health care to these
children and their families because every child has a
right to health even in the midst of conflict - indeed,
especially in the midst of conflict.

Thirdly, education is key. As with attacks against
health facilities, the devastating impact of attacks on
schools for children and the future of their societies
cannot be overstated, which is why the Education
Cannot Wait fund aims to reach those millions of
young people whose education has been disrupted by
crises, including by conflicts. Education improves their
futures and is therefore vital to the futures of their
communities and societies.

Our progress to date has shown that the children
trapped by conflicts are not beyond our reach. With
the support of Governments, the global community
and all parties to conflict, we can and indeed must help
these young lives to emerge from the shadows of war,
not only through our resolutions, but also through our
resolve; not only through our outrage, but also through
our action.
