El Salvador reaffirms its commitment to peacebuilding and sustaining peace as a fundamental part of the work of the United Nations. We would highlight the close linkages that exist among peace and security, sustainable development, human rights and international cooperation. El Salvador believes that the current crisis resulting from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has exposed existing inequalities and vulnerabilities. Beyond its impacts on health, it has had profound social, economic and political consequences. It has given rise to major challenges in terms of peace and security and has the potential to trigger or intensify violence and conflicts, which could reverse the achievements registered in recent years in terms of peace. In that respect, El Salvador believes that the persistent contemporary challenges to international peace and security, including as inequality and climate change, have made clear that the best way to prevent conflicts is through the effective implementation of commitments on sustainable development and the protection and promotion of human rights. Based on the experience it gained in its peace process and the challenges it currently faces, El Salvador recognizes the importance of implementing coherent, coordinated and multidimensional responses to current challenges. In that context, El Salvador believes that the main challenge facing the United Nations peacebuilding architecture is to tackle factors of instability and conflict. Current tensions and the potential increase in the number of conflicts in States and societies as a consequence of the COVID-19 pandemic require a focus on the need for a stronger peacebuilding architecture. To that end, El Salvador wishes to emphasize the following aspects. First, coherence and complementarity among the principal organs of the United Nations are seen as essential to peacebuilding. It is vital to strengthen the advisory role of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and ensure its closer cooperation with other United Nations bodies, while abiding by their respective mandates. Likewise, we deem it relevant to support efforts to ensure greater flexibility in the PBC's methods of work and an increase in the number of countries, regions and issues under its consideration. Secondly, we consider it necessary to accelerate and intensify the implementation of the resolutions on women and peace and security and on youth, peace and security - issues that, from El Salvador's perspective, should remain on the Security Council's agenda. Initiatives and solutions must be inclusive and people-centred, which implies the systematic inclusion of women and young people in peace processes and decision-making processes. Thirdly, El Salvador believes that ensuring that peacebuilding processes have sufficient, predictable and sustained resources remains the greatest challenge. In the context of the global economic recession, which is putting considerable pressure on the system for coping with the pandemic and its effects, we run the risk of seeing peacebuilding initiatives being weakened. In that respect, we consider it relevant to strengthen the commitment of Member States to maintaining and increasing their investments in peacebuilding initiatives in order to contribute to post-pandemic reconstruction. El Salvador believes that, in order to achieve all of the goals I mentioned, we must strengthen the linkages between peacebuilding architecture review processes and the repositioning of the United Nations system, with the objective of ensuring that those processes can mutually reinforce one another and allow progress to be made through a more coherent and holistic approach to peacebuilding, while laying out a clear and concrete path towards fulfilling the commitments that remain pending. Finally, in the context of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the Organization and the beginning of the Decade of Action for the Sustainable Development Goals, political will on the part of Member States is key to translating commitments into concrete and tangible results, in line with our promise to leave no one behind set out in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, which is the Organization's most important instrument for conflict prevention.
