Mrs. Junod (International Committee of the Red Cross) (spoke in French): I should like first of all, on
behalf of the International Committee of the Red Cross,
to thank you, Madam President, as well as the other
members of the Council, for allowing me to take the
floor in this discussion of children and armed conflict.
Our grave concern about this issue is part of the larger
question of the protection of civilian populations which
lies at the heart of the Committee's mandate. The plight
of children, of all the victims of war, is undoubtedly
the most tragic. They have been maimed, orphaned and
separated from their kin; they have witnessed or even
perpetrated unspeakable atrocities; and they have been
deprived of education and traumatized for life. Entire
generations and societies have mortgaged their future
to pay for their terrible past.

We can no longer ignore the fact that one day a
representative or one of our humanitarian colleagues,
may lose his or her life because a child soldier,
brainwashed or drugged, has targeted him or her. But
who could have imagined even a few years ago that the
Security Council would be considering such problems?
Today's discussion, which follows up on the historic
resolution 1261 (1999), is a hopeful sign, because it
attests to the universal awareness of the urgent need for
concerted action on the part of the international
community to try to alleviate the consequences of war
for children. In this regard, I should like to pay tribute
to the vigorous, enthusiastic and tireless advocacy
efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Olara Otunnu.

Whether in its role as guardian of international
humanitarian law and legal expert, or in its operational
activities, the International Committee of the Red
Cross has for a long time paid great attention to
children during and after armed conflicts. I should like
to give the Council a brief account of the efforts that
we have been making in this area at the legal and
operational levels, and in the context of the programme
of action of the International Red Cross and Red
Crescent Movement.

At the legal level, the ICRC, as an expert in
humanitarian law, has contributed to all the work
undertaken by the conferences that have led to
significant developments in international law with
regard to the protection of children, from the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its Optional
Protocol on the recruitment of children through the
Ottawa Treaty to the Statute of the International
Criminal Court.

I shall confine myself to a few comments on the
recently adopted Optional Protocol. The formal
embodiment of the prohibition on recruiting children
under the age of 18 or their participation in hostilities
was the most important objective. Moreover, the
Protocol would have had no great meaning if it had not
taken into account non-State actors. The ICRC
welcomes the fact that this long-term undertaking has
ultimately been successful, and we encourage States to
ratify it as soon as possible.

However, the instrument is not without defects. It
does not prohibit indirect participation, and it
authorizes voluntary recruitment of children under 18
without defining "voluntary", leaving a loophole for
abuse. Furthermore, non-State entities are bound only
by a moral obligation. In this regard, it should be noted
that the Additional Protocol II to the Geneva
Conventions applicable to non-international armed
conflicts, ratified by 149 States, goes much further in
this regard. It prohibits recruitment and participation in
hostilities of children under 14, and gives the same
legal obligations to parties to the conflict, whether
Government authorities or armed opposition. It is also
important to bear in mind that recruitment and
participation in hostilities of children under 15 are
classified as a war crime in the Statute of the
International Criminal Court.

While legal protection of children has been
greatly developed, much remains to be done with
regard to ratification and implementation. The advisory
services of the ICRC are available to States to assist
them in developing national legislation to implement
humanitarian law.

At the operational level, the specific needs of
children, particularly in nutrition and health, are taken
into account in assistance programmes directed at
civilian populations that have suffered from armed
conflict, whether they have remained in their homes or
have been displaced.

In the context of protection activities for
prisoners, the ICRC takes action to ensure that children
are detained in places where they are separated from
adults and it calls for their release whenever possible.

The ICRC's action in favour of unaccompanied
children and the search for their relatives, the exchange
of messages and the reuniting of families are the area
in which the institution's experience is richest.
Agencies such as the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF) and non-governmental organizations are
also active in this field. In the report (A/54/2000) of
the Secretary-General to the Millennium Assembly
there is a proposal, at the request of the International
Rescue Committee, to establish a world network using
a database to search for disappeared children - Child
Connect. ICRC, whose working methods have evolved
with the use of computerised techniques, is now
studying the best way to cooperate in this initiative
while retaining its approach and criteria for dealing
with the constraints of situations of armed conflict.

With regard to rehabilitation and reintegration,
the various entities of the International Red Cross and
Red Crescent Movement - the ICRC, the Federation
and the national societies - began preparing in 1995 a
programme of action for children who are victims of
armed conflict. In addition to the principle of non-
recruitment before the age of 18, the purpose is to take
specific measures to protect and assist children,
including in the rehabilitation and reintegration phase.
Programmes, particularly those concerning
psychological and social rehabilitation, are now being
prepared by national societies, with the support of the
ICRC or the Federation. The States parties to the
Geneva Conventions that participate in the Movement's
conferences reaffirmed their full support for the
programme of action at the 27th international
conference last November.

I wish in conclusion to express the fervent hope
of the ICRC that significant progress will be made at
the special session of the General Assembly devoted to
the follow-up to the World Summit for Children, to
take place next year, and which your country, Madam
President, will have the honour of presiding over. The
follow-up to the major conferences obliges States to
present reports on their initiatives. We hope that the
universal awareness of the magnitude and acuteness of
the problem of the protection of children in armed
conflict will give some an uneasy conscience and
prompt them to take action.

