Mr. Duddridge (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Sir, for convening this important and timely debate.
I join others in thanking the Secretary-General for
his briefing.

Bringing peace to the Great Lakes area has been
one of the most difficult challenges faced by the
Council. Decades of violence and chaos have left
millions dead - millions without hope or, indeed,
a home; millions vulnerable to attack from armed
groups. The Charter of the United Nations pledges to
save successive generations from the scourge of war.
In the 70 years since we collectively made that pledge,
nowhere has it rung more hollow than in the Great
Lakes region.

Nowhere is that more obvious today than in
Burundi. When I visited the country in December last
year, I heard horrific stories of suffering and abuse.
People spoke of torture, disappearances, extradjudicial
killings, mass graves and murder, and indiscriminate
raids on their homes. I met with health workers who
were running out of medicine for sick children, human
rights activists living in fear for their lives, and
traders who were helpless against the collapse of their
economy, which prior to the troubles was doing so well,
as we heard earlier. In January, the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights noted that extrajudicial
killings were increasing, despite the Government's
claim that the situation was normal. Evidence of nine
mass graves - one of which contained at least 100
bodies - was cited in the same report, again denied by
the Burundian Government. And the violence continues
today. Abductions and killings are creating a climate of
fear. Just last month, Human Rights Watch presented
credible evidence of the increasing and worrying use of
organized sexual violence.

The United Kingdom is committed to doing
everything in its power to seek a peaceful solution to
the situation in Burundi. We must not, collectively
or individually, repeat the mistakes of the past. We
thank the Secretary-General for his leadership and
members of the Council for their leadership and active
engagement, particularly during their second joint
visit to Bujumbura and Burundi earlier this year. We
welcome the pledges made by the African Union (AU)
and the East African Community to take decisive
action to prevent human rights abuses anc crimes
against humanity more generally in Africa. We in
the United Kingdom stand ready to support the AU.
We thank Uganda for its constructive participation
in this mediation process, and we also welcome the
participation of His Excellency Benjamin Mkapa,
former President of Tanzania, in these efforts and offer
him our strongest support and assistance.

It is right that the international community should
play its part. However, let us be clear. Let us be under
no misunderstanding. The primary responsibility for
this crisis lies with the Burundian Government. The
Burundian Government has failed in its fundamental
duty to its nation to support the security and safety of
its own people. It has within its power the power to
change things. Burundi has found a pathway to peace
before, and it must do so again. President Nkurunziza
must deliver on his promises to the Secretary-General
and representatives of the African Union.

The first step is simple. The Government must
participate in a fully inclusive dialogue with all
parties - not just those whom President Nkurunziza
feels happy dealing with. All parties must be included,
as peace among just a few is no peace at all. We have
learnt time and time again elsewhere in the world
that, for peace to endure, communities need to resolve
conflict peacefully. The United Kingdom believes
genuinely that democratic and accountable governance
is the best foundation for stability. That means a frank,
lively and uncensored national debate, an active,
representative civil society, and a freely operating
media. It also means timely and democratic transition
of power to maintain lasting stability. Failure to allow
that transition puts the progress made across the Great
Lakes at risk. We urge all countries of the region to use
electoral processes to demonstrate their commitment to
peace, stability and accountability.

Today, that is particularly pertinent to the Republic
of the Congo, which held elections yesterday following
a referendum in which a national debate can be said,
sadly, to have been neither frank, lively or uncensored.

Looking across the border, 2016 is a crucial year
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The United
Kingdom is a particularly close long-term partner of
the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and we want them to enjoy stability and prosperity.
We stand by resolution 2211 (2015). The Democratic
Republic of the Congo must hold elections this year,
in accordance with its Constitution. With every missed
milestone in its democratic journey, the Government
loses credibility with the United Kingdom and, I
believe, with the Council. It breaks a promise not to us,
but to its people, threatening further instability in that
already fragile region.

We know that the process is not easy, and we are
ready to help. We are ready to help with funding and
support for the electoral process. The Council has
also offered its full support to the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and I expect that
to be repeated when the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is renewed later this week. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo must make the most
of this support, and seize the opportunity to show
leadership across the region.

The United Kingdom believes in the enormous
potential of the countries and the people of the Great
Lakes. That is why we have maintained our strong
friendships and support. But their fates are inextricably
linked, so their Government must work together if this
potential is to be realized. The Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region, signed by the countries
of the region in 2013, offered a comprehensive, joint
approach to the region's problems, but not enough has
been done to deliver it.

We all know that peace and security are
fundamental building blocks for economic growth.
Together, they hold the key to unlocking the potential of
the people of the region. The Private Sector Investment
Conference for the Great Lakes Region of Africa, held
in Kinshasa - of which we have heard something
earlier in the debate - last month highlighted how
poverty fuels conflict in the region. But it also showed
that investment, economic growth and job creation
can and will build peace. In recognition of that, the
United Kingdom recently appointed trade envoys to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda.

I urge leaders of the region to play their part in
bringing peace, making the measures set out in the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework a reality
and uniting to make long-term peace and prosperity. As
they strive to do so, the people of the Great Lakes region

will have the full support of the United Kingdom - and,
I hope, of the Council.

