Mr. Vieira de Mello (spoke in Spanish): It is an
honour to be briefing the Council today under your
stewardship, Madam, only three days after our meeting
in Baghdad.

In addressing all present, I wish particularly to
greet those three who are in this room representing the
Governing Council of Iraq. I am here today to
introduce the Secretary-General's report on the work of
the United Nations in implementing the mandate
accorded it under resolution 1483 (2003). My focus
will lie particularly on those aspects of the mandate
outlined in operative paragraph 8 of that document.

In this briefing, I shall seek to complement, not
duplicate, the text of the report. I shall aim to provide a
picture in words of the current situation in Iraq, brief
the Council on the latest developments with regard to
the political process currently under way and outline
those areas in which the United Nations, now and in
the immediate future, can help in the implementation of
that resolution.

Before I commence my briefing proper, however,
let me begin by paying tribute to the extraordinary
people of Iraq.

In recent weeks, my colleagues and I have been
awed by the evocation of the history of a great country.
Babylon was described by Herodotus as far back as
450 BC, when it was already thousands of years old, as
being unparalleled in its magnificence. Iraq's
contribution to our understanding and appreciation of
law, of science and of art - indeed, its contribution to
human civilization - has been immense.

This should be and is a source of pride to the
Iraqi people - a pride that is today deeply hurt. Iraq is
something other than a past repressive regime; it is
something other than a pariah State; it is not simply the
scene of conflict, deprivation and abuse. It is a country
with a singularly rich history. That its immediate past
has been so terrible is a tragedy on which we all must
reflect. The Iraqi people deserve far more than their
recent years have afforded them.

It is the cornerstone of the Secretary-General's
approach to the work of the United Nations in Iraq, as
outlined in his report to the Council, that everything we
do must be for the benefit of the people and country of
Iraq; must be decided on by or in consultation with
them; and must be aimed at enabling as soon as
possible the full restoration of Iraq's full sovereignty
and return to the community of nations. The United
Nations looks forward, as quickly as possible, to
welcoming back one of its founding Members.

(spoke in English)

With respect to the political process, for me, on
arriving in Iraq at the beginning of June and not being
an expert on the country, only the first step was
obvious, as the Secretary-General just pointed out. It
was to speak with as many Iraqis as possible to find out
what it was that they wanted for themselves and how it
was that they saw we might be of assistance in
realizing these aspirations.

I have thus spent the past weeks travelling the
country and meeting with a wide array of Iraqis:
politicians, civil society leaders, lawyers, spiritual
leaders, doctors, journalists, artists and human rights
activists. From my preliminary discussions, a number
of consistent themes emerge.

First, they want to see themselves back at the
helm of their country. They also want to see the arrival
of security and of the rule of law. Equally, Iraqis want
to see the restoration of basic services: reliable
electricity, clean water, schools back up and running,
hospitals functioning and so on. They want to see the
establishment of permanent, Iraqi, representative and
credible institutions that operate in their service. In all
these areas, they - including those who are critical,
even resentful of what they perceive to be the United
Nations past record in their country - unanimously
call for an energetic, centre-stage role for the
Organization.

These are the traumas, the anxieties, the
aspirations and the frustrations of the Iraqi people with
which we all must empathize and to which we must
respond if we are to succeed in this endeavour.

The formation on 13 July of Iraq's Governing
Council was a significant step towards that goal. As the
report of the Secretary-General outlines, that body has
been invested with significant executive powers,
agreed jointly between the members of the Governing
Council and the Coalition Provisional Authority (CPA),
with particular but not exclusive emphasis on foreign
affairs, finance, security and the constitutional process.
The Governing Council will soon be appointing Iraqi
interim ministers and, importantly, designating Iraqi
representation in international forums.

We now have an institution that, while not
democratically elected, can be viewed as broadly
representative of the various constituencies in Iraq. As
such, its establishment is a welcome development for
the international community and for the United
Nations. It means that we now have a formal body of
senior and distinguished Iraqi counterparts, with
credibility and authority, with whom we can chart the
way forward. For decisions of national importance to
be authoritative, they must be seen to be the product of
Iraqi decision-making of as representative a nature as is
possible.

With the formation of the Governing Council, we
now enter a new stage that succeeds the disorienting
power vacuum that followed the fall of the previous
regime. On my return to Baghdad, I intend to sit with
the Governing Council to see how best we might
develop together the areas of activity the Secretary-
General outlined in his report, as well as in any other
areas it believes we might be of assistance. It is our
firm intention to assist, advise, support and help
consolidate this initial embodiment of Iraqi executive
authority.

I commend the Iraqi leaders on the Governing
Council for their statesmanship in assuming this
historic responsibility. I also commend the Coalition
Provisional Authority - and in particular
Ambassadors Bremer, Sawers and Crocker - for their
efforts in seeking to ensure the full implementation of
resolution 1483 (2003) as soon as possible. As the
Security Council has resolved, the day when Iraqis
govern themselves must come quickly. The formation
of the Governing Council is a necessary step in that
direction. I am thus delighted that the Security Council
has the opportunity today to meet formally with Mr.
Pachachi, Mr. Chalabi and Ms. Al-Hashemi to hear
from that delegation their vision for the transition and
beyond.

The process leading to the establishment of the
Governing Council was complicated but bears hope for
the future. It is truly unprecedented that Iraq is going
through the present legal, political and military
circumstances. The making of the Governing Council
required intense consultations and compromise on all
sides. I am convinced that this experience will stand
Iraq in good stead in dealing with the many challenges
that lie ahead.

Iraq has many fundamental political issues on
which to decide, not least determining the process by
which a constitution can be drawn up, as well as the
timing and precise nature of elections. These will need
to be held in order, in the words of resolution 1483
(2003), for an internationally recognized,
representative Government to come into being.

For the constitution to be viewed as credible, it is
essential that its drafting be an Iraqi-driven process.
All are in agreement on that. I thus welcome the
Governing Council's intention to make that an early
focus of its deliberations. We stand ready, should the
Governing Council so desire, to share our experience in
this field.

Preparing for elections is a complex, time-
consuming matter. I am thus pleased that we will soon
welcome to Iraq a visit by the Electoral Assistance
Division of the Department of Political Affairs to begin
discussion with the Governing Council and the
Coalition Provisional Authority on possible electoral
frameworks and the resulting calendar. That process
cannot begin too soon, not least to serve as a tangible
demonstration of intent that full sovereignty is to be
restored to Iraq as quickly as possible, and that the
current state of affairs is finite.

As the Secretary-General emphasizes in his
report, now more than ever, Iraq needs the support of
its neighbours. As he just said, immediately prior to my
coming here I visited His Royal Highness Crown
Prince Abdullah of Saudi Arabia, in Taif. I also
travelled to Damascus and Tehran, where I met with
Presidents Al-Assad and Khatami and Foreign
Ministers Al-Shara' and Kharrazi, respectively. In
late June, I accompanied the Secretary-General to
Amman. There, we met with Foreign Ministers Maher,
Muasher and Giil - of Egypt, Jordan and Turkey
respectively - as well as with Secretary-General Amr
Moussa of the League of Arab States. I hope to be
visiting those neighbours, as well as Kuwait, on my
return to the region.

All were concerned to see resolution 1483 (2003)
implemented as quickly as possible. Some were
anxious for reassurance that the Governing Council
was a truly representative and independent body with
genuine executive authority. All, not surprisingly,
desired to see a new Iraq at peace with itself and its
neighbours, and wished the United Nations to take the
lead in achieving that vision.

In turn, I urged all of Iraq's neighbours to play
their supportive role to the full, to embrace the
Governing Council and to provide it with whatever
assistance it may request. As the Secretary-General
pointed out, the aim must be to help consolidate Iraq's
national unity, territorial integrity, stability and
prosperity. In so doing, Iraq's neighbours will
contribute significantly to regional and world peace
and security.

On the issue of security, the political process -
which still has a long way to go - is only one of the
challenges currently facing Iraq. As the Council will be
aware, security in Iraq remains tenuous. Too many are
losing their lives, on an almost daily basis. It is
imperative that security, law and order be restored
throughout Iraq as soon as possible. Without them,
every area of activity will be impacted for the worse.

In the run-up to the formation of the Governing
Council, Iraqis cooperating with the Coalition
Provisional Authority have been the subjects of attacks.
Another disturbing trend has been attacks against Iraqi
police. There have been virtually daily attacks on
coalition forces, which have been widely reported in
the media. In parallel, common law criminality is a
major problem, not helped by Saddam Hussain's
decision, in October last year, to empty the prisons -
with the exception, of course, of political detainees.
The potential impact of this violence must not be
underestimated. It threatens to undermine confidence in
the transition and to shake the resolve of Iraqis
committed to leading their country through this very
delicate period in its history.

The United Nations presence in Iraq remains
vulnerable to any who would seek to target our
Organization, as recent events in Mosul - described in
the Secretary-General's report - illustrate. Our
security continues to rely significantly on the
reputation of the United Nations, our ability to
demonstrate, meaningfully, that we are in Iraq to assist
its people, and our independence. Recent attacks, one
fatal, on the International Organization for Migration,
are also of great concern. I have just been informed this
morning that today in Baghdad a delegate of the
International Committee of the Red Cross was killed in
an incident south of the capital.

In the current context, the coalition has the
primary obligation of restoring and maintaining
security, law and order. The Governing Council, too,
now has policy prerogatives on matters concerning
Iraq's national security. Ultimately, only Iraqis can
fulfil that responsibility on behalf of a national
authority that enjoys credibility, respect and resources.

Although we cannot be, and do not wish to be, a
substitute for the Coalition Provisional Authority in
this field, the United Nations stands ready to lend
modest assistance, in terms of its expertise, in the area
of developing an effective national law and order
capacity. We have much training experience in that
area, not least in the field of human rights. I would
encourage the Coalition Provisional Authority and the
Governing Council to make use of it, as well as of
those offers to assist with police development that I
have received from a number of Member States and
organizations. In the coming weeks, I intend to focus
my discussion with the Coalition Provisional Authority
and the Governing Council on how best that might be
done so as to effectively give life to paragraph 8 (h) of
resolution 1483 (2003).

We are also expecting a visit, at the end of this
month, from our colleagues at the United Nations
Office in Vienna, who will be dispatching an
assessment mission to look into how best strategies
might be developed to deal with different types of
organized crime, and particularly drug smuggling.
Again, I was speaking with my colleague Antonio
Costa about this matter this very morning.

We also stand ready to offer advice on
correctional reform. Establishing a proper prison
system that processes detainees in a timely manner and
that is in accordance with all human rights obligations
is an imperative. We have seconded an experienced
senior colleague from the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo to assist in this area.

With regard to humanitarian assistance, United
Nations activities did not begin in Iraq with resolution
1483 (2003). For a considerable period of time prior to
that much importance was given to this question, and
impressive work has been carried out by the
Organization in the humanitarian field and in the
implementation of the oil-for-food programme.

Immediate humanitarian needs are largely being
met in Iraq today. However, there are still outstanding
requirements; and more are emerging, particularly in
regard to internally displaced persons. The plight of
refugees, as highlighted by the recent welcome visit of
High Commissioner Lubbers, also needs to be resolved
in a measured but comprehensive fashion. Funding for
humanitarian requirements in Iraq has, for the most
part, been generously provided. Of the $2.2 billion
requested in the latest humanitarian appeal launched by
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA), almost $2 billion has been pledged or
contributed. As the Council knows, of that amount $1.1
billion was provided through the oil-for-food
programme, as authorized by resolutions 1472 (2003)
and 1483 (2003). An additional $900 million has been
provided through voluntary contributions. Nonetheless,
additional needs remain largely unmet. The sectors of
emergency rehabilitation, health and demining,
including the disposal of unexploded ordnance, require
particular and urgent support.

With respect to the oil-for-food programme,
given the sheer scale of that programme, its completion
by 21 November 2003 was always going to be a
challenge. With a coordinated and determined effort on
all sides, it should nonetheless prove possible. But
needs will continue to exist far beyond the handover of
the programme, that is, until the economy picks up and
reliance on humanitarian assistance declines.

In the centre and south, good cooperation has
been established between the Coalition Provisional
Authority, the Iraqi line ministries and relevant United
Nations agencies. Work is well under way on the
prioritizing of contracts. However, it should be noted
that the number of contracts being adopted is much
higher than initially envisaged because the
humanitarian phase has been superseded by
rehabilitation and recovery activities much more
quickly than anticipated. In the coming weeks, as the
elements of the reconstruction plan for Iraq and the
2004 national budget are firmed up in advance of the
donors' conference, we can expect that the process
already under way will require some fine-tuning.

In the particular case of the three northern
governorates, the Coalition Provisional Authority has
proposed that the United Nations transfer programme
implementation to the Iraqi authorities at both the
regional and the central levels, with the Authority
providing support and advice at a senior level. We are
preparing a strategy for implementing this handover for
discussion with the Governing Council and the
Authority.

With respect to reconstruction, looking to the
future, there are clearly immense reconstruction needs
in the short and longer terms, not only as a
consequence of the conflict but, maybe even more so,
as a consequence of 13 years of sanctions and
subsequent neglect and decay. As reflected in
resolution 1483 (2003), this reconstruction is not only
of a physical nature; it must also include public
administration, governance, civil society and all the
other vital elements required for a new Iraqi society.

To deal with the diversity and complexity of the
situation, from the first day of my time in Iraq I have
had in my team representatives from the United
Nations Development Programme, the International
Monetary Fund and the World Bank, who have
provided advice to me, as well as to the Iraqis and
Authority counterparts. Building on the experience
acquired by the United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes that have been active in Iraq for years, it
has been a superb success and a model of coordination
and true integration of United Nations efforts. I thank
all the institutions involved for their contribution to
this effort. It should become the template for such
operations in the future.

At the informal meeting hosted by the United

Nations in New York on 24 June - in which some
Council members participated, together with an Iraqi-
led delegation - the international community

expressed clear support for such a reconstruction effort.
For that reason, the United Nations, together with the
World Bank, is carrying out a number of sectoral needs
assessments over the coming months which, in
consultation with the Governing Council, will inform a
donor conference to be held in the autumn on what
Iraq's reconstruction priorities should be.

It will not surprise members to hear that one area
in which I am taking a particularly keen interest is that
of human rights. There are three particular concerns:
how to deal with past abuses; how to ensure that human
rights are protected for all Iraqis in the future, with
particular emphasis on the rights of women; and how to
ensure that human rights are protected and upheld in
Iraq today. All merit close attention.

The human rights violations of the past regime in
Iraq are well known to all. What is perhaps not so clear
is their scale, for that is still emerging. What does seem
to be becoming appallingly apparent, however, is that
those victims who suffered the ultimate violation - the
abuse of their right to life - number in the several
hundreds of thousands. One can reasonably suppose
that the unlawful incarceration, torture and ill treatment
of others took place to at least as horrific an extent.

It is for the people of Iraq to determine how to
deal with those challenges. How effectively they do so
will significantly affect the extent to which they will be
able to achieve harmony for their future. Equally, how
effectively they deal with the past will go a long way
towards ensuring that such egregious crimes will never
again be possible. The past and the future, as always,
are inextricably linked.

Many of the issues that are being discussed, in
particular the past crimes inflicted on the Iraqi people,
will be painful and complex for the people of Iraq to
address. Given that, and given the gravity of the crimes
in question, I believe there is much merit in
considering the establishment of a mixed Iraqi and
international panel of experts to consider in detail the
options that would best suit Iraq.

The United Nations will continue to facilitate
dialogue on those issues and, together with my office
in Geneva, lend our experience where required. We
also look forward to a visit in the near future by the
Special Rapporteur of the United Nations Commission
on Human Rights on human rights in Iraq, Mr. Andreas
Mavrommatis. I urge the Governing Council to pay
particular attention to developing a national human
rights action plan to enable Iraqis to deal with the
myriad human rights issues in a coordinated and
comprehensive manner, including through the possible
establishment of an independent national human rights
institution. The forthcoming constitutional discussions
offer a unique opportunity for integrating such human
rights concerns in the elaboration of Iraq's new
fundamental law.

Access to information is a major problem for
Iraqis today. Currently, there is no national mass media
capacity that is seen to be independent, objective and
comprehensive. After being denied that right for so
long, Iraqis are keen for change. I thus intend to
explore with the Iraqi media, as well as with the
Governing Council, the possibility of assisting - as
we have done elsewhere - in the establishment of a
national, independent and impartial news radio station,
together with international donors and non-
governmental organizations. Clarity and certainty of
information will be essential if peace of mind is to be
achieved and frustrations allayed.

Today, Iraq finds itself in an awkward situation: a
post-conflict situation, but with hostilities occurring
every day; awash with weapons, many legitimately
present, many more not; and under military occupation.
In this tense context, the protection of human rights
inevitably becomes a concern. Iraqis have raised with
me their current fears and anxieties in this regard,
which the Secretary-General has reflected in his report.
Likewise, human rights non-governmental
organizations are playing a critical and helpful role in
monitoring current developments.

I have raised with Ambassadors Bremer and
Sawers concerns regarding searches, arrests, the
treatment of detainees, the duration of preventive
detention, access by family members and lawyers and
the establishment of a central prison database. They
have been receptive and have provided me with
responses on action being taken to address and resolve
all those questions. Last Friday, with Ambassador
Bremer and his senior colleagues dealing with the
police and correctional services, I visited the main Iraqi
detention complex at Abu Ghraib, which is currently
under rehabilitation, as well as a nearby camp where
detainees are temporarily being held. That afforded a
further opportunity to review all such concerns with
relevant officials.

In short, I have expressed the imperative need -
and the Coalition Provisional Authority has agreed, of
course - for the coalition forces to demonstrate
through their actions the importance of exemplary
compliance with international humanitarian and human
rights law. Anything less must not prevail in today's
Iraq.

(spoke in Spanish)

By way of summing up, let me make the
following comments on what remains to be done and
how the United Nations might help.

First, I believe that the Governing Council
possesses credible executive authority and that it is
broadly representative of the various constituencies
existing in Iraq.
Secondly, for it to succeed, the Governing
Council will need the full support of the international
community and of the Iraqi people, whose trust and
respect it will need to earn anew each day. It must be
empowered to deliver tangible improvements to the
welfare of the population while not becoming the
object of criticism because of the legal obligations of
the Coalition Provisional Authority in the current
situation.

Thirdly, there will need to be a clear timetable,
laid out as soon as possible, for the earliest possible
restoration of Iraqi sovereignty. I have stressed that
point before, but it is worth repeating. Iraqis need to be
aware that the current stage of affairs will soon come to
an end. They need to know that stability will be
restored and that the occupation will end. The
articulation of a clear timetable with definite
milestones will afford them that comfort and will
contribute to stabilizing the situation.

Fourthly, I believe that we have reason to be
optimistic about the future of Iraq. But we have little
margin for error. The situation remains fragile. Iraqis
know better than anyone how, when and at what pace
to proceed in their own country. Our greatest
contribution will be to follow their lead and, when
necessary, to assist them in achieving consensus among
themselves. Finally, as I mentioned earlier, the
Authority must exercise its leadership to provide
security and restore law and order.

How can the United Nations help? Resolution
1483 (2003) provides considerable scope for the United
Nations to play an effective role in Iraq. It is not a clear
mandate, but at the same time the situation in Iraq is
exceptional, and therefore it requires an exceptional
approach. The lack of clarity allows for the United
Nations role in Iraq to emerge and develop as the
situation on the ground evolves. The report of the
Secretary-General indicates a number of areas in which
the United Nations can assist and proposes a structure
that should be constantly reviewed as the oil-for-food
programme comes to an end and as humanitarian
activities wind down and reconstruction needs grow.
During this new stage of United Nations participation
in Iraq, particular attention will be paid to recruiting
and developing the capacity of national staff.

In short, the report emphasizes that we must be
flexible and able to respond quickly to calls for
assistance when they arise. It also points out that
implementation of the mandate will be a work in
constant progress, with some guidelines that we will
develop in the short term and others that will naturally
emerge at a later date.

What the United Nations cannot do is replace the
Coalition Provisional Authority. Nor should it ever
replace the rightful role that Iraqis must play in shaping
the future of their country. What the United Nations
can do is help build consensus among Iraqis and
between Iraqis and the Coalition Provisional Authority.

We have tentatively developed some areas of our
programme of action. The reform of key institutions
and the establishment of electoral and constitutional
processes, for example, are essentially political
undertakings with serious implications for the future of
Iraq. It is therefore essential that the Iraqi population
set the agenda and that the United Nations then support
its implementation, as it may be required. For that
reason, much of our plan has yet to be written and will
have to be discussed with the Governing Council.

Before the end of the year, it is the Secretary-
General's intention, as indicated in his report, to put in
place a team of experts under the overall coordination
of his Special Representative. They will be able to
respond effectively to requests for assistance that we
have received and that we expect to receive. I wish to
thank my colleagues and my team in the United
Nations Office of the Humanitarian Coordinator in Iraq
and the Secretariat for having ensured that these first
weeks of our work under resolution 1483 (2003) have
proceeded without major delays.

I wish to make a final comment. Many Iraqis with
whom I have spoken have expressed a sense of
betrayal: that the international community did not
sufficiently recognize their plight. I believe that we
owe a debt to the people of Iraq, and that the best way
of honouring it is through our words and deeds and
through our commitment to support the rehabilitation
of their country now and in the future. As the
Secretary-General said, the people of Iraq deserve no
less.

