Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Mr. James Swan, Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and Mr. Francisco Madeira, Head of the African Union Mission in Somalia, for their comprehensive briefings. We would also like to thank Mr. Dan Smith, Director of the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, for his briefing. Russia fully supports the efforts of the Federal Government of Somalia to achieve domestic political and economic stability and to implement democratic changes. We continue to closely follow the situation in the country and the steps taken by its authorities to prepare for this year's key event - the general elections. We are pleased to note that the Somalis have managed to achieve progress in that regard. The most significant achievement was clearly last week's adoption of the very important electoral law. We also welcome the consultations launched in Mogadishu earlier this month to revise the federal constitution. Furthermore, we would like to welcome the contribution of the Federal Government to normalizing the situation in the Horn of Africa as a whole. The reaffirmation at the end of January by President Mohamed Farmajo and the leaders of Ethiopia and Eritrea of their commitment to earlier agreements as well as the plan of action that they adopted are a good illustration of that. At the same time, much remains to be done. We trust that the Somalis will continue to honour their commitments. We agree with the assessment in the Secretary- General's report (S/2020/121) that the lack of a constructive dialogue between Mogadishu and the federal member states remains a significant factor that hinders political progress and national reconciliation efforts in Somalia. Indeed, without the resumption of that dialogue, the numerous problems facing the country risk remaining unresolved. We call on the Somali authorities to step up their efforts to establish links with the authorities of Jubaland and Puntland and to resolve political differences in Galmudug. We believe that a significant contribution to resolving those issues could be made by setting up a permanent mechanism for communication with the federal member states, including Somaliland. Al-Shabaab continues to pose a major threat to the country's security. We are seriously concerned about the significant increase in terrorist activity by its fighters and their use of ever more sophisticated improvised explosive devices. In that regard, we would like to recall that in August 2019 our delegation asked the United Kingdom, as penholder on Somalia, to organize a briefing to the Council by the Director of United Nations Mine Action Service on the threat posed by those devices in Somalia; we could have heard from him today. However, unfortunately, our request fell on deaf ears. We still believe thatthe issue of improvised explosive devices warrants just as much attention as other aspects of the situation that we have considered today. We are convinced that, in order to tackle the terrorist threat in Somalia, there is a need for effective joint efforts to build a unified national security architecture. Progress in this area should be decisive with a view to handing over responsibility for the security of the country to the Somalis themselves. The process should also take into account developments in the situation on the ground. At the moment, we agree that the African Union Mission to Somalia is an extremely important player in fighting Al-Shabaab. The international community should continue to take steps to increase the operational readiness of the African peacekeeping units and the Somali National Army. Considering the complex humanitarian situation in Somalia, Russia continues to provide assistance to the country and to Somali refugees in neighbouring countries. We do so through targeted contributions to the relevant funds of the World Food Programme. We also intend to continue to train Somali civilian personnel. In conclusion, I would like to assure the Council of our country's firm commitment to continue working intensively in the Security Council to resolve the crisis in Somalia, while respecting the country's sovereignty and territorial integrity.
