Mr. Sidibe (Mali) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, it is a pleasure for the delegation of Mali
to see the Security Council meeting under your
presidency to consider the situation in Afghanistan. I
wish to welcome the presence of Secretary-General
Kofi Annan and to thank him for his important
statement at this important meeting of the Council. Our
thanks go also to Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan. We are grateful for his high-quality
briefing this morning, which contained a clear concept
and vision. It was very useful.

I would now like to make the following
comments.

First, like other delegations, we too are concerned
by the humanitarian situation in Afghanistan. As
indicated by the Special Representative, this situation
requires sustained efforts on the part of the
international community. We believe that everything
should be done to enable the quick delivery of food aid
within Afghanistan and that it should be distributed to
Afghans within Afghanistan and in neighbouring
countries. The fate of the most vulnerable groups of
people in Afghanistan, particularly women, children
and the elderly, should be given special attention.
Likewise, it is crucial to give special attention to the
plight of refugees in neighbouring countries,
particularly in Pakistan and Iran. We thank the
Governments that have agreed to keep open the roads
through which relief is delivered, and we appeal to
Member States to come to the assistance of these
countries so that they can deal with the constant flow
of Afghan refugees.

In this context, we think that the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs should continue
to play an important role in coordinating emergency
relief assistance for Afghanistan. We also congratulate
the humanitarian organizations for the outstanding
work they have done, and we encourage them to
continue their efforts for the Afghan people within the
country and in neighbouring countries. To this end, we
think it is imperative to ensure the security of the
personnel of humanitarian organizations. We encourage
all those who have contributed so generously to the
United Nations relief fund to speed up disbursement of
their pledges. In this respect, the international
community should live up to its promises made at the
beginning of the conflict, whereby the Afghan people
would not become a target of war and that they would
not be forgotten.

My second comment has to do with the political
situation. Mali believes that the United Nations has a
decisive role to play, particularly by facilitating the
transition from war to peace and by assisting the
Afghan people to participate actively in a broad-based
dialogue at the end of which an overall political plan
could be worked out and executed. It is crucial that the
territorial integrity of Afghanistan be preserved and
that the key element of this plan be the Afghan people,
who have the right to live freely and with dignity. The
international community should seek to set up a broad-
based Government, one that is multi-ethnic and fully
representative of the Afghan people. Accordingly, Mali
welcomes the talks that Mr. Brahimi has had with the
authorities of Pakistan, Afghan leaders living in
Pakistan, Iranian authorities and other leaders of the
region in order to find a consensus solution to the
conflict.

We welcome the holding of a meeting, in the
margins of the General Assembly's general debate, of
the representatives of the "six plus two" group, and we
urge all parties to abide by the principles of
international law and international humanitarian law
following the capture by the Northern Alliance of
Mazar-e-Sharif and the fall of Kabul.

In conclusion, I would stress the role that the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative
continue to play in Afghanistan. We encourage and
fully support all of the efforts under way to find a
positive outcome to the Afghan conflict. Mali reiterates
its strong support for any initiative to settle the crisis
that would reflect the higher interests of the Afghan
people.

