Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to reiterate
today our solidarity with and our condolences to France
for the terrorist attacks on French soil, as well as to
Lebanon, the Russian Federation, Iraq, Syria and the
many countries that are being assaulted on a daily basis
by the terrible phenomenon of terrorism. We welcome
the presence of the Secretary of State for International
Development of the United Kingdom, and express
our gratitude for the words of Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon; Mr. Olof Skoog, Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission; and Ms. Ouided Bouchamaoui, President
of the Tunisian Confederation of Industry, Trade and
Handicrafts, together with those of the other ministers
and representatives participating in this debate.

The interrelationship between sustainable
development, international peace and security and
human rights is reflected in the many statements
issued by the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council and the Security Council, based on their
respective perspectives and mandates. Socioeconomic
imbalances are often one of the main root causes of
conflicts. Venezuela considers it extremely important
to give people the necessary means for creating
foundations for inclusive, sustainable, fair and equitable
development. Development rooted in social justice must
be part of any process or model that guarantees peace.

During the sixty-ninth session of the General
Assembly, all countries, many of them represented by
Heads of State and Government, engaged in a broad
inclusive participatory process and discussed issues of
an economic and social nature. They agreed on important
development principles and objectives and established
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1), including a follow-up and
review mechanism, with a view to the achievement
of the Sustainable Development Goals. A broad
consensus was reached on giving differential treatment
to countries with different levels of development, on
the ground that there is no one-size-fits-all model of
development, and on the need to create and implement
various financial support and cooperation approaches
to help achieve sustainable development.

For us, it is solely up to the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council to address these
economic and social issues, including the process
of following up and monitoring the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. We again wish to draw
attention to the fact that it is the intention of the
Security Council to encroach upon areas that are within
the exclusive competence of other organs of the United
Nations, in particular the General Assembly.

The President's concept note (S/2015/845, annex)
insists that the Security Council has a role to play when
addressing what it believes to be other root causes of
conflicts. In particular, it maintains that the Council
can contribute to peacebuilding by promoting and
supporting electoral processes, constitution-making and
the building of inclusive and transparent institutions.
On that point, we should note that the Security Council
cannot establish just one type of political institutional
model to support development processes without
violating one of the basic principles of the Charter of
the United Nations - the principle of sovereignty. The
sovereignty of every country lies with its people. Each
people develops its own political, economic and social
systems and its own legal and institutional frameworks,
which are most suited to its own interests, culture and
history. It is incumbent upon the people themselves to
make the changes that they believe are necessary. It
is a process that falls only to the nationals of a given
country. It cannot be imposed or controlled by any
other country or international body.

Many of the root causes of the conflicts that have
developed in the twentieth century and which are
destroying the fabric of the twenty-first century stem
from the major political and military Powers imposing
political, economic and social models and visions
of development on developing countries that find
themselves within the geopolitical sphere of influence
of developed countries. Many conflicts in South-East
Asia, Latin America, Africa and the Middle East have
been linked to that practice, which was developed by the
former colonial Powers and the new major economic and
military Powers. Furthermore, since we can all agree
that poverty, exclusion, inequality and social injustice
are the root causes of conflicts affecting international
peace and security, the Council must also identify
foreign interference as one of the root causes of the
conflicts that arise when developing countries decide
on their own economic and social models in order to be
able to resolve their major development problems. That
occurs in countries that have attempted to control and
manage their own natural resources, develop processes
of agricultural reform, democratize the distribution of
their nations' wealth or simply diversify and extend the
sphere of their trade relations.

Countries with their own development models
have very often suffered interference, political
destabilization and even military intervention because
the major Powers, which have economic or geopolitical
interests in those nations, are opposed to the sovereign
decisions that those countries have taken. In order to
justify foreign interference, veritable media wars are
started. A country is criticized very often because of its
political model, an inappropriate understanding of its
human rights record or for violating other democratic
principles, which in most cases are not even being
adhered to by the interfering country itself or by the
regional allies supporting that country in its political
or military action. That creates an international
environment that justifies foreign interference. The
situation in North Africa and the Middle East is a sad
example of that practice, which has brought so much
pain and suffering to those countries. War, with its
burden of death and destruction, has led to their losing
every possibility of development, at least in the medium
term.

One ofthe root causes ofconflict where the Security
Council can act decisively is linked to colonialism, that
is, in cases of foreign occupation. Western Sahara and
Palestine, with its territories occupied by Israel, are the

most poignant examples in the unhappy, long-standing
record of the Council as a result of the Council's
paralysis and inability to resolve the situations. Those
are two situations of ongoing conflict that are clearly
within the scope of the Security Council and which
should be resolved so as to prevent greater conflict. The
concept note asks what the Security Council can do to
address the root causes of conflicts? We can restate that
question and ask, can the Security Council address the
root causes of conflicts?

In that regard, it is worthwhile referring to
some of the statements in the report of the Advisory
Group of Expertson the Review of the Peacebuilding
Architecture. The Advisory Group highlights in its
report that the United Nations and we believe, the
Security Council in particular, has

"yet to absorb fully how their tools and actions
must adapt, and, in general, often prefer militarized
responses. The very nature of such responses,
with their emphasis on short-term security and
their correspondingly heavy resourcing needs,
can sometimes take away support and attention
from achieving sustainable peace." (S/2015/490, para. 121)

The recent case of the adoption of Security Council
resolution 2240 (2015), which considers the use of
military force as a way of resolving the migrant crisis in
the Mediterranean, clearly reveals the tendency of some
members of the Security Council to use force and short-
term solutions. An organ that favours the use of force
and short-term solutions is not the most appropriate
body for addressing the root causes of conflicts.

We believe that one of the tools used by the Security
Council that best reflects the short-term view that it
uses to resolve problems and which does absolutely
nothing to address the root causes of conflicts is the
sanctions committees. More than 50 per cent of the
sanctions committees address situations in African
countries with protracted conflicts derived mostly from
the colonial presence and the deformations that that
presence has created to ensure its political control. The
root causes of those conflicts include ethnic, religious
and national differences, tribal organizations, poverty
and exclusion, divisions and country organizations that
were artificially created by colonialism.

However, sanctions committees are designed
to exercise punitive actions that could be military,
economic or political in nature. Regrettably, very often
they become extensions of the presence of former
colonial Powers in those countries. There are very
few successful examples of sanctions committees.
The Security Council should give that issue special
consideration and attention, especiallybecause countries
under a sanctions regime face major limitations and
obstacles to achieving sustainable development. Most
of the time, those countries have already sunk into the
deepest poverty and social exclusion and are in constant
military conflict.

Finally, Latin America and the Caribbean is an area
of peace. Our region presents to the world a situation
in which, after many years of ongoing conflict caused
by foreign interference, interventionism and social
injustice, we have reached the twenty-first century as
an area of peace, free of nuclear weapons and weapons
of mass destruction. We have a new architecture of
regional organizations that have been created and
revitalized by the thrust of our regional leadership,
such as the Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of
Our America, the Union of South American Nations,
Petrocaribe, Mercosur, the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States, the Latin American
Federation of Contractors' Associations and the
Caribbean Community. That has made it possible for us
to address our own regional problems from a southern
perspective and promote our own inclusive models,
which are inspired by participatory democracy with
full respect for the sovereignty of countries and the
principle of non-interference.

Since the Government of President Hugo Chavez
Frias, our own national experience has given us a
Constitution approved by a process of referendums that
includes the most progressive human rights provisions,
accountability and broad popular participation.
The action of the Government has been directed
towards recovering our sovereign right to manage our
main natural resources in order to ensure effective
action to counter poverty, exclusion and gender
inequality and to ensure human rights for all. Today,
Venezuela is a peaceful country. In spite of constant
foreign interference, we are a young country that is
strengthening its own model of law based on our own
experiences and the situation in our country. We are a
factor for the stabilization of peace for Latin America
and the Caribbean. As I mentioned earlier, Simon
Bolivar and our liberation armies crossed our borders
only 200 years ago to free and create more than five
South American nations. We have the moral ground, the
experience and the conviction to work for development,
social justice and peace.

