Mr. Beck (Palau): We wish to associate ourselves
with the statement made by the representative of Papua
New Guinea on behalf of the Pacific Islands Forum.

We salute the United Kingdom for having
proposed this open debate on the security implications
of climate change. As a small island State, Palau is
particularly challenged by sea-level rise. Furthermore,
Palau wishes to call to the attention of this body an
equally daunting risk posed by warming which is not
specifically identified in the concept paper and which
requires the urgent attention of the world community.

Stated plainly, global warming threatens to
destroy the world's coral reefs. In 1998, the warming
incident known as El Nifio caused the bleaching and
death of almost one third of Palau's corals. Certain
particularly sensitive species were virtually eliminated.

The destruction of the coral reefs is tantamount to
the destruction of the country. The reefs are central to
Palau's economy, which relies almost exclusively on
tourism. The reefs are vital to Palau's food security.
Without them, the people will not have the fish to feed
themselves or the money to buy food. For over 3,000
years, Palauans have survived by fishing on and around
their coral reefs. Climate change now threatens those
reefs with increased acidification, rising temperatures,
fiercer storms and accelerating sea-level rise. The
destruction of the reefs will lead, inevitably, to the
migration of the people and to the end of their culture.

Coral reef ecosystems are vital not only to Palau
but to scores of States. The reefs provide one quarter of
the fish catch in developing countries and feed more
than one billion people. Their destruction will pose a
threat to every country to which former fishermen and
their families will migrate.

We applaud the United Kingdom for having
convened this proceeding and for raising the profile of
this issue, as well as for its support of the influential
Stern review, among other things. We are grateful to
the United States and the European Union for their
efforts to ensure that coral bleaching was addressed
during recent deliberations on the General Assembly's
important oceans resolution. We applaud the
Government of France for its leadership in creating the
Coral Reef Initiative for the South Pacific, and all
other nations which have addressed the threats to coral
reefs.

We call upon the international community to
squarely address reef destruction and ameliorate the
damage already done, as a matter of great urgency.

