Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open meeting on the
question of the Middle East. We would also like in
particular to thank the Secretary-General for his
presence today, as well as for the statement he has
delivered. Moreover, we wish to thank Under-
Secretary-General Pascoe for his briefing.

The situation in the Middle East has changed
drastically in the past month. The armed conflict in
Gaza has resulted in enormous casualties among the
civilian population. At the moment, the situation has
eased somewhat. Nevertheless, it continues to be very
fragile and threatens to result in an escalation of the
conflict at any moment. It is our hope that the parties
can take advantage of this very unusual respite and
redouble their efforts to ensure a comprehensive and
lasting ceasefire as soon as possible. That would be
conducive to ensuring security for both sides, as well
as normal lives for the Palestinian people.

China appreciates the efforts made by Egypt to
that end. We hope that the parties concerned will
demonstrate flexibility, genuinely renounce violence
and militancy and commit themselves to dialogue and
negotiation on an equal footing in order to resolve the
problem.

China welcomes the pledge made by Israel and
Palestine to continue political negotiations. We hope
that both sides will be able to overcome every
distraction and speed up the negotiating process
through concrete actions. Both parties should avoid
any actions that might poison the atmosphere for
negotiations. Recently, Israel announced its decision to
expand settlements. That is not conducive to building
up mutual trust.

We welcome the efforts made by Yemen to
promote direct dialogue between the various factions in
Palestine. We also welcome the fact that the two major
factions have signed agreements and are continuing
dialogue and consultations. As we have always
emphasized, strengthening the internal unity of
Palestine is a very important precondition for the
success of the political negotiations between Israel and
Palestine, which will eventually lead to the realization
of a comprehensive peace. The international
community should also continue to provide Palestine
with assistance, help the Palestinian authorities
enhance their capacity-building and improve the
livelihoods of the Palestinian people. That would be
conducive to consolidating the support of the
Palestinian people for the negotiation process.

The Middle East peace process is faced with very
serious challenges at the moment. The process
launched in Annapolis has already made an important
first step. But it is also faced with various kinds of
obstacles. The international community must think in
depth about how to inject new vitality into the
Annapolis process. We support the ideas of the Russian
Federation concerning the holding of a follow-up
meeting to Annapolis. We are confident that efforts for
preparations and to allow all concerned parties to
participate will not only help to consolidate the
achievements of the negotiations, but will also create
similar conditions for broader and deeper negotiations
in the next stage.

Syria-Israel and Lebanon-Israel negotiations are
also important components of the Middle East peace
process. Launching negotiations on those two tracks at
an appropriate time and making progress on them will
help to achieve a comprehensive peace in the Middle
East. We hope that the parties concerned will provide
more support to the negotiations on those two tracks.

The presidential election in Lebanon has again
been postponed. The political and security situation in
Lebanon has been tense. That has highlighted the
importance of maintaining stability and an early
solution to their political differences. We support the
continued efforts of the Arab League to find a solution
to the political crisis in Lebanon, and we hope that all
the parties in Lebanon will put their national interests
first and adhere to dialogue and consultations to
resolve their differences and seek consensus.

