Mr. Biorn Lian (Norway): Allow me first to
congratulate you, Sir, upon your assumption of the
presidency for the month of April. It is indeed a pleasure
to see you presiding over this important meeting. Allow
me also to congratulate the Permanent Representative of
Botswana, Ambassador Legwaila, for the excellent
manner in which he carried out his duties last month.

The peace process in the Middle East is in a fragile
and critical state. The Israeli and Palestinian authorities
are concentrating their efforts on the fight against
terrorism. Significant achievements have been made so far
in this regard.

In the meantime, however, the Palestinian population
of the Gaza Strip and the West Bank is experiencing
severe economic difficulties. The continuation of the
peace process between the Israelis and Palestinians now
depends, more than ever, on unequivocal international
support. We must demonstrate to the Israeli and
Palestinian peoples, in deeds as well as in words, that we
are fully behind them, and behind the peace process
between them. To these ends the international community
must act swiftly along two tracks, both of which are
equally important and mutually supportive of what we are
all trying to achieve.

First, we should coordinate our efforts to fight
terrorism in the Middle East and worldwide. The Summit
of Peacemakers in Sharm El Sheikh earlier this month

 

and the coming ministerial meeting in Luxembourg
constitute the framework for international coordination and
cooperation on counter-terrorism. Terrorism should not be
allowed to stop the peace process. We must ensure that the
clear message from the Summit of Peacemakers is fully
implemented and is amplified in its practical
implementation.

Secondly, it is now vital that the donor community
help mitigate the effects of the border closure on the
Palestinian economy and society. In its capacity as chair of
the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee, the purpose of which is to
coordinate aid for Gaza and the West Bank, Norway called
for an emergency meeting of that Committee in Brussels on
12 April. The meeting was devoted entirely to issues
pertaining to economic assistance to the Palestinians. On
the basis of reports presented at that meeting, the following
ideas should be highlighted.

Additional financial support to cover the deepening
budget deficit is urgently needed. We ask donors to pay
their pledges to the Holst Fund without delay.

We also ask donors to fund new, small and
dispersed projects that can create immediate employment
and to direct unallocated resources to such projects as
soon as possible.

Pledges from the Paris conference of 9 January 1996
should be fulfilled as soon as possible. Projects already
under way should have accelerated implementation.

Some improvements in the transport of goods into
and out of the Palestinian areas have taken place. The
number of Palestinians allowed into Israel to work is
slowly picking up. We hope these developments will
continue, as they are of the highest importance for a
substantial improvement in the Palestinian economy.

No one thought in 1993 that the peace process
between the Israelis and the Palestinians would be easy.
Let us therefore not forget what the peace process has
achieved so far; let us look forward and beyond the
current crisis in order to protect and carry through the
peace process.

Since I do not plan to speak later today, allow me a
brief, final word.
Norway is deeply concerned about the present
escalation in Lebanon, which has led to civilian casualties
and large migration flows away from the battle zone. We
urge the parties to stop the spiral of violence and to
conclude an immediate cease-fire, so as to avoid further
harm to civilians and to enable the resumption of peace
negotiations in the region.

