Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium): I am
speaking here in my capacity as Security Council
Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015). That resolution, adopted in July 2015, endorses
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA),
which entered into force in January 2016.

The Plan of Action is the result of the diplomatic
efforts of China, France, Germany, the Russian
Federation, the United Kingdom, the United States, the
High Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy and the Islamic Republic
of Iran, and it represents a comprehensive and lasting
solution to the Iranian nuclear issue.

As the Secretary-General recalls in his report
(S/20l9/492), the Plan of Action is a major achievement
in nuclear non-proliferation and in dialogue and
diplomacy. It is a cornerstone of multilateralism,
peace and international security. Since its entry into
force to this day, it has guaranteed the exclusively
peaceful nature of the Iranian nuclear programme. It
is therefore an honour for me to have taken on the role
of Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) in January. In carrying out this task, I have been
able to rely, first of all, on the excellent work done by
my colleague of the Netherlands, my predecessor as
Facilitator, as well as on the unwavering support of the
Secretariat. To them, I offer my thanks.

During this mandate, my ambition is to support
and improve the implementation of the resolution on
behalf of the Security Council by following the three
guidelines inherited from my predecessor: facilitation of
dialogue between the parties, transparency in our work
and support for trade through the procurement channel.
That is not an easy task: the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action currently faces many challenges. I will come
back to that point.

I now turn to the seventh report of the Facilitator
(see S/2019/514), which was approved by all members
of the Security Council after a comments period and
a no-objection procedure. The report informs the
Council about the activities carried out and the status of
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) between
12 December 2018 and 15 June 2019, in conjunction
with the reports of the Secretary-General (S/2019/492)
and the Joint Commission (see S/2019/488). As the
text is rather technical in nature, I will not review all
the elements that make it up. My report is at Council
members' disposal for reference and full information.
However, allow me to mention the following three points.

First, I would like to recall the two meetings of the
Council in the 2231 format during the reporting period.
On 3 April 2019, the Coordinator of the Procurement
Working Group of the Joint Commission came to
make a presentation on the procurement channel. On
24 June, the Security Council discussed the findings
and recommendations contained in the seventh report
of the Secretary-General, prior to its public release.

Secondly, in my role as Facilitator, I also held
several bilateral consultations with Member States and
their representatives, including the Islamic Republic of
Iran, to discuss issues related to the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015).

Thirdly, there are also references in my report to
the two reports issued by the International Atomic
Energy Agency during the reporting period, in
February and May 2019. In its most recent report,
the Agency certifies, for the fifteenth time, that Iran
is in compliance with its nuclear commitments under
the Plan of Action. I wish to underline the central
role - impartial, factual and professional - played by
the Agency in the implementation of the Plan.

Let us be realistic: the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action is at a crossroads, and my role as an
honest broker is not to look away from that reality but,
rather to identify, with full impartiality, the points of
disagreement so that the parties can find an agreed
solution. The various letters circulated within the 2231
format reflect the state of deliberations among the
parties. The communications are listed and summarized
in my report, including the responses received from the
Permanent Mission of Iran. The points of disagreement
with respect to the restrictive measures set out in annex
B to resolution 2231 (2015) stand out upon examination.

First, with regard to Iran's activities related to
missiles and space launchers, as referred to in the report
of the Secretary-General, I note the various letters sent
by several Member States describing those activities
as inconsistent with annex B and Iran's counter-
arguments based on a different reading of paragraph
3 of that annex. The differences in the interpretation
of paragraph 3 constitute a major and recurring point
of contention. Other letters focused on possible Iranian
arms transfers in the region, which are another source
of disagreement.
The exchange of correspondence also included the
latest developments with respect to compliance with
the entire Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action and
resolution 2231 (2015). I note the concerns expressed
following the strengthening of the economic sanctions
imposed by the United States since its withdrawal
from the Plan, and, more recently, the end of some
exemptions for non-proliferation nuclear projects,
which affects compliance with resolution 2231
(2015). I also note concerns expressed on the recent
announcements by Iran on its non-compliance with
some of its commitments. Lastly, I take note of the
concern expressed by some Member States, as well as
by the Joint Commission in its report, on the impact
of the sanctions reimposed by the United States on the
work of the Procurement Working Group of the Joint
Commission. The procurement channel is definitely at
the heart of the Plan of Action mechanism: it ensures
that the transfers approved through it comply with the
provisions of the resolution.

In conclusion, I join with the other bodies
responsible for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), the Secretary-General and the Joint Commission
in strongly regretting the deterioration of the current
context, which affects compliance with resolution 2231
(2015) and the Plan ofAction. Questions of international
peace and security require collective responses, which
is the raison d'etre of the Security Council. The Plan
of Action and resolution 2231 (2015) constitute one
of those responses and enjoy very broad support
within the international community. Therefore, while
referring to paragraph 2 of resolution 2231 (2015), I
call on all Member States, regional organizations
and international organizations to take such actions
as may be appropriate to support the implementation
of the JCPOA, including by refraining from actions
that undermine the implementation of commitments
under JCPOA.

