First of all, I would like to congratulate Germany on its successful presidency of the Security Council in July 2020. We recognize the additional efforts that the Council presidencies have had to make in the past months, which have been marked by the challenges facing humankind owing to the effects of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. It is an honour for Ecuador to address the Security Council to present its position on the question of Palestine, which has historically been an issue of concern and vital importance. In this regard, we reaffirm our solidarity with Palestine and reiterate our commitment to alleviating the difficult situation faced by the Palestinian people. Relief will be achieved only through a political, peaceful, definitive and just solution agreed by the parties themselves and based on the existence of two States, Palestine and Israel, within the recognized 1967 borders. Ecuador rejects any kind of incitement to violence that would make a solution for the parties even more remote. We reiterate the call made in resolution 2334 (2016) for both parties to observe calm and restraint and act in accordance with international law, including international humanitarian law. I would like to express my delegation's concern about the humanitarian situation, including the human rights violations and the non-compliance with international humanitarian law, which is in place in the occupied Palestinian territory. Ecuador calls on the international community to prevent the implementation of any kind of illegal settlement policy, in particular the demolition and confiscation of Palestinian-owned infrastructure, including water and sanitation infrastructure, throughout the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, as well as any effort to impede humanitarian assistance, We express our deep concern over annexation measures, which constitute grave breaches of international law and seriously affect the possibility of finding a two-State solution and threaten prospects for renewed negotiations. We reject any unilateral action that undermines hopes for resolving the conflict through negotiations and causes further deterioration of the humanitarian situation of thousands of Palestinians. We call on all parties to make collective efforts to launch credible negotiations and intensify regional and international diplomatic efforts aimed at achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East without delay. Finally, I would like to reiterate Ecuador's full support for the call of Secretary- General Antonio Guterres for a ceasefire and for silencing arms around the world, in accordance with the joint statement co-initiated by Ecuador, in conjunction with 172 other countries, with a view to working together to fight COVID-19, which is our common enemy. The implementation of that appeal would also serve as a first step towards achieving a definitive and sustainable peace.
