Mr. Kariyawasam (Sri Lanka): At the outset, let
me convey my appreciation to you for the opportunity
given to address this meeting of the Security Council
which commemorates the first anniversary of the
adoption of Security Council resolution 1612 (2005) on
children and armed conflict. The Government and
people of Sri Lanka, having experienced the bane of a
terrorist group recruiting children for armed conflict,
are indeed grateful to France for her initiative in
bringing to the forefront the issue of children and
armed conflict.

I am indeed pleased to note the presence of
Dr. Radhika Coomaraswamy, a distinguished Sri Lankan.
Her dedicated contribution to a cause that we in Sri Lanka
are deeply committed to is indeed heartening.

Children are our future. It is the responsibility of
each State, and indeed, the international community, to
protect them and to promote their welfare to ensure
that their childhood is spent with proper care, not with
undue danger, for children are vulnerable, less able to
defend themselves and are therefore subject to easy
abuse in many ways. The fate of innocent children
caught in armed conflict is one of the most serious
concerns before us today. Forcible conscription of
children into armed conflict by armed groups stands as
one of the most abominable crimes of our day.

While the Convention on the Rights of the Child
stands as a beacon in international efforts to protect
children, the adoption of Security Council resolution
1612 (2005) a year ago marks an important phase in
the global strategy to make the world safer for
children.

As the report of the Secretary-General dated 9
February 2005 has highlighted, one of the greatest
scourges afflicting children today is the practice of
their being recruited and used as child combatants in
many conflicts around the world. We observe that
children are often brainwashed, sexually harassed and
provided with guns to kill at will, affecting their own
lives and those of others. It is the duty of the Council
and of States Members of the United Nations to ensure
that the parties identified in the report of the Secretary-
General are pursued vigorously in order to bring such
abuses to an end.

The report of the Secretary-General has identified
several non-State actors, some of which have been
banned in a number of countries as terrorist groups, as
responsible for grave violations and abuses against
children. These non-State actors operate beyond the
pale of international law, ethics and universally
accepted norms of conduct. The Security Council and
its Working Group must consider a series of punitive
measures against such non-State actors that can
increase incrementally when they refuse to fall in line
with international norms and practices. It is essential
that the Security Council Working Group and the
Office of the Special Representative for children and
armed conflict show innovativeness and act with
firmness to ensure that punitive measures are taken
against those non-State actors that are parties to such
crimes against children.

We fully recognize and acknowledge the
undiminished responsibility of States to protect
children at all times, in time of peace and in time of
conflict. Unlike non-State actors, however, States are
subject to international treaty regimes, which include
the Convention on the Rights of the Child, its Protocols
and core human rights covenants. All these together
constitute a comprehensive international mechanism
which ensures that States protect children and promote
their well-being. The human rights records of States
come under strict scrutiny at periodic reviews held by
treaty bodies to monitor the implementation of
obligations undertaken by States at the national and
international levels.

It is therefore necessary that the Security Council
Working Group place its primary focus on non-State
actors that are neither bound by, nor have any respect
for, international treaty obligations. This will help
ensure that States are not burdened with multiple
reporting responsibilities and that non-State actors are
brought under a punitive regime.

In September 2005, world leaders adopted what
constituted their vision and plan of action for the
United Nations - the outcome document - which
also identified the use of children in armed conflict as
a growing menace.

It is important that we reflect on this call by our
leaders as we commemorate the first anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1612 (2005). The international
community must now take the next logical step - the

most important one - of addressing the priority of
normalizing the lives of children affected by armed
conflict. As we embark on our task of addressing the
plight of children in armed conflict and promoting
rights of children, we need to agree that a necessary
corollary of that effort will be to provide them
assistance, including through meeting their education,
health, and recovery needs. This will involve the
greater challenge of finding adequate resources through
enhanced international cooperation.

As I conclude, I would like to take this
opportunity to inform the Council that, in pursuance of
resolution 1612 (2005), the Government of Sri Lanka
is in the final stages of establishing a task force for
monitoring and reporting. In setting up this task force,
we took into consideration the report of the Secretary-
General dated 9 February 2005, in particular annex II
of the report, and the terms of reference of the Security
Council Working Group on children and armed
conflict.

Detestable crimes have been committed against
young children, particularly against Tamil children
living in the northern and eastern parts of Sri Lanka, by
a rebel group, the Tamil Tigers, for more than two
decades. It is no secret that the situation has scarcely
seen any improvement, as has been well documented
by none other than UNICEF, which has taken the lead
role in bringing this sad state of affairs to public
attention. Those children have been forcibly
conscripted for battle. Some of them have been
programmed into becoming suicide bombers. We in Sri
Lanka, therefore, are well aware of the damage caused
to the social fabric of a country and its future by this
abominable practice on the part of a terrorist group. As
an affected country, we urge the international
community to take swift and decisive action, without
further delay, to end the impunity enjoyed by non-State
actors, which continue to abuse children. Let us not, in
this endeavour, miss the forest for the trees, and let us
not divert responsibility. Let us not fail in our quest to
ensure a safe and secure world for our children.

