Mr. Matjila (South Africa): I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting, one year after the Security Council visited Guinea-Bissau, where it had an opportunity to interact with Ms. Sori- Coulibaly. We join others in welcoming the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Cooperation, African Integration and Nigeriens Abroad and are mindful that the Niger is the current Chair of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS). We thank Ms. Sori- Coulibaly for her presence and her update on the developments of the past 12 months. We further welcome His Excellency Ambassador Ronaldo Costa Filho and appreciate the work of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission. I would like to focus my observations on three issues, namely, political developments, transnational organized crime and the implementation of the mandate of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS). First, with regard to political developments, my delegation would like to join other Council members in congratulating the people of Guinea-Bissau on the presidential elections, which were carried out in a free, fair and credible manner. That is a positive milestone, especially the fulfilment of the electoral cycle. South Africa is confident that this will put the country on a trajectory towards stability and prosperity. We also call on all the parties in Guinea-Bissau to exercise calm and restraint in response to the recent tensions around the election results and to allow the legal process to take its course as the current impasse is overcome. Inclusivity is paramount as the country moves forward. The participation of women and gender equality remain critical issues that should be addressed. Similarly, the engagement of youth in the political sphere should be prioritized. The demographic dividend should be harnessed to its full potential in order for the country to attain sustainable peace and development. Similarly, South Africa commends the strong leadership of ECOWAS, under the Foreign Minister of the Niger, and its support of the mediation efforts to further the aspirations of the citizens of Guinea-Bissau. We urge the leaders of Guinea-Bissau to pursue the spirit of cooperation with ECOWAS by fully implementing the reform agenda as stipulated in the Conakry Agreement. That road map highlights the need for constitutional reforms, inclusive political dialogue and national reconciliation processes to be implemented. Furthermore, the role of the international community has been critical in supporting Guinea- Bissau in the electoral and peace processes. We urge the international community to continue its strong support so that Guinea-Bissau may achieve socioeconomic development and build an inclusive society. Secondly, our delegation remains concerned about the threat that transnational organized crime poses for Guinea-Bissau and the region. We support the recommendations contained in the Secretary-General's report, which states that "[t]he strengthening of land, maritime and air border control is critical in confronting this threat." (S/2020/105, para. 89) In that regard, we commend the efforts being undertaken, in partnership with UNIOGBIS, to provide strategic and technical advice and to support the Government of Guinea-Bissau in combating drug trafficking and transnational organized crime, in close cooperation with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. It is important that the requisite support be provided in order to avoid fuelling terroristic activity in the region. Thirdly, and lastly, South Africa supports a responsible drawdown, with due consideration for the situation on the ground, so as to avoid the reversal of the significant progress that has been registered so far. We furthermore support the implementation of the transition plan for the gradual drawdown and transfer of tasks to the United Nations country team, the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel and international partners with a view to a prospective completion by 31 December.
