Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today's open debate on
drug trafficking as a threat to international security.
Following last July's debates on peace consolidation in
West Africa (see S/PV.6157 and S/PV.6l60), your
initiative confirms the Security Council's attention to
the growing threat posed by drug trafficking and
organized crime to international peace and security. I
also wish to express my sincere appreciation to the
Secretary-General and the Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
for their comprehensive and accurate reports.

Italy would like to endorse the statement
delivered by the representative of Sweden in its
capacity in the presidency of the European Union.

Never before has individual, national and
international security been so clearly interconnected.
Today transnational crime, particularly the drug trade,
is relevant to the definition of a "world risk society".
For the international community to tackle it, a new
approach is needed, one that has two main
characteristics: the ability to deal effectively with
non-State actors, and improvements in international
cooperation and information-sharing.

Security today is a multidisciplinary challenge. It
requires global analysis, global commitment and a
global response. While stopping drug traffickers is a
decisive element, it should not be the driver of our
policies. Development is a crucial step towards
achieving security.
09-63874
The 2009 Italian presidency of the Group of Eight
(G-8) attached special significance to those new
destabilizing factors and transnational threats. Last
May, an international conference was held in Rome
that was co-chaired by the Italian Interior and Foreign
Affairs Ministers and attended by specialized
international agencies, regional organizations and
prominent experts. At the conference, participants
defined the conceptual framework for the political
declaration adopted in July by the G-8 leaders at
L'Aquila.

The harmful leverage of drug trafficking and
organized crime is multiplied in vulnerable regions,
where they destabilize States from within and can
create asymmetrical shocks at the international level.
Your emphasis on the African situation, Mr. President,
is thus particularly appropriate.

West Africa is a test case for the international
community. The West African States' ability to achieve
the Millennium Development Goals depends, to a large
extent, on strategic and effective coordination between
international cooperation and national policies. The
involvement of the United Nations Office for West
Africa as a bridge between the Organization and
regional efforts, along with the personal commitment
of Ambassador Djinnit, represent an important step in
that direction. I commend UNODC for its commitment
and achievements in every aspect of our common
action.

Some years ago, UNODC gave us an early
warning about West Africa's risk of becoming a
platform for drug trafficking and organized crime. Its
reports on drug trafficking there represented the most
detailed, in-depth analysis available at the international
level.

UNODC encourages international cooperation
through the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) and the West Africa Coast Initiative,
which draw on the combined forces of the Department
of Political Affairs, Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and INTERPOL. Just last week, a donor
conference in Vienna aimed at assisting ECOWAS
attracted major support.

Italy has contributed €l.3 million to those
initiatives and provided a coast guard unit and one
aircraft for border control in Senegal in the framework
of the External Borders of the Member States of the
European Union, or FRONTEX, programme. Starting
09-63874

next January, UNODC will work in collaboration with
two teams of Italian Guardia di Finanza experts to
develop, execute and implement a capacity-building
project for the law enforcement agencies of Guinea
Bissau, Mali, Sierra Leone and Senegal to fight against
drug trafficking and transnational organized crime. In
response to the requests of national beneficiaries and
the findings of country-based preliminary assessment
missions, the Italian specialized trainers will develop
and run tailored-made training programmes for each of
those four countries.

Italy remains committed to supporting
Afghanistan's efforts to reduce the illegal cultivation
and production of narcotic substances. The outreach
session of the G8 Ministerial Meeting, held in Trieste
on 26-27 June, highlighted the need for joint initiatives
in border management, the harmonization of judiciary
systems, the strengthening of intelligence networks, the
exchange of information, the eradication of illicit drug
crops and alternative development.

Italy supports the Central Asian Regional
Information and Coordination Centre (CARICC) and
welcomes its cooperation with the Joint Planning Cell
for the countries of Afghanistan, Iran and Pakistan and
the Gulf Centre for Criminal Intelligence.

Italy contributed $500,000 to CARICC and
€400,000 to UNODC regional programme on
Afghanistan and neighbouring countries to enhance
operational capacities in border management and to
counter drug trafficking, and has contributed
€l.5 million to the Afghan Counter-Narcotics Trust
Fund.

Criminal entrepreneurs are exploiting regional
vulnerabilities, taking advantage of their unique
combination of risk and rewards under current
conditions. Our response must change that arithmetic.
Enabling information-sharing and police and judicial
cooperation among all countries affected by this traffic
would give a fundamental added value to our
operational capacities.

In that regard, the United Nations conventions
against crime and corruption are our strongest
weapons. 2010 will mark the 10th anniversary of the
Palermo Convention and its additional protocols.
Today, more than ever, we need a firm commitment
from the entire United Nations membership to that and
other instruments. The General Assembly's omnibus
resolution on the United Nations Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice Programme, proposed by Italy and
approved in November by the Third Committee with
the co-sponsorship of 117 Member States, clearly
affirms those goals.

That resolution requests the Secretary-General to
convene a special high-level meeting of the General
Assembly on transnational organized crime in the
second quarter of 2010. The purpose of the meeting
would be to foster universal adherence to the Palermo
Convention and strengthen international cooperation. It
should also create political momentum for next year's
Conference of States Parties and its high-level
segment. We call upon all Member States to be
represented at the highest level possible at those
events, so as to confirm our common political will and
shared responsibility in tackling drug trafficking and
related forms of organized crime.

Italy welcomes the presidential statement that
was adopted by the Security Council today and will
continue to be an active partner in international and
regional efforts to tackle the convergent threats to
international security of organized crime and drug
trafficking.

