The President: I thank the representative of
Afghanistan for his kind words addressed to me.

I now give the floor to the Assistant Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, Mr. Danilo Turk, to
respond to comments and questions raised.

The Assistant Secretary-General: On behalf of
the Secretary-General, I would first like to thank all
those who have spoken today for their encouraging
words of support. It has been especially gratifying to
hear unanimous support for the Secretary-General's
proposals of a new United Nations mission in
Afghanistan. I will also be sure to transmit to
Mr. Brahimi your sustained confidence in his important
work.

I noted very few specific questions. The
representative of the United Kingdom did, however,
ask whether the Secretariat foresaw a role in
Afghanistan for the Internally Displaced Persons Unit
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs. The Unit, which is based in Geneva, has
already deployed an assessment mission to areas in
Afghanistan with a high concentration of internally
displaced persons. The mission's report is being
finalized, and its recommendations will be discussed in
the coming days.

Whatever programmes emerge from these
recommendations will be integrated into pillar II of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). On this point, I would like to underline that
the concept of integration will allow the specific
problem of internally displaced persons to be addressed
with solutions that take into account and build on other
development activities and the reconstruction of the
country as a whole.

I focus on the integration, because it is at the
heart of the Secretary-General's concept of UNAMA,
which in turn represents an original model for a
complex United Nations mission. The central idea is to
have a coherent mission structure in which all aspects
are carefully integrated with each other. The concept of
integration is particularly important for human rights,
which has been mentioned by a number of delegations
today. In an integrated mission, the human rights
mandate will not be the responsibility of a single
office, but will be an integral part of activities carried
out within various elements of both pillars.

While I would like to assume that the lack of
questions reflects a general satisfaction with the
direction that the United Nations has taken in
Afghanistan, I do not take this as a sign of
complacency. At the same time, I have duly taken note
of a number of concerns that have been raised,
including the question of narcotics. And I assure you
that these concerns will also be conveyed to
Mr. Brahimi, as well as to other relevant parts of the
United Nations system.

Before concluding, I feel that it is important to
reiterate that we must not become complacent. The
earthquake last night reminded us of how vulnerable
Afghanistan remains to the forces of nature. Our own
analysis and numerous news reports continue to remind
us that Afghanistan is equally vulnerable to human
forces.

On this point I would like to stress an issue raised
by a good number of delegations, and that is the
importance of security. I welcome the strong support
for the extension of the mandate of the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) past June and hope
that the Council will take action to bring that about.
Ialso wholeheartedly agree with the representative of
the United Kingdom when he calls for an expansion of
the ISAF effect beyond Kabul, and I look forward to
further suggestions and specific ideas of how to bring
this effect of ISAF beyond Kabul into being.

Finally, we cannot afford to become complacent
about the need to provide support - financial support
in particular - for the Interim Administration, the
Loya Jirga process and humanitarian reconstruction
and development activities. The Interim Administration
Fund run by the United Nations Development
Programme, which has allowed Mr. Karzai's
Government to function with some success, urgently
needs replenishment if the Administration is to keep its
commitments until June.

In this regard, let me say, Mr. Minister, that it is a
particular privilege to have this meeting under your
presidency, as the Government of Norway not only
chairs the Afghanistan Support Group, but is also one
of the largest and most consistent contributors to the
Interim Administration Fund, as well as to other
humanitarian assistance efforts in Afghanistan.

In conclusion, let me restate my gratitude for the
support shown today by Council members and non-
members alike, for the Secretary-General's proposal
regarding the mandate and structure of UNAMA and
for the work that the United Nations has accomplished
so far in Afghanistan. I look forward to the draft
resolution that will be submitted tomorrow on the
establishment of the new Mission.

The President: I thank the Assistant Secretary-
General for the clarifications and answers he has
provided and for the kind words he has addressed to
me.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 4.50 pm.

