Ms. Nakamitsu: I thank the members of the
Security Council for the opportunity to brief them on
the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013), on the
elimination of the chemical weapons programme of the
Syrian Arab Republic.

As per long-standing practice, I met yesterday
with the Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic in advance of these consultations. In addition,
I remain in regular contact with the Director-General
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) and spoke to him this past Tuesday,
4 September.

As the Council was informed in July (see S/2018/745), the OPCW Technical Secretariat has
verified the destruction of all 27 chemical weapons-
production facilities declared by the Syrian Arab
Republic. That is an important step towards the full
implementation of resolution 2118 (2013).

Efforts to clarify the outstanding issues regarding
the initial declaration of the Syrian Arab Republic are
ongoing. As members are aware, on 10 July the OPCW
received a letter from the Syrian Arab Republic in
response to questions regarding chemical weapons-
related activities conducted at the Syrian Scientific
Studies and Research Centre. Those questions were
attached to a 10 April letter from the OPCW Director-
General. The OPCW'S Declaration Assessment Team
is continuing to analyse the answers provided by the
Syrian Arab Republic and will report in due course to
the OPCW Executive Council.

The Secretary-General continues to urge cooperation
by the Government of Syria with the OPCW in resolving
the outstanding issues related to Syria's declaration.
As I have noted on many occasions, the confidence of
the international community in the full elimination of
Syria's chemical weapons programme depends upon
the OPCW being able to close those outstanding issues.
The complete implementation of resolution 2118 (2013)
is critical not only to finding a long-overdue end to the
ongoing conflict in Syria, but also to stability in the
region in the longer term. In this regard, I welcome
the news conveyed to me by the Director-General of
the renewal of the Tripartite Agreement between the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, the OPCW
and the United Nations Office for Project Services.
This will allow the OPCW to continue its activities in
Syria using the same logistics procedures and support
as in the past.

As the Council has been previously informed, on
6 July the OPCW Technical Secretariat issued a note
entitled "Interim report of the OPCW Fact-finding
Mission in Syria regarding the incident of alleged use
of toxic chemicals as a weapon in Douma, Syrian Arab
Republic, on 7 April 2018", which was subsequently
circulated to the Security Council through the
Secretary-General. On 7 August, the OPCW received
a note verbale from the Syrian Arab Republic that
provided comments on the interim report. The Fact-
finding Mission (FFM) continues to collect and analyse
information with regard to the alleged use of toxic
chemicals as a weapon in Douma and will provide a
final report on its findings in due course. I reiterate my
full support for the integrity and professionalism of the
work of the OPCW and its Fact-finding Mission, and
look forward to the final report on this incident.

The FFM. has also requested and was provided
with, documents pertaining to four reported incidents
currently under investigation by the National Authority
of the Syrian Arab Republic: two incidents in Kharbit
Masasnah on 7 July 2017 and 4 August 2017; one

incident in Al-Salamiyah on 9 August 2017; and another
incident in Souran on 8 November 2017. The FFM. is
continuing to translate and analyse the information
contained in those documents.

At its fourth special session last June, the Conference
of States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention,
inter alia, decided that the OPCW Secretariat

"shall put in place arrangements to identify the
perpetrators of the use of chemical weapons in
the Syrian Arab Republic in those instances in
which the OPCW Fact-finding Mission in Syria
determines or has determined that use or likely use
occurred, as well as cases for which the OPCW-
United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism had
not issued a report".

On 27 July, the OPCW Director-General provided a
report to States parties and to the Secretary-General on
the initial implementation of the decision. The Secretary-
General has taken note of the decision adopted at the
OPCW Conference of States Parties in June and looks
forward to the Director-General's next progress report,
which will be issued to the OPCW's Executive Council
at its eighty-ninth session, next month.

The lack of a mechanism to attribute responsibility
to those who have used chemical weapons has been
deeply troubling and a missing step on the path towards
accountability. The closure of the United Nations-
OPCW Joint Investigative Mechanism, which was
mandated to identify the perpetrators of such acts,
emboldened those who sought to carry out further
attacks. Anyone who uses chemical weapons must be
identified and held to account.

The Security Council holds the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
which is threatened by the use of weapons of mass
destruction. The adoption of the June decision in the
OPCW, therefore, does not lessen the need for unity
in the Security Council. The Secretary-General has
repeatedly expressed his willingness to assist the
Council, and I reiterate his calls on Council members
to work together to find a common approach to tackling
this issue, which has become one of the most critical
challenges to the maintenance of international peace
and security. Like the Secretary-General, the Office for
Disarmament Affairs stands ready to assist.

I would like to recall the remarks made by the
Secretary-General in this Chamber on 14 April, when
he stated: "Any use of chemical weapons is abhorrent,
and the suffering it causes is horrendous" (S/PV8233, p. 2). In that regard, I underline that the use of any toxic
chemical, such as chlorine, as a weapon by any party
and under any circumstances is totally unacceptable.
Last week, the Secretary-General expressed his
deep concern about the growing risks of a humanitarian
catastrophe in the event ofa full-scale military operation
in Idlib province. Before concluding, I wish to reiterate
that it is of vital importance that humanitarian principles
be upheld, that all relevant international disarmament
and non-proliferation norms - most importantly the
Chemical Weapons Convention - be fully respected,
and that all sides work together to avoid further
escalation in Syria, including in and around Idlib.

