Mr. Cohen (United States of America): Let me
add our voice to those thanking Under-Secretary-
General Lowcock for his deeply concerning, sobering
and important briefing today. We are very grateful for
his hard work and the work that his team does on the
ground in Yemen every day.

The stories behind the huge number of people
affected by the crisis have become all too familiar:
babies ravaged by hunger, too weak to cry, and parents
choosing between critical medical care for a child or
food for their family. Now, as the Under-Secretary-
General argued, continued deterioration and newly
acute risk are apparent in every grim update, most
recently in the reports of over 20,000 newly displaced
people in northern Yemen, due to fighting in the area.

There are alternatives to that situation. The
suffering of the Yemeni people is not inevitable. But
unless the fighting stops and there are immediate
efforts to stabilize the Yemeni rial, then the suffering
of those who are already severely food insecure in
Yemen will continue to worsen. In that regard, no one
has worked harder or more tirelessly to bring about a
political solution than Special Envoy Griffiths. He has
our full support and we need him to succeed.

Until we achieve a political solution, we implore
all the parties to take the measures necessary to protect
civilians and critical civilian infrastructure and to
ensure unfettered access for humanitarian goods and
personnel and the movement of essential commercial
goods. The parties must adhere to their obligations
under international law and recognize that damage
to ports and other civilian infrastructure will further
drive food insecurity. In that regard, we urge parties to
consider all possible measures to further mitigate and
reduce unnecessary suffering from the conflict. We
thank the United Nations for its efforts to maintain a
de-confliction mechanism in that context to allow aid
and commercial goods to flow despite the fighting.

We share the Under-Secretary-General's assessment
that humanitarian assistance, especially in the past
year, has been critical in staving off the worst outcomes
and mitigating Yemeni suffering. The United States is
one of the largest donors of humanitarian assistance
to Yemen, having provided more than $1.2 billion in
humanitarian aid since fiscal year 2017, including food,
medical care, safe drinking water, shelter, psychosocial
support and supplies to fight the spread of disease.
The United States contributions to the World Food
Programme operations have also been vital.

However, as the Under-Secretary-General
said, we can and must do more. And so we are. In
addition to continued humanitarian relief, we are
expanding non-humanitarian assistance to address
the consequences of conflict, including supporting
efforts to enhance the Central Bank of Yemen's ability
to function, so that it can begin to address Yemen's
deteriorating economic situation and the currency
depreciation that has made it even harder for Yemenis
to afford to survive.

We will continue all those efforts, and hope that
all parties will also recognize and help to respond to
the suffering. At the same time, there is simply no
alternative to a political solution. The dire situation that
the Under-Secretary-General described is yet another
reminder that this war and the suffering of the Yemeni
people can end only at the negotiating table, not on
the battlefield.
