Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at the outset to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council. We express our full support for all
your efforts for the maintenance of international peace
and security. We thank Ambassador Lavrov and the
friendly delegation of the Russian Federation for their
efforts last month to carry out the tasks of the Council.

We welcome Mr. Michael Steiner. We have heard
his briefing at the opening of this meeting, a very
detailed and thorough statement on all aspects of the
situation in Kosovo. In particular, he provided us with
the details of the successes achieved during the past 18
months and of the obstacles that continue to impede
full implementation of resolution 1244 (1999). The
delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic wishes to
reaffirm to Mr. Steiner its deep appreciation for his
efforts to obtain the release of prisoners and to restore
the political process in Kosovo, which will lead to the
establishment of civilian institutions there. We agree
with Mr. Steiner in his assessment of the positive
aspect represented by the open appeal addressed to all
displaced persons in Kosovo and the hopes and
objectives contained therein.

My delegation expresses its satisfaction with the
Secretary-General's report (S/2003/675) on the work
done by the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), submitted pursuant to
resolution 1244 (1999), which is now before us.

My delegation welcomes the transfer of powers to
Provisional Institutions, in accordance with chapter 5
of the Constitutional Framework, which will make it
possible to strengthen the capacity of the Provisional
Institutions to assume new responsibilities. The
Government of Kosovo took 27 decisions in that regard
during the period covered by the report, 12 of which
relate to legislation. The Kosovo Assembly made great
progress in forwarding legislation to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for
promulgation following revision. The municipal
assemblies have also made great efforts to adopt
legislation, which has been slow.

We must also protect vulnerable groups and
women and encourage them to participate in public
life, in accordance with the action plan known as
"Community Proportional Representation", put forward
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and the Kosovo Prime Minister last year.

My delegation reaffirms the need to pursue
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina regarding
practical matters to be resolved, and we are pleased to
note that the United Nations Office in Belgrade began
its work on 1 July 2003.

My delegation also supports the Secretary-
General's comments in his report that the challenges
faced by UNMIK must be met by working in the
framework of the "standards before status" policy, as
explained by Mr. Steiner.

Finally, my delegation welcomes Mr. Steiner's
efforts and contribution to UNMIK. We congratulate
him on the progress made during his mandate and wish
him every success in his future work once he has
completed his task as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Kosovo.

