Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his sobering
presentation.

Across the Middle East, we see trends moving in
the wrong direction - of rising violence, of political
leaders choosing conflict over peace, of innocent
people paying the price as conflicts fester. Today, I will
discuss those trends in Israeli, Palestinian, Lebanese
and Syrian contexts, and what we can do to help reverse
them. Let me begin with the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

We share the Secretary-General's serious concern
about the situation on the ground, especially the violence
against innocent civilians. There is absolutely no
justification for terrorism or for the taking of innocent
lives. That is why we condemn in the strongest terms
the unconscionable terrorist attack last week in the
West Bank, where a 13-year old girl, Hallel Ariel, was
stabbed to death in her own home as she slept. In recent
months, there has been a steady stream of Violence on
both sides of the conflict. On 21 June, as we heard, a
15-year old Palestinian boy, Mahmoud Badran, was
killed when returning home from a night out at a water
park in the West Bank, in what the Israeli army said
was an accidental shooting. Shortly thereafter, clashes
broke out at Al-Haram Al-Sharif/Temple Mount during
Ramadan. We offer our most sincere condolences to the
families of Hallel and Mahmoud, and to all victims of
senseless acts of violence.

Israel has just announced the advancement of
hundreds of settlement units in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem. If implemented, that would be the latest step
in what seems to be a systematic process ofland seizures,
settlement expansions and legalizations of outposts that
is fundamentally undermining the prospects for a two-

State solution. As the Quartet report makes clear, this
is notjust about settlement construction. It is a broader
process that includes not giving permits for Palestinian
development and demolishing the homes and structures
of Palestinians. As the report finds, the population of
settlements has more than doubled since the Oslo process
began in 1993. Settlement activity is incompatible with
a two-State solution and counterproductive to the cause
of peace. The report is clear that Israel should cease
the policy of settlement construction and expansion,
designating land for exclusive Israeli use, and denying
Palestinian development.

The Quartet report reflects our concern about the
trends on the ground that are imperilling a two-State
solution, such as violence, terrorism and incitement to
violence, the settlement construction and expansion,
and the political and humanitarian situation in Gaza. We
are concerned that continuing on the current course will
make the prospects of a two-State solution increasingly
remote and risk entrenching a one-State reality. The
Quartet report's main objective is to provide a way
forward to achieve the goal that is shared by all on the
Council - a negotiated two-State solution. That way
forward requires both sides to take all necessary steps
to prevent violence and protect the lives and property
of all civilians. The Palestinian Authority should act
decisively to cease incitement to violence and clearly
condemn all acts of terrorism, and both sides must
refrain from provocative actions and rhetoric.

Finally, the report rightly recognizes the
challenging situation in Gaza and the threat it poses
to the two-State solution. This includes the build-up of
illicit arms and militant activity in Gaza, which must be
terminated. The report also outlines in detail the very
dire humanitarian situation in Gaza, with 1.3 million
Gazans in need of sustained humanitarian assistance.
The international community must accelerate Gaza
reconstruction and assistance. The report stresses the
urgent need for affirmative steps to reverse each of
these trends and calls on both parties to independently
demonstrate through policies and actions a genuine
commitment to a two-State solution. In other words, the
parties should take steps now to move towards creating
a peaceful two-State reality on the ground. The Quartet
report provides a constructive path forward to help
create the conditions for meaningful negotiations.

In Lebanon, the country's politicians must show
leadership and flexibility by electing a president
in accordance with Lebanon's Constitution and
national pact. Two years ofa presidential stalemate have
hobbled the Government at a time when the country
faces profound security risks, as demonstrated by the
recent suicide attacks in the village of Al-Qaa. That is
why the United States is helping the Lebanese Armed
Forces build the capabilities necessary to counter
violent extremism and protect the Lebanese people, an
essential effort that more Governments should support.
In Syria, the Al-Assad regime continues to attack
civilians, besiege cities and prevent humanitarian aid
from reaching those whose lives depend on it. Even
as the regime and opposition committed to refraining
from attacks during Eid Al-Fitr, the Al-Assad regime
violated this commitment by continuing attacks on
Daraya, outside of Damascus, as well as in Aleppo and
Homs. The Al-Assad regime's attacks over the past
week demonstrate its aim to encircle and cut off access
to Syrians in the eastern part ofAleppo, with potentially
devastating consequences. A besieged eastern Aleppo
City would represent the largest such population in
the country, with hundreds of thousands of additional
Syrians cut off from regular access to aid. Russia, as a
co-sponsor of the cessation of hostilities, should use its
influence on the regime to help stop those attacks.

Onthe humanitarian front, more than 590,000 people
remain trapped in 18 besieged areas. In most of those
cases, the regime and its allies continue to deliberately
obstruct access to Syrians in desperate need of food
and basic medicine. The regime regularly challenges
the United Nations on the number of beneficiaries who
need assistance in these besieged locations, trying to
argue that the United Nations should be stocking even
less aid in its convoys.

The challenges to accessing these besieged areas
remain immense. Take one example: the town of
Madaya near Damascus, which is besieged by the
Al-Assad regime. The people of Madaya are dependent
on humanitarian deliveries for survival. Otherwise,
they would be putting their lives in great danger if
they tried to leave to get food, medicine or other
basic supplies. According to a report from Physicians
for Human Rights and the Syrian-American Medical
Society, released just today, Madaya is surrounded
by approximately 65 checkpoints. The report explains
that each of those checkpoints can include military
personnel, snipers and heavy weaponry. Between the
town and the checkpoints, the report further notes, up
to 12,000 landmines and a network of dirt mounds and
trenches keep the town's 40,000 residents trapped. That
is one landmine for every three residents.

These conditions are, needless to say, not conducive
to resuming intra-Syrian negotiations. In December
2015, the Security Council unanimously expressed
support for resolution 2254 (2015) for a Syrian-led
political process that establishes credible, inclusive and
non-sectarian governance. Getting a genuine cessation
of hostilities back on track is critical to this goal. The
Syrian people desperately need a reduction in violence
and sufficient humanitarian aid.

In Daraya, another town outside of Damascus
besieged by the Al-Assad regime, Fatima Lahham
recently told a reporter about her 7-year-old daughter,
Maram. Maram is going deaf. While others run for
shelter when regime aircraft approach the town, Maram
just cannot hear them coming. When special batteries
in Maram's hearing aids run out, Fatima, her mother,
has noticed that Maram will not take the hearing aids
out. According to Fatima, she says, "No, they might
make me hear". Although a recent aid convoy made it
possible for her to get a new set of batteries, Fatima is
deeply anxious about what will happen to her daughter
when they run out again in a few weeks. Now when
young Maram draws pictures of people running away
from bombs, Fatima sees that there is a little girl who is
not running away, because she cannot hear. Those are
the consequences for just one family of the Al-Assad
regime's sieges. It is horrifying to think of what will
happen if continued Syrian and Russian air strikes
could force another 300,000 people in and around
Aleppo to endure the same fate.

