Ms. Loj (Denmark): This statement is made in
my national capacity. Before proceeding, I wish to
fully associate Denmark with the statement made by
the United Kingdom.

The Al-Qaida/Taliban sanctions regime is as
important as ever in the international fight against
terrorism. The 1267 Committee, with the support of its
Monitoring Team, endeavours to ensure that the
sanctions remain up to date, relevant and adequate to
counter the constantly changing threat from Al-Qaida,
the Taliban and their associates.

It is a welcome development that the Committee
is receiving an increasing number of names to be added
to its consolidated list. At the same time, several
countries have voiced concern that the listing and
delisting procedures do not live up to the principles of
due process. Some countries have even stated that they
will not be able to propose names for inclusion on the
Committee's list until those concerns have been
addressed.

Whether the lack of due process is real or not, it
is crucial that the concerns be addressed. It must be
avoided that a number of countries perceive Security
Council sanctions to be less than firmly founded on the
principles of due process. The issue demands the
immediate attention of all members of the Security
Council.

In our efforts to combat international terrorism, it
is imperative to strike the right balance between
preventive and swift action against terrorists on the one
hand, and adequate safeguards for the individual -
and not least for those unjustly targeted - on the other.
It is also very important that our efforts are carried out
in full respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms.

At the same time we must, of course, maintain
that it is the Security Council that takes any decisions
on listing and delisting. In our View, the Council
should therefore focus on improving the Committee's
delisting procedures. That would enhance the
credibility of the sanctions regime, and it would
increase the regime's effectiveness by providing
additional safeguards so as to avoid keeping on the
lists people who do not belong there. Furthermore,
improving the delisting procedures will not in any way
weaken the effectiveness of preventive actions against
terrorists. Listed persons or groups will remain on the
list and will therefore be subject to the preventive
actions until the Committee decides otherwise.

A way forward in this respect could be to
establish a review mechanism that would consider
individual petitions for delisting from individuals and
entities affected. The mechanism would be authorized
to request unclassified information from the
Committee, which would keep the mechanism
informed of its activities on a regular basis. After
having considered a complaint, the review mechanism
would submit a recommendation to the Committee.
The Committee would endorse or dismiss the
recommendation, thus keeping decision-making within
the realm of the Security Council. This mechanism
would also act as a filter in cases that are deemed
unfounded and consequently do not merit consideration
in the Committee. Denmark stands ready to discuss
with Council colleagues this or alternative ways
forward.

It is against this background that Denmark is
participating actively in the ongoing negotiations of a
strengthened 1267 sanctions regime. We thank the
United States for a very good draft resolution and for
the many innovative and constructive ideas contained
in it. Denmark supports almost all of them
wholeheartedly. It is, however, of key importance that
the resolution also contain very clear language on the
Security Council's intention to address the increasing
due process concerns.

Before concluding, I would like to express
Denmark's firm support for and confidence in the work
of the 1540 Committee, as just described by its
Chairman. Thanks to his leadership and the support of
its experts, that Committee is on a solid course towards
fulfilling its mandate. Much remains to be done,
however, and it is of utmost importance that all
Member States meet their reporting requirements.

The work of the 1540 Committee is a key element
in our common endeavour to prevent the spread of
weapons of mass destruction, including to terrorists
and other non-State actors. As we all know, this
challenge remains as urgent as ever.

