Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): I welcome the
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dacie, and Ambassador
Vlora Citaku back to the Security Council today, and
I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Kosovo, Mr. Zahir Tanin, for his briefing.

The political leadership in both Serbia and Kosovo
has reiterated a commitment to continue normalizing
relations. We encourage their ongoing determination
to ensure that this important agenda continues to move
forward. To do so, it will be necessary for both sides to
implement agreements that have been reached so far,
including in relation to Serb-majority municipalities
in Kosovo. We hope that the EU-facilitated dialogue
can continue to advance the process of normalizing
relations, and that both sides can bring to the table
the necessary political will and requisite flexibility to
make progress possible. Ongoing technical discussions
in Brussels can support the process by building shared
understandings and common interests.

With respect to the political situation in Kosovo, we
are disturbed by recent violent and disruptive episodes
in the Assembly of Kosovo. As noted in the report
(S/2016/407) of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), acts of violence, in any form, remain
an unacceptable means to express political views.
When elected representatives engage in such acts it
sets a poor example for others to emulate, and risks
seriously undermining democratic institutions. Such
incidents also undermine reconciliation efforts. We
welcome efforts under way to promote a more peaceful
and tolerant society in Kosovo, such as the Kosovo
Government's recent conference on interfaith dialogue
and heritage protection as tools of reconciliation and
combating religious extremism. It is important that
further progress towards reconciliation not be deterred
or undermined by the efforts of a disruptive minority.

Another important aspect of reconciliation is
confronting the past in order to allow a society to move
forward together. We welcome further progress in the
establishment of the specialist court to try allegations
arising from the European Union Special Investigative
Task Force, including Kosovo's ratification of a
host agreement with the Netherlands. We hope that
the remaining preparatory work can be concluded
expeditiously so that the court can begin its work as
soon as possible.

As others have mentioned, we also urge further
progress on rule-of-law issues, including ensuring
respect for an independent and accountable judiciary
and the appointment of judges and prosecutors from the
Serbian judiciary into the Kosovo legal system.

Before I conclude, allow me to welcome the
positive role UNMIK has played. We reiterate our view
that the Council should adopt a more flexible approach
to how it considers this agenda item, bearing in mind
the number of other pressing issues with which the
Council grapples.

