Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): First
of all, I thank Special Envoy Griffiths and Under-
Secretary-General Lowcock for their briefings.

The international community is currently paying
close attention to the issue of Yemen and has high
expectations for the restoration of peace and stability
in the country. The Stockholm Agreement has brought
about hope for peace among the Yemeni people. The
Security Council must reach a timely understanding on
the implementation of the agreement by all parties and
on the challenges they are facing. It must also continue
to play a positive role on the issue of Yemen.

At the moment, all Yemeni parties are abiding by
the ceasefire agreement in general. The Redeployment
Coordination Committee, under the auspices of
the United Nations and with the participation of all
Yemeni parties, is conducting this work in an orderly
fashion and arrived at a consensus on 17 February on
arrangements for the first phase. The Yemeni parties
are implementing the prisoner-exchange agreement
and addressing the issue of the city of Taiz and the
large-scale prisoner-exchange plan.

China welcomes those positive developments. At
the same time, as indicated by the representative of
Kuwait, we see that there are challenges remaining. The
practical difficulties in implementing the agreement
cannot be underestimated. There is still fighting in
Al-Hudaydah and its surrounding areas. The two parties
still have differences on the release of prisoners and the
issue of Taiz. The humanitarian situation in Yemen is
dire. Against that backdrop, I would like to share the
following comments.

First, we should continue with the implementation
of the Stockholm Agreement. The Yemeni parties
should effectively implement the Agreement, address
their differences through dialogue and achieve broader
consensus. Efforts should be made to accelerate the
deployment of the United Nations mission in Yemen in
order to assist and monitor the implementation of the
Agreement. The Yemeni parties should also strengthen
cooperation with the United Nations, provide
assistance to and facilitate the Mission's deployment
and effectively guarantee the security of international
personnel in Yemen. The Security Council should take
full account of and respect the opinions of the country
in question and the countries in the region, and should
remain united.

Secondly, we must intensify efforts to ease
the humanitarian situation in Yemen. The Yemeni
parties must actively cooperate with United Nations
humanitarian assistance efforts and facilitate its rapid
and unhindered humanitarian access. The international
community must provide food, medicine and funds in
a targeted fashion in order to support the economic
improvement and price stabilization in Yemen so as to
meet the basic subsistence needs of the Yemeni people.
China looks forward to the positive results of the high-
level pledging conference on the Yemen humanitarian
response plan, to be held on 26 February.

Thirdly, we should push the Yemeni parties to
sustain effective political dialogue and negotiations.
We must insist on the role of the United Nations as
the main channel. The Yemeni parties should also
strengthen cooperation with Special Envoy Griffiths
and Lieutenant General Lollesgaard, and maintain
contact with them in order to build mutual trust and
narrow their differences. Under the leadership of the
Redeployment Coordination Committee, political
will must be translated into genuine action. We look
forward to seeing the early launching of the next round
of peace talks under the leadership of Special Envoy
Martin Griffiths so as to achieve a balanced settlement
that takes into account the interests of all parties and
helps to restore peace, stability and normalcy in Yemen.

Political means are the only way to resolve the
Yemeni issue. All parties must safeguard the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of
Yemen and, based on resolution 2216 (2015) and other
resolutions, the Gulf Cooperation Council initiative and
its implementation mechanism, as well as the outcome
document of the National Dialogue Conference, support
efforts to reach a broad and inclusive political solution
through dialogue and consultation. The international
community should create favourable conditions for the
Yemeni parties to implement the agreements towards a
political solution.

Lastly, I would like to emphasize that China is
willing to work with all parties in a concerted effort
to continue to play a constructive role in moving the
political process in Yemen forward and improving the
humanitarian situation.

