Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We wish to thank you, Mr. President, in your
capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), for your
presentation of the 90-day report, as well as Under-
Secretary-General Feltman for his briefing on the
launch by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
ofa ballistic missile on 28 November.

This fresh violation by Pyongyang of a Security
Council resolution is cause for deep disappointment.
Once again, we must take stock ofthe fact that prospects
for normalizing the situation on the Korean peninsula
remain very distant. There is no doubt that this further
demonstration of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea's open disregard of the demands set out in the
resolutions of the Security Council and the norms of
international law justifies the strongest condemnation.
Russia does not accept the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea's goal of acquiring the status of a
nuclear power and has supported all Security Council
resolutions demanding an end to the missile and
nuclear programme of Pyongyang, in the interests of
denuclearizing the Korean peninsula.

At the same time, it is clear to us that there can
be no military solution to the problems on the Korean
peninsula. Given current conditions, we strongly call
on all parties concerned to halt the spiral of tension
that seems to follow each cycle of reaction and counter-
reaction. It is essential to take a step back and carefully
weigh the consequences of each move and to revise the
policy of mutual threats and intimidation, because such

a policy can only have the opposite effect of what is
being sought.

It is in the interest of the entire international
community for the situation on the Korean peninsula
to be resolved only through peaceful means. In
the meantime, until the States of the region show
their readiness to pay due attention to the political
components of all sanctions resolutions, including
resolution 2375 (2017), the situation will continue to
deteriorate, creating in a Vicious circle.

Sanctions against Pyongyang are simply an
instrument aimed at engaging it in constructive
negotiations and should not be used either to strangle the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea economically
or to intentionally worsen the humanitarian situation.
This pertains in particular to the illegal unilateral
restrictions that strike at the civilian sector and have no
link to the country's missile and nuclear programmes.

Over the past two and a halfmonths, the United States
and its allies seem to have been testing Pyongyang's
patience with their activities, including undeclared,
unscheduled military manoeuvres in October, recently
instituted unilateral sanctions, and United States and
South Korean military and air exercises to be conducted
next week on an unprecedented scale near the border
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, and
which were only just announced. Against a backdrop of
relative calm from Pyongyang, these incessant gestures
of hostility towards the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea compel us to reconsider the sincerity of the
statements being made about preferring to use peaceful
means to resolve the crisis surrounding the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea.

We believe that this time should have been used
to take concrete steps to make direct contact with
Pyongyang rather than further escalating tensions. A
comprehensive solution to the problems of the Korean
peninsula is possible only in the framework of a
general military and political de'tente in North-East
Asia, reducing the level of military confrontation and
establishing mutual trust among the States involved in
the region. That was the approach proposed by Russia
and China in their joint statement on 4 July on a road
map for gradual progress towards a settlement, starting
with the principle of suspension for suspension, which
envisions a halt by the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea to its missile and nuclear tests with at the same
time a reduction by the United States and South Korea
of the scale and intensity of their military exercises.

That in turn would pave the way to a discussion

of the principles of peaceful coexistence between

Washington and Pyongyang and a resumption of the

inter-Korean dialogue.

It must be clear to everyone that making progress
towards achieving a comprehensive settlement of the
Korean peninsula's issues will be difficult as long as
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea feels that
its security is directly threatened. And that is how
Pyongyang sees the military hyperactivity that is going
on in the region in the form of the conduct of regular,
large-scale manoeuvres and exercises by the United
States and its allies, as well as by sending strategic
bombers and naval forces, including aircraft carriers.
An additional destabilizing factor in the region has
been the ramping up in the Republic of Korea of
elements of the American Terminal High Altitude
Area Defense anti-missile system. We have repeatedly
stated that such moves are not only an irritant but
undermine the military balance in the region generally
andjeopardize the security of neighbouring States. It is
now more important than ever for the parties involved
to refrain from provoking each other, show restraint
and make sure that no further steps are taken that could
further escalate tensions. In that regard, we strongly
urge the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to
stop its nuclear-missile tests and call on the United
States and the Republic of Korea to refrain from the
large-scale unscheduled military manoeuvres starting
at the beginning of December, which will only inflame
an already explosive situation.

Russia's position on resolving the situation around
the Korean peninsula remains unchanged. Finding
a long-term, mutually acceptable solution to all the
problems can be achieved effectively only through
determined, active diplomacy. In that context, we call
on all sides to start working without delay on finding
a formula for a political and diplomatic settlement. We
see no rational alternative to that.

