Judge Khan: It is a great honour for me to
address the members of the Security Council as the
new President of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda.

I would like to begin by congratulating the
representative of Gabon, who is presiding over the
Security Council in June. I wish you, Sir, all the best
for a successful tour of duty.

I am pleased to present the members of the
Security Council with the fifteenth completion strategy
report of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (see S/2011/317, annex I). I would like to
express the appreciation of the entire Tribunal to the
Governments of the members of the Council and to the
Secretariat for their continued trust and support at all
levels over the last six months. I would also like to
congratulate Council member Portugal, which has
taken over as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals.

In the second half of this year, the Tribunal will
render judgments in five more cases with respect to 14
accused persons. For two cases where fair-trial
considerations required the provision of more time,
judgment will be delivered in the first quarter of 2012.
The Military 11 judgment involving four accused
persons was delivered on 17 May, and the Butare
judgment, involving six accused, will be delivered on
24 June. The Bizimungu judgment will be delivered by
August, and the Karemera, Ndahimana and
Nzabonimana judgments will be delivered in the fourth
quarter of this year. Therefore, almost all of our current
caseload will have been completed by the end of 2011.
Of course, there are a number of referral applications
of cases to Rwanda under review. The trial decision in
the case of J ean-Bosco Uwinkindi is due to be rendered
at the end of this month, and the inevitable appeal is
projected to be finished in October.

The Prosecutor has made a new arrest. Bernard
Munyagishari was arrested in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo about two weeks ago. This new arrest
may not lead to trial activity if the referral applications
to Rwanda are accepted. However, if the Uwinkindi
application is denied and no other country is willing
and able to try Munyagishari, the trials of both will be
held at the ICTR, and, because we conduct these
applications and pretrial simultaneously, the trials
would most likely be finished by late 2012.

The Tribunal has also begun the hearings for
preservation of evidence under rule 71 bis in the case
of one fugitive, Felicien Kabuga, and two others will
begin in the fall. As an additional judicial workload,
we also anticipate at least three proceedings for
contempt of court beginning early next year.

In terms of appeals, a further five appeal
judgments are expected to be delivered in the second
half of 2011, and a total of 11 are expected by the end
of 2014.

Due to fair-trial considerations, our judicial
calendar can only provide estimates of expected
judgment delivery dates. However, our success at
meeting the targets set in the completion strategy
reports continues to improve, thanks to our trial
management initiatives. Those initiatives, which were
largely introduced after 2007, have shortened the time
required for pre-trial and trial, while upholding the
highest standards of fair-trial rights.

We can maintain this progress only if we remain
adequately staffed. Here I would like to thank our staff
for their continuing determined efforts to advance the
mandate of the Tribunal, often under difficult
circumstances.

Staff retention remains a critical issue. The
staffing situation is delicate, and any increase in
departures would endanger our ability to meet our
completion strategy targets. As an institution in the
final stages of its mandate, we have specific problems
that cannot be solved by applying standard human
resources policies. In this regard, we support President
Robinson's proposal for a limited payment to staff

members with more than five years of continuous
service who remain until the abolition of their posts.
We also have a large number of staff on
temporary contracts. Those contracts will have to be
extended past the permitted 729-day period, and we
will need the support of the Secretariat to do that. We
appreciate that in its resolutions the Council continues
to note the importance of adequate staffing for the
Tribunals and calls on the Secretariat to work with the
Tribunal Registrars to find practical solutions to the
issue. I would also like to thank Council members and
the General Assembly for recognizing with a one-time
ex gratia payment the significant contribution that ad
litem judges have made to the work of the Tribunal.

Next, I turn to the issue of management positions
in the Tribunal Chambers. The permanent judges in
Arusha have already begun to leave. Some will resign
when their cases end, and others will be redeployed to
the Appeals Chamber. Under the present rules, in a
short while, once all the permanent judges have left,
we will not be able to fill the critical positions of
President and Vice-President of the Tribunal. We have
therefore requested, through the Secretary-General,
that the requirement that the President be a trial judge
resident in Arusha be removed, and that provision be
made for an ad litem judge to be elected Vice-President
and to act as President in the President's absence.

State cooperation continues to be an important
factor in the Tribunal's success. In the last few weeks,
Judge Byron rendered decisions on the transfer of four
convicts to Member States for enforcement of their
sentences. I would like to thank all the States that have
concluded agreements with the Tribunal on receiving
convicts for their cooperation.

We would also like to encourage Member States
to consider accepting referral applications from the
Tribunal. Nine fugitives still remain at large. We are
pleased that the most recent arrest, of Bernard
Munyagishari, was made about two weeks ago. The
Tribunal relies on the cooperation of Member States in
the tracking, arrest and transfer of fugitives. We look
forward to the early and speedy conclusion of the work
of the joint ICTR/Kenya task force in the tracking,
apprehension and transfer of the fugitive Felicien
Kabuga. The Prosecutor will provide the Council with
a more comprehensive briefing on this matter.

I would like to draw the Council's attention to the
increasingly problematic issue of relocating the
acquitted. Under any national jurisdiction, a person
acquitted of criminal allegations is set free and allowed
to fully reintegrate into society. This, unfortunately, is
not the case for those acquitted by the Tribunal. They
remain trapped in Arusha while they wait to be
relocated to a safe country. As acquitted persons, they
should be in a position to fully enjoy their rights,
including the right to life, which encompasses the right
to family, education and employment. Instead, they are
separated from their families and unable to pursue
further education or any form of employment.

Five out of eight of those acquitted have been
able to join their families in their country of choice, in
most cases following lengthy and difficult negotiations.
Regrettably, this has not been the case for three
acquitted persons who remain in safe houses in Arusha.
For one of them, Andre Ntagerura, it has been almost
five years since his acquittal was confirmed by the
Appeals Chamber.

The challenge of relocation is the unfortunate
result of the absence of a formal mechanism for
securing the support of Member States in accepting
such people in their territories. The ICTR considers the
resettlement of persons acquitted by an international
criminal tribunal to be a fundamental expression of the
rule of law and is seriously concerned about the
consequences of failing to fulfil this obligation.

This view was shared by the United Nations
refugee agency in a meeting of experts of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) and of the ICTR organized in Arusha in
April. One of the conclusions of the joint expert
meeting recognized that the Security Council is where
the plight of the acquitted persons belongs and that the
Tribunal has no other choice but to call upon the
Council for its assistance in finding a sustainable
solution to this issue. The Security Council will shortly
receive a joint dossier on this matter prepared by the
UNHCR and the ICTR.

Moreover, the relocation of convicted persons
who have served their sentences also needs urgent
attention. These persons have even fewer avenues for
resettlement open to them. This issue is destined to
become growing problem in the years to come.

Lastly, I would like to provide an update on the
progress towards the Residual Mechanism, which was
established by this Council in resolution 1966 (2010),
six months ago. We are working hard, under tight
deadlines, to ensure that the Residual Mechanism will
be a small and efficient institution. In close
cooperation with the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, we are providing input to the
Office of Legal Affairs on the Mechanism's draft rules
of procedure and evidence and developing a proposed
budget, staffing requirements and joint policies for
access to and security of the archives of the Tribunals
and the Mechanism. We are doing all of this while
relying on our existing staffing resources - which are
already stretched thin - and engaging in full-time
efforts to complete our core judicial work.

I want to thank the Council for the commitment
and the support it has shown the Tribunal over the last
17 years. I look forward to working closely with the
Council to ensure the success of the Tribunal in the
final stages of its mandate.

In the same way that the jurisprudence of the
Tribunals set a precedent for international criminal
justice, we hope that our efforts to meet the goals of
the completion strategy may also guide the closing of
future tribunals. As the Tribunal has gained experience,
delays have been reduced and effectiveness in
approaching the strategy has increased. The lessons
learned from the Tribunal's efforts to implement a
completion strategy must be shared with other
institutions embarking upon such endeavours, so that
difficulties can be minimized and best practices
maintained and implemented.

The Tribunal has been engaged in work directly
related to the Rwandan genocide for more than 17
years. That genocide has greatly affected everyone at
the Tribunal, and seeking justice for the victims
continues to drive our commitment to the goal of
ensuring that never again will such atrocities occur. As
the Tribunal's mandate draws to a close, we hope that
our work will lead the way in the continued fight
against impunity.

