Mrs. Malenga (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): I would first like to express
my deep satisfaction at seeing you, Sir, preside over the
Security Council during the month of March, and to
tell you how pleased we are to see France lead today's
Council deliberations. I would also like to thank you
for holding this debate on children and armed conflict,
thereby affording my country, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the opportunity to speak on an issue that
continues to be one of our priorities. I would also like
to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and other
speakers for their respective statements. Finally, my
thanks go to Mr. Junior Nzita for his testimony.

Allow me to note here that the repeated outbreaks
of war experienced by my country are at the origin of
various forms of atrocities experienced by children
in the eastern parts of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo still occupied by armed groups. Indeed,
Congolese children who have been or continue to be
detained by armed groups have lived through and
continue to experience psychologically traumatic
events. They are helpless eyewitnesses of horrible
scenes of violence during which their family members
and friends are killed before their eyes.

Thousands of child victims of violent attacks by
armed groups have suffered massive moral damage
and material damage. Many are used as combatants,
messengers, sex slaves, spies, traffickers or transporters
of munitions. Some are also used to crush stones in
quarries in order to make gravel. Once the stones are
crushed, the coltan is used in electronic devices. The
high level of radioactivity of those substances explains
the frequency of the sometimes fatal respiratory
problems suffered by a large number of Congolese
children who crush and transport coltan. Those who
survive remain traumatized by the acts of vandalism
and barbarity perpetrated against them by armed groups
to which they fell victim. Moreover, children displaced
by conflict have virtually no access to education, which
makes them even more vulnerable to recruitment into
armed groups.

Mindful of this tragic situation experienced
by children, my Government, with the support of
international partners, including the United Nations, is
committed to combating violations of children's rights.
Its initial efforts consisted in putting an end to that
problem within our army. To that end, my Government
has launched several initiatives. Strongly determined
to eradicate the problem, it has made the necessary
political commitment, leading to the appointment
by the President of the Republic, Joseph Kabila, of a
Personal Representative in charge of the fight against
sexual violence and child recruitment.

The efforts of my Government to end this issue
continue. In that regard, my country has supported
the United Nation global "Children, Not Soldiers"
campaign, which the Special Representative of the
Secretary- General for Children and Armed Conflict and
UNICEF organized in 2014 with a view to eradicating
the recruitment and use of children in conflict by
Government security forces by the end of 2016.

My Government is also committed to the fight to
eradicate the negative forces and armed groups that,
to a certain degree, constitute the root causes of the
issue. Furthermore, my Government also places special
emphasis on the fight against impunity for serious
crimes committed against children, and has established
new courts for children in 10 provinces in the country.
In the same effort to strengthen the protection of
children, the Government has decided to make the
six grave violations of the rights of children in armed
conflict a criterion for disqualification for membership
in our armed forces. Those strong initiatives to support
children's rights have had significant results, including
the arrest and conviction of high-ranking officers in
our armed forces and the national police.

In conclusion, my Government is determined
to pursue its efforts to implement its action plan to
eradicate the recruitment and use of children in armed
forces and groups, as well as other grave violations of
children's rights. In that regard, my country would like
to thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, for her dedication to the cause of children. My
country also welcomes the excellent cooperation it has
developed with the Office ofthe Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, the Task Force on Children and Armed
Conflict, the MONUSCO team for child protection and
UNICEF. My country expresses its deep gratitude to all
these partners.

