Mr. Al-Badi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
The serious and bloody events taking place in the
occupied Palestinian territories confirm the aggressive
nature of Israel, which is seeking to create pretexts to
further its settler colonialism and to expand, in order to
usurp and Judaize more Palestinian territories and to
create new conditions which are impossible for the
Palestinians to accept or live with.

Anyone who resists occupation, rejects
humiliation and indignity, finds all the roads closed
before him and is left with nothing but self-sacrifice is
called a "terrorist" and must be condemned.
Furthermore, his clan and his relatives must be
punished and penalized. Yet the unjust occupier and
oppressor who has usurped all the rights of others is
allowed to enjoy the right of self-defence to further its
colonialism and entrench its occupation.

The racist separation wall - which the
Palestinians consider the third tragedy, or nakba - the
construction of which began in 2002 under the pretext
of maintaining security, is in fact part of Ariel Sharon's
plan, which dates back to the 1970s and which he
began implementing in the 1980s with the Seven Stars
settlement plan. That plan seeks to erase and
completely abolish the Green Line in several areas and
to annex the Israeli settlements to Israel, creating
narrow alleys between cities and other populated
Palestinian areas, which the Israeli Government views
as separate cantons that will be controlled by Israel,
which will allow the Palestinians to manage their own
internal affairs, so that Israel will be spared the burden
of a foreign population.

The first phase of the construction of the wall,
comprising 90 kilometres from Jenin to Qalqilya, has
been completed and has devoured one third of the West
Bank. The eastern wall will extend from Ain al-Baydat
through Toubas to Jericho. Thus, the map of the four
cantons will be completed in the West Bank. This will
isolate some 250,000 Palestinians in real prisons from
which they cannot move.

It is thus clear that the purpose of this racist wall
is not to ensure security, as insolently claimed by
Israel, but to confiscate more land, and to humiliate
and oppress the Palestinian people creating conditions
making it difficult or impossible for them to live within
their own country and on their own land. Probably the
best evidence of this is set out in the report of the
Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human
Rights, John Dugard, which states that "The evidence
strongly suggests that Israel is determined to create
facts on the ground amounting to de facto annexation"
(E/CN.4/2004/6, summary), and that "Israel's action in
the [occupied Palestinian territory] is so remote from
the interests of security that it assumes the character of
punishment, humiliation and conquest [of the
Palestinian people]" (ibid., para. 5).

Israel would not have continued its injustices and
aggression had the Security Council assumed its
responsibilities to preserve international peace and
security. Israel would not have continued to ignore and
disdain the Security Council and the United Nations
had it not been for the practice of double standards.
Israel would not have continued its policy of
colonialism and the building of additional settlements
had it not been assured that it had political protection
and that no economic sanctions would be imposed
upon it such as the ones imposed upon other States.

Given both the permanent international
responsibility of the United Nations for the Palestinian
question until such a time as it is resolved in all its
aspects as well as the provisions of the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
calls upon the Security Council to fully assume its
responsibilities and discharge its obligations by
asserting the illegitimacy of erecting such a wall and
by calling for Israel to halt its construction
immediately. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has called,
and will continue to call, for the deployment of an
international interposition force between Palestinians
and Israelis. The situation in the Middle East should be
no exception to the rule enforced in other parts of the
world to separate warring parties. The Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia calls on the Quartet to assume its
responsibilities under the road map and to establish
implementation mechanisms for it, including the
deployment of an interposition force to separate the
parties and guarantee their adherence to the road map.

