Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this debate on the
important subject of the promotion of the rule of law as
a complement to the maintenance of international
peace and security. I also wish to thank Deputy
Secretary-General Asha-Rose Migiro for her
unrelenting commitment to the cause of the rule of law,
and Under-Secretary-General Patricia O'Brien for her
very insightful exposition on the subject under review.

This debate proceeds from the premise that
justice and peace are mutually reinforcing ends,
essential for a healthy society. The demonstrable truth
of this assertion impels, in our view, a thorough
examination of how best to promote and strengthen the
rule of law as part of the United Nations commitment
to maintain international peace and security. The
examination must take into account the need for a
common language and understanding of the concept of
justice in the United Nations and at the international
level.

Without the critical underpinnings of legislative
and judicial infrastructure in any society, and in the
absence of broad acceptance of legal norms, economic
and social development will inevitably be retarded, as
legal rights cannot be effectively claimed. The
vulnerable are not protected from violations of criminal
and humanitarian law and, in such circumstances, there
is a pressing need for justice to be done and, indeed, to
be seen to be done. Only then can confidence in the
organs of society and in Government be restored.
The centrality of the rule of law cannot therefore
be overemphasized, particularly with regard to
transitional and fragile States. It is gratifying that the

consideration of the issue of the rule of law is by no
means new to the Council's agenda. Apart from the
debates of 2004 and 2006, the rule of law has featured
in many Council resolutions in the context of children
and armed conflict - such as in resolutions 1325
(2000), 1612 (2005), 1674 (2006) and 1820 (2008).
Prominence was also given to the subject with the
establishment of the Rule of Law Coordination and
Resource Group, in 2007. Since then, United Nations
actors have benefited from an excellent resource
through which efforts at reform are pooled and best
practices sifted.

We have been challenged by the concept paper
before us today (see S/2010/322) to identify ways of
rooting activities deeper within the framework of
international law and to encourage adherence to the
rule of law and international law within the domestic
sphere. All too often in the immediate aftermath of
conflict, the architecture of order and justice becomes
fragmented as a result of violence, meaning there are
few mechanisms for bringing violations of criminal or
humanitarian law to light. This, in turn, leads to a
culture of impunity that is readily exploited by armed
groups. In such circumstances, there is a pressing need
for justice to be done, or to be seen to be done. Only
then can confidence in the organs of society and in
Government be restored.

We note with satisfaction that rule of law values
are beginning to find their way into peacekeeping
operations led by the United Nations and regional
organizations like the African Union. For example, in
the Sudan, the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur is mandated to assist in promoting
the rule of law through institution-building and
strengthening local capacities to combat impunity.

The Council has also mandated the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to assist with the investigation
of human rights violations in that country, with a view
to ending impunity and implementing a transitional
justice strategy. Such best-practice models should
continue to be replicated with due regard to the
particular historical, political and institutional
backdrop. Ideally, such initiatives should also receive
early programmatic funding in peacekeeping mission
budgets for that purpose.

We would also encourage the use of the
integrated mission planning process advocated under
the capstone doctrine to ensure that, as far as possible,
the multiple arms of the Organization act in concert to
support a return to lawfulness, accountability and
justice, as part of peacebuilding processes. In that way,
the United Nations may stimulate an approach that
integrates security, human rights, development and rule
of law activities into all strategies for peacebuilding.

In the context of conflict situations, we would
like to underscore the need for close collaboration
among the Security Council, the General Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council in the task of
facilitating the restoration and consolidation of the rule
of law in conflict and post-conflict societies. It is
essential that the United Nations develops a strategy
that allows peacekeepers to undertake, prioritize and
sequence peacebuilding tasks from an early stage. The
strategy should focus on the police, the rule of law,
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration, security
sector reform and quick-impact projects.

The role of the Peacebuilding Commission and
civil society entities in post-conflict reconstruction
cannot be overstated. Regional organizations can also
contribute positively to global efforts to consolidate the
rule of law.

We must also stress the need to craft initiatives in
partnership with legitimate national and local actors to
foster long-term local ownership of the processes and
institutions administering justice. The primary role of
the United Nations should focus on assistance, and
must not seek to transplant judicial systems. We
believe that reform efforts that incorporate public
participation in their design would enjoy more
credibility and more legitimacy vis-a-vis the ultimate
beneficiaries. Clear anti-corruption strategies from the
United Nations might also ensure a culture of integrity
within judicial systems.

Strategies such as these would strengthen
transitional justice processes where the ultimate
objective is to reconcile as well as to punish. We would
welcome a report from the Secretariat that covers more
recent case studies to assess how far the United
Nations system has achieved an integrated approach to
rule of law activity in societies transitioning from
conflict. The recommendations therein would serve as
milestones against which to measure progress.

In the area of inter-State disputes, Nigeria
supports the use of the International Court of Justice
(ICJ) as an effective and authoritative arbitrator of

international disputes. Indeed, in the context of
Nigeria's boundary dispute with Cameroon concerning
the Bakassi peninsula, the ICJ mechanism proved itself
a very crucial part of the United Nations pacific
dispute settlement armoury under Chapter VI of the
Charter.

With respect to ad hoc tribunals, while we
recognize their value in ending impunity and bringing
violators to justice in the aftermath of violent
confrontation, resource constraints can limit their
effectiveness. We are now witnessing the winding
down of the mandate of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda. We hope that all the necessary
support will be given by the United Nations to the
relevant domestic justice systems to ensure that they
are equipped to adequately take on the mantle of
punishing crimes against humanity and other conflict-
related violations of international law.

Nigeria has previously stated, and reiterates
today, that the International Criminal Court is an
invaluable tool for ensuring the development of
international law. We hope that its decisions will help
us to keep pace with the changing nature of
international relations. It would be to the benefit of the
entire community of nations if those Member States yet
to do so would accede to the Rome Statute.

We are encouraged by the Council's unanimous
decision to appoint an ombudsman to analyse the
de-Iisting of terror suspects from the consolidated list.
Such procedural steps shore up due process within
appropriately targeted sanctions regimes and, as such,
should be considered in relation to other sanctions
regimes.

In conclusion, it is incumbent upon the Council to
pay due regard to the value of the rule of law as an end
as well as a means. Unless the standards of lawfulness
are maintained, there is a high risk that the call for
adherence among nations and non-State actors to the
rule of law could possibly be undermined. The Council
should engender adherence to international legal
standards through uniform implementation and
consistent enforcement instruments and regimes. Our
quest for justice and the rule of law should not be
limited to the domestic sphere. Those same standards
should also apply at the international level. It is our
collective responsibility to manifest a just international
order, and thus empower all peoples to live in peace
and harmony.

Ms. Le Fraper du Hellen (France) (spoke in 
French): I thank you, Sir, for having organized this

open debate on strengthening the rule of law in the
maintenance of international peace and security.

We would also like to convey our gratitude to
Ms. Migiro, Deputy Secretary-General, and
Ms. O'Brien, Under-Secretary-General for Legal
Affairs, for their contributions. Ms. O'Brien
underscored the scope of the activities of the
Organization in strengthening the rule of law. She
mentioned in particular the administrative tribunals,
which we sometimes forget.

I will address three issues: the strengthening of
the rule of law in conflict and post-conflict situations,
international justice and the peaceful settlement of
disputes, and the efficiency of the sanctions regime. In
these three fields, without being too optimistic, the
distance covered in the four years since the adoption of
the 2006 presidential statement (S/PRST/2006/28) is
substantial.

On the strengthening of the rule of law, the
promotion of justice and the rule of law enables a
weakened country emerging from conflict to rebuild
and move towards a lasting peace. Notable progress
has been achieved since our last debate, as I just
mentioned. The Permanent Representative of Nigeria
spoke of the role of the Peacebuilding Commission and
the fact that provisions regarding the promotion of the
rule of law are now systematically included in the
specific mandates of peacekeeping and peacebuilding
operations, such as the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur.

The Rule of Law Assistance Unit approved in the
2005 World Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1) and
which is backed by the Office of Rule of Law and
Security Institutions is now operational, as was
underscored by Ms. Migiro. It devotes special attention
to the specific needs of each country and enables us to
ensure better coordination of capacities on the ground.
This is above all a matter of identifying real needs. At
recent meetings in which we participated, we have
noted that aid has often focused on fields such as
training and the building of infrastructure to the
detriment of more complex programmes that are just as
essential aimed at ensuring, for example, in the judicial
field, the independence and protection of magistrates

whom we are training. France welcomes the role
played by Ms. Migiro in this effort to identify
priorities. We take note of her proposals to further
strengthen the coherence of the system.

Turning now to international justice and the
peaceful settlement of disputes, France also takes note
of progress achieved. The peaceful settlement of
disputes is one of the pillars of the Charter of the
United Nations, and the International Court of Justice,
as the main judicial body of the United Nations, plays a
central role in the maintenance of peace and security.
The number of inter-State disputes and requests for
opinions by bodies of the United Nations brought
before the Court clearly demonstrate its vitality. To rule
on matters of law is a vital responsibility that structures
the international order; however, as other speakers
have said before me, it is just as important to apply this
law, and it is to that issue that we must devote our
attention in years to come.

The international community has acquired new
tools to assist it in its work in preventing and settling
disputes. As underscored in the concept note submitted
to us by the Mexican presidency (S/2010/322), the
fight against the impunity of the perpetrators of
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes is
an essential aspect of our mission to promote peace and
security. To fight against impunity, the international
community and the Council can now count on the
International Criminal Court, the first standing tribunal
mandated to prosecute the perpetrators of the worst
crimes when national authorities do not have the will
or the capacity to bring such perpetrators to justice.

France has frequently reiterated that we
unreservedly support the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court and his work, in particular
in his prosecutions of crimes committed in Darfur, a
situation referred to him by the Security Council. The
Security Council deemed that the intervention of an
independent, impartial tribunal would contribute to
prosecuting crimes in the Sudan. The Court has carried
out its work. It is now incumbent upon the Security
Council to ensure that its own decisions are respected.
At stake is respect for the Charter and for the referring
Rome Statute. It is also important that all
representatives of the Secretary-General should, as
Mr. Ban Ki-moon asked them to do, respect and
support the international criminal justice actors within
the framework of their missions on the ground,
especially when the Court works within the framework
of a Security Council resolution adopted on the basis of
Chapter VII of the Charter.

As to sanctions and their efficiency, the Council
has consistently improved this essential political
instrument by specifically targeting individuals and
entities that breach embargoes, impede peace processes
or are linked to Al-Qaida, as well as individuals
responsible for hate crimes or incitement of hatred.

The efficiency of this Council hinges in part on
its ability to ensure that States vigorously implement
its decisions. That is especially important in the field
of the fight against terrorism. We have noted a loss of
trust by a number of States in the mechanisms for
de-iisting individuals by the sanctions committees. In
order to ensure that the United Nations targeted
sanctions system remain a transparent tool to
effectively fight against threats to peace, France
proposed in 2006 the creation of a focal point that
would take requests for de-listing and exemptions
directly from individuals on the list. A shared focal
point was set up. Four years later, pursuant to
resolution 1904 (2009), we have moved even further
through the appointment of an Ombudsman for the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999), responsible for considering de-listing requests
made to the Committee and to put Member States'
questions to individuals requesting de-listing. France
welcomes the appointment of Judge Kimberly Prost to
that post. These developments enable us to better take
into account respect for human rights in the fight
against terrorism.

Exercising the responsibility to protect,
combating impunity and strengthening the
effectiveness of sanctions are the missions that France
would like to see the Security Council work on more
diligently. That is the way we interpret the draft
presidential statement that has been circulated by the
delegation Mexico, which we support.

