Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Mr. President, I congratulate your friendly
country on its accession to membership of the Security
Council and on assuming the presidency of the Council.
I also congratulate the new non-permanent members.

I thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his thorough briefing this morning.

We align ourselves with the statement delivered by
the representative of Libya on behalf of the Group of
Arab States.

Today's meeting is being held following a year
of suffering for the Palestinian people, during which
their rights were violated with increased violence.
The number of victims of violence has nearly reached
300. In addition to the stalemate in the peace process,
this deterioration of the security situation is another
factor underscoring the urgent need to reach sustained
solutions and for all stakeholders to work towards
that goal.

Achieving a permanent, just and comprehensive
peace requires the settlement of final status issues
through a serious negotiation process between the two
sides - Palestinian and Israeli - on the basis of agreed
upon terms of reference, including the Arab Peace
Initiative; the establishment of a viable Palestinian
State within the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital; the ending of the Israeli occupation of
occupied Arab territories, including the occupied
Syrian Golan and Lebanese territory; the immediate
and complete cessation of settlement activities; the
return of refugees; and the restoration of the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people.

The issue of Jerusalem is of particular importance
owing to its centrality in the light of the ongoing
tensions. In that regard, we reject any attempt to change
the current status ofAl-Quds Al- Sharifand holy Muslim
and Christian sites, especially Al-Aqsa Mosque.

The State of Qatar continues to uphold its position
and policy in favour of playing a positive role in
achieving peace, stability and a just, permanent and
comprehensive settlement of the Palestinian question.
The State of Qatar recognizes the importance of
stability and an environment conducive to peace.
We will therefore pursue our efforts to contribute
positively to alleviating the humanitarian suffering of
our Palestinian brothers, especially in the light of the
extremely deteriorated situation in the Gaza Strip due to
the continued unjust blockade that has been imposed on
Gaza for over a decade. The recent urgent humanitarian
assistance provided by the State of Qatar contributed
greatly to alleviating the severe electricity shortage
and helped to prevent the closure of the schools of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East as a result of a shortage
in funding.

The Syrian people continue to suffer from the
catastrophic consequences of the ongoing Syrian crisis,
especially the Syrian refugees and displaced persons
who are enduring the harsh winter. In that regard,
His Highness Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al-Thani,
Emir of the State of Qatar, allocated $50 million to
alleviate their suffering. That humanitarian response
was undoubtedly essential. However, the only way
to put an end to this suffering and to the threats to
international peace and security arising from this crisis
is through a political solution that meets the aspirations
of all the Syrian people, in accordance with the Geneva
communique (S/2012/522, annex) and Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 2254 (2015), and
maintains the unity, territorial integrity, sovereignty
and independence of Syria. Until a political transition
is achieved and national reconciliation is completed,
those who have perpetrated crimes that violate
international law and international humanitarian law
must be held accountable.

Despite the many serious crises in our region, an
additional irresponsible crisis was created through the
unjust blockade on the State of Qatar for over a year
and a half in an attempt to harm the State of Qatar
and tarnish its reputation. The campaigns of hatred
and deception carried out by countries of the blockade
failed to undermine the standing of the State of Qatar
or the steadfastness of its people. However, this crisis
has had dangerous consequences on the stability of the
region and the collective efforts ofthe Gulf Cooperation
Council to address threats and common challenges.

Furthermore, the blockade has caused several
serious violations of the human rights of Qatari citizens
and all those residing in the State of Qatar. These
continued illegal unilateral measures set a precedent
and have had an impact on international relations based
on international law and good-neighbourliness. A
decisive stand should be taken against them to ensure
an immediate end to this unjust and illegal blockade.
The State of Qatar is committed to resolving the
crisis through dialogue in a way that guarantees its
sovereignty and puts an end to those illegal measures.
We have renewed our commitment to the mediation
carried out by His Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad
Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, the Emir of the sisterly State of
Kuwait. We appreciate his efforts and those of other
States to resolve the crisis. Qatar's wise approach to this
crisis has been clear from the outset and is in accordance
with international law and international mechanisms
for settling disputes. This was reflected in the ruling
issued by the International Court of Justice in July 2018
in favour of the State of Qatar against the United Arab
Emirates for violating the International Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination.

I started my statement by speaking of the bleak
picture of 2018. Perhaps it would be appropriate for me
to conclude by expressing hope that the New Year will
be different and that all stakeholders will undertake
serious and genuine measures to resolve the Palestinian
question in a just, permanent and comprehensive way
and to wisely address all other crises in the Middle East.

