Mr. Duale (Somalia): I take this opportunity to
thank you, Mr. President, for enabling me to participate
in this discussion on Somalia today. At the same time, I
would like to congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
also take this opportunity to thank the Secretary-
General and all Governments, organizations and
individuals that have supported Somalia's efforts to
advance the cause of peace, stability, reconciliation,
humanitarian assistance, human rights, unity, political
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity.

In that connection, I wish personally to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, who in his briefing to the
Council has presented Somali issues better than I could
ever do. That is because he is on the ground. We hope
that the United Nations will now allow him to set up
his office in Somalia, and not outside it. I hope that the
same will happen when it comes to all United Nations
country offices that are now located in Nairobi.

I also wish to thank Mr. Lamamra, Commissioner
for Peace and Security of the African Union (AU), for
his support and his briefing. Through him, I also thank
the AU, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development and the countries contributing troops to
Somalia, which, as he has said, has suffered a lot.

I also wish to thank the Permanent Observer of
the League of Arab States for his briefing and support.

I now wish to proceed to touch on a number of
issues raised in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2009/684) that were also highlighted by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in his briefing.

Clearly, our first priority is security. Without
adequate security for all, it is hard to see how any
meaningful progress can be achieved in the areas of
economic development, employment, peace and
stability, among others. Furthermore, we believe that
this could be achieved through the following steps,
which were also mentioned by the Special
Representative. The first is to sufficiently rebuild the
Somali national security force, including the army,
police, coast guard and justice and correction units.
The second is to adequately strengthen the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) in all respects
to be part of a larger United Nations effort. The third is
the deployment of an adequate United Nations
peacekeeping force, of which AMISOM. will become
an integral part at an appropriate time - which we
hope will happen sooner rather than later.

In that connection, we wish to go further and say
that we believe that the only way to improve security
and stability in Somalia is to empower Somali security
forces to subdue the most virulent insurgents and to
enable the Government to extend its areas of authority

as far as possible if negotiations for peace fail. This is
clearly necessitated by the fact that, in the past two
decades, the political scene in Somalia has been
characterized by a state of anarchy and stalemate in
which none of the competing forces has been able to
overwhelm the others decisively, credibly and
definitively. In that scenario, we believe that it is still
possible to end the agony of the Somali people by
establishing a strong, well-trained and well-equipped
national force.

Secondly, with regard to the mobilization of
resources, the Council will no doubt have noted that
there are several references in the latest report to
inadequate progress having been made in several areas,
including security, due to the lack of or delays in
receiving resources. The Council will also note that, to
date, the Government has received only a very small
portion of the confirmed pledges made in Brussels in
April 2009. We therefore appeal to Member States to
urgently release their pledged contributions to the
Transitional Federal Government (TF G).

In that connection, we thank the Secretary-
General and the United Nations organizations
concerned for their efforts to mobilize resources for
Somalia. When it comes to accountability and
transparency with regard to the funds disbursed
directly to the Transitional Federal Government, it
should now be noted that the accounting firm of
PricewaterhouseCoopers has been hired by the
Government to oversee all expenditures of resources
received from outside the country.

Humanitarian assistance is very essential and
important. We fully share the deep concern of the
Secretary-General over the significant decline in
humanitarian funding in 2009 and the delays in the
delivery of badly needed supplies. For its part, the
Transitional Federal Government is committed to doing
all it can to protect and speed up deliveries and access.
Again, we must point out that there is a genuine
connection between humanitarian assistance and
security. We believe that improving the security
situation is the way to proceed with regard to
improving the delivery of humanitarian assistance to
needy populations.

On the issue of piracy, we are on the record in our
support for the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/590). We again reiterate that piracy is only a
symptom of the security situation in Somalia.

Therefore, the way to tackle piracy is to tackle the
overall security situation on land. To that end, the
Government has already trained 1,000 coast guard
staff, but they lack the basic necessities to be deployed
to the areas affected and where they are most needed to
combat piracy on land.

As we noted in the case of humanitarian
assistance, the key to improvements in the human
rights situation is to improve the security situation.
Unfortunately, wherever there is conflict in the world
there will be some violence and violations of human
rights. The Transitional Federal Government is
committed to the observance of human rights. We
uphold the value of human life and dignity. As reported
in the Secretary-General's report, the Somali Cabinet
has endorsed the Convention on the Rights of the
Child. In fact, the former Permanent Representative of
Somalia to the United Nations signed the Convention
on behalf of the Government in 2004. We now expect
Parliament to fully ratify it soon.

With regard to reconciliation and peacemaking,
the Transitional Federal Government is fully
committed to the process of reconciliation and the
fulfilment of the Djibouti process. Some progress has
already been made, but more definitely needs to be
done. Unfortunately, there are elements in the violent
opposition who neither will have anything to do with
reconciliation nor desire any peaceful settlement of
issues. They are only interested in armed struggle to
remove or wipe out all who disagree with their
interpretation of Islam, national goals, interests and
values. Nevertheless, the Transitional Federal
Government will continue to reach out to all elements
in the interest of bringing about peace.

However, it must be noted the TFG is also
obliged to do its utmost to repel and resist armed
violence while condemning all terrorist acts and the
use of violence for political ends. It must be noted
further that the TFG, at a meeting of the International
Contact Group on Somalia hosted by the Organization
of the Islamic Conference in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, on
17 December 2009, presented its strategy for 2010 on
the following areas: first, reconciliation and outreach;
secondly, security; thirdly, holding an international
conference on recovery and reconstruction; and
fourthly, effective coordination and cooperation
mechanisms between the Transitional Federal
Government, its neighbours and the international
community.

I would like to end my intervention with a few
remarks about the three-phase incremental approach by
the United Nations, as outlined in the Secretary-
General's April 2009 report (S/2009/210). It is possible
that this approach, had it implemented much earlier,
could have been useful. However, at this moment, and
given the dire Somali situation, especially the
humanitarian situation, of the past two decades, we
consider that this approach might prove to be
inadequate to say the least. The proposed piecemeal
solution does not seem to be commensurate with the
gravity of the situation. What is really needed is not a
light footprint. We believe the reality and gravity of the
current situation would in our view dictate a much
heavier footprint. When one is afflicted with a serious
disease that has persisted for so long, maybe a massive
dose of medicine - or at least a significant one - is
what is needed. Excuse me: I am a doctor by
profession, so this is the example I know best.

Finally, we support the Secretary-General's
request to the Security Council to renew the mandate
of the United Nations Political Office for Somalia for
the biennium 2010-2011, as we also support the
renewal of the mandate of AMISOM. for a further term
of 12 months.

I am now duty-bound to express on behalf of my
Government our appreciation and thanks to His
Excellency the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and the United Nations country team for
Somalia for their untiring efforts. We wish them all a
happy and successful year.

Allow me also to join previous speakers in
conveying our most sincere sympathy, condolences and
solidarity to the Government and the people of Haiti,
especially the families who suffered most.

I also wish, finally, to thank the Security Council
for remaining seized of the case of Somalia and to urge
the Council to take express action.

