Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to express our support for the statement of the representative of France. We thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his briefing. First of all, we would like to express our categorical condemnation of the wave of attacks in the last quarter of last year, which claimed the lives of some 193 Malian soldiers. representing an alarming trend in terms of both frequency and scale. Our heartfelt condolences go to the families of the victims who died in the line of duty, including the 13 French soldiers. On a positive note, we are encouraged by the progress in the long-awaited inclusive national dialogue as a constructive exercise in empowering all the relevant parties in the peace and reconciliation process. We eagerly await the results of the dialogue, which should reflect the legitimate concerns and recommendations of the people, and the implementation of policies and measures based on its conclusions. The Dominican Republic has always championed the important role of women in decision-making and internal processes, and we therefore commend the active participation of women's and youth groups in the inclusive national dialogue. We agree with the statement that it is women and young people who pay the highest price in conflicts, and therefore there can be no real discussion on peace and development without their equal participation. The Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict visited Mali in December to learn about the situation first-hand and to establish a dialogue with the Government, armed groups, civil society and other stakeholders regarding the challenges and opportunities in making progress on that agenda. We take this opportunity to acknowledge the work being done by the United Nations MultidimensionalIntegrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and UNICEF in that regard. We call on the Government of Mali to continue strengthening the legal framework for the protection of children and we hope that the draft law on gender-based violence, as well as the revision of the Child Protection Code, which criminalizes the recruitment and use in hostilities of children under 18 years of age, will be adopted as soon as possible. More than 1,000 schools remain closed owing to persistent insecurity, which amounts to more than 244,000 children without access to education. We call on the Government of Mali to fulfil its obligations under the Safe Schools Declaration and take action to resume the education of the thousands of affected children and on armed groups to refrain from threatening teachers, attacking schools and using them for military purposes. As they have concluded the process of the inclusive national dialogue, we urge the parties to focus their attention on the immediate implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, based on the priorities identified in resolution 2480 (2019), which were also part of the conclusions of the dialogue reached by consensus, including the constitutional and institutional reforms; the redeployment of the reconstituted Malian defence and security forces to the northern part of Mali; and the participation of women, who continue to be underrepresented in the mechanisms responsible for implementing and monitoring the Agreement. We remain very concerned about the persistent critical and complex security situation in central and northern Mali as a result of intercommunal violence and the spread of terrorist groups, which, during every reporting period, claim the lives of hundreds of civilians and threaten to destabilize the entire region. We must pay particular attention to the hopelessness felt by the population, especially young people, and the existing vacuum in the absence of State authority to provide security and justice that are exploited by extremist groups to promote their cause and exercise greater control. We are encouraged by MINUSMA's efforts, based on the Council's request for the development of a second strategic priority that would allow the Mission to increase its presence in the centre of Mali. Lastly, we believe that it is important to strengthen outreach initiatives and relations with the relevant parties in Mali in order to better understand the work and mandate of MINUSMA and the sanctions regime, the sole purpose of which is to contribute to security and the peace and internal reconciliation process.
