Mr. Derbez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Throughout the entire inspection process Mexico has
clearly expressed its confidence in the impartiality,
professionalism, seriousness and constructive spirit in
which Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei's teams are working.
On this occasion, having heard their reports, we
reiterate that confidence.

In the report presented today we see a degree of
improvement in the working conditions under which
the inspectors are operating. In the past three weeks
Iraq has changed its position regarding aerial
reconnaissance and interviews with scientists and has
provided documentation that could clarify pending
questions. At the same time, a decree has been enacted
in Iraq that prohibits the importing and production of
materials that could be used for producing weapons of
mass destruction.

Just as it is clear that today's report indicates
some improvement in Iraq's attitude, it is also clear
that the Iraqi Government continues to evade its
international responsibilities. It has yet to respond to
repeated appeals made by the international community
under resolution 1441 (2002) that it cooperate
unconditionally in achieving the disarmament
requested.

The international community is calling for
genuine and verifiable disarmament and wants to know
precisely, if this is the case, where and how Iraq
destroyed its arsenals of chemical and biological
weapons, the location of installations where this type
of weapons was produced and their current status. At
least one fact is irrefutable. It has been proven that in
the last two wars in which Iraq participated, it
possessed and used this type of weapons. Now the
international community demands to know the
whereabouts of these arsenals or to have evidence of
their effective destruction.

As on few occasions in the history of the United
Nations, Security Council members have applied
themselves to finding alternative means leading to the
shared goal of dismantling Iraq's arsenals of mass
destruction. We are united in attaining this goal but
increasingly divided as to the most effective and least
costly manner by which it may be achieved. The
different approaches and proposals have been discussed
and considered in the spirit of preserving the unity of
the Security Council, for in the Council lies the
strength of a system of collective security, which the
United Nations is.

Within the framework of those deliberations,
Mexico's contribution has been oriented towards
preserving that consensus and exploring peaceful and
multilateral ways to bring about the verifiable,
immediate and effective disarmament of Iraq. That is
why, after having heard the reports of Mr. Blix and
Mr. ElBaradei this morning, we reaffirm our
confidence in inspections as the mechanism approved
by the international community to detect and destroy
the weapons of mass destruction in that country. If
those inspections have not thus far yielded the hoped-
for results, the Security Council's primary task is to
ensure that they fulfil their mission. We cannot fail to
stress that Iraq will have to change its attitude
drastically in order to take full advantage of the last
opportunity offered to it by this body.

Mexico is especially concerned about the damage
that this conflict is already causing at the political and
economic levels and with regard to the world's social
tranquillity. In a very few weeks, signs of international
political polarization have appeared as the international
economy suffers the consequences of anxiety and
uncertainty. In Mexico, we are not immune - much
less indifferent - to those effects. The disarmament of
Iraq, under a process that unequivocally allows its
absolute compliance, would help to alleviate those
signs of tension and would provide certainty to the
global economy. In that endeavour, we must make
greater efforts; we must revitalize the values of peace
as the principal formula to discredit terrorism.

Mexico reaffirms its full confidence in the United
Nations to settle international disputes, in exhausting
all peaceful means available to us and, above all, in
strengthening the values that gave rise to the
Organization and that are more relevant than ever in
the light of the current dilemmas.

