The Secretary-General: I am pleased to address
the Security Council on the important subject of
preventing armed conflicts and addressing their root
causes. Although we are focused today on Africa, there
are universal lessons in conflict prevention that apply
everywhere around the world.

Conflicts breed where there is poor governance,
abuse of human rights and grievances over the unequal
distribution of resources, wealth and power. Tensions
simmer where people are excluded, marginalized
and denied meaningful participation in the political
and social life of their country. Unrest flourishes
where people are poor, jobless and without hope. To
prevent conflicts, we must strengthen democracy,
build stronger, more resilient and accountable State
institutions, ensure adequate checks and balances,
promote the rule of law and work to establish effective
democratic control over the armed forces.

Too often, national pride and the self-interest of
political actors and spoilers conspire to undermine
prevention efforts. Issues related to poor governance
and the unfulfilled promise of democracy often lead
to conflict. Good governance will be the focus of my
report on the causes of conflict and the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa.

More than 20 African countries are holding elections
this year. The relatively peaceful elections in Kenya
were an example of how electoral disagreements can
be handled through the legal process without recourse
to violence. In other cases, elections can be a source of
instability. The parties may use elections to continue
the competition to divide the spoils of war. That is why
it is so important for mediation efforts to ensure that
peace agreements are not just pacts between political
elites to address an immediate political problem; they
must also deal with the underlying causes of conflict
and allow all stakeholders to participate.

It is also not enough to reach agreements - they
must be fully implemented, monitored and enforced.
That is clear in the case of the Central African
Republic. The violation of the Libreville agreements by
parties contributed to the resumption of conflict and,
eventually, the unconstitutional change of Government.

Such challenges are particularly acute when
States are fragile and armed movements operate
with impunity across porous borders, often with the
support of neighbouring States. Whether in the Horn
of Africa or the Great Lakes region, the continent is
still afflicted by interconnected instability spreading
from one territory to its neighbours. That contagion has
many vectors: economic despair, arms flows, massive
population displacements, proxy conflicts triggered by
relationships of mistrust, and regional rivalries. In our
increasingly interconnected world, regional action to
prevent or address conflicts is all the more important.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, national
authorities, regional leaders and the international
community are coming together not only to deal with
the manifestations of violence, but also to address its
underlying root causes. I am grateful to the Security
Council for endorsing the approach of leaders of
the region. Their Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region emphasizes the need to address the
structural causes fuelling instability in that country
and commits regional actors to shared responsibilities.
The Council's new mandate for the United Nations
peacekeeping mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is intended to contribute to efforts for the
implementation of the Framework, including through
the deployment of an intervention brigade to deal with
the problem of armed groups.

In South Sudan, decades of political and economic
marginalization resulted in organized military and
political resistance. The United Nations has committed
to helping that young country, even though we have
paid a heavy price. I was outraged by the attack last
week that killed a dozen people, including five brave
peacekeepers. I thank the Council for joining me in
strongly condemning that appalling ambush and calling
for the perpetrators to be brought to justice.

Since the independence of South Sudan, Juba and
Khartoum have made slow but steady progress towards
the resolution of post-secession issues, including
agreements on border security arrangements, economic
relations and oil. But potential sources of conflict
remain, including in particular the unresolved status of
the Abyei Area,

The conflict in Somalia has multiple, complex
causes, including competition for resources and power,
a repressive State and a colonial legacy. The crisis is
exacerbated by politicized clan identity, easy access to

weapons, the presence of a large number of unemployed
youth and a culture of impunity that sanctions the use
of Violence.

The Federal Government of Somalia has entered a
new era of peacebuilding and statebuilding. But it faces
daunting challenges to restore confidence in the State
and the conditions necessary for peace and stability.
I am also concerned about the situation in the
Sahel, where countries have faced decades of complex
challenges of poverty, the effects of climate change,
frequent food crises, rapid population growth, poor
governance, corruption, the risk of violent extremism,
illicit trafficking and terrorist-related security threats.
The situation is exacerbated by the fact that States of
the region have limited capacities to deliver basic social
services and protect human rights.

When State authority and security institutions
erode, it becomes more difficult to manage borders. In
Mali, that has paved the way for transnational criminal
organizations and terrorist networks to disrupt regional
stability and compromise territorial integrity. Severe
drought and food insecurity in many countries in the
Sahel region, including in Mali, the Niger and Burkina
Faso, have also created conditions for instability and
undermined stabilization efforts.

The United Nations is at a critical juncture in its
engagement in Guinea-Bissau. Following the military
coup last year, the United Nations has continued to
promote inclusive dialogue among national actors
towards the restoration of constitutional order.

In all of our efforts across Africa, the United Nations
benefits from reinvigorated regional organizations.
They are playing a stronger and role as key strategic
partners. The prompt reaction of the Economic
Community of Central African States to the crisis in
the Central African Republic showed an increased
willingness to formulate joint responses to common
problems. The United Nations is working to strengthen
the conflict prevention and early-warning architecture
of the Southern African Development Community
(SADC). We are pursuing our 10-year capacity-
building partnership with the African Union. We are
strengthening our close relationship with Economic
Community of West African States on peacebuilding
and crisis prevention in West Africa. We are engaging
with the African Union, SADC and the International
Conference for the Great Lakes Region in the search
for peace in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. And we are partnering with the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development on the
urgent challenge to bring stability to Somalia.

Above all, it is critical to ensure that affected
communities own and lead conflict prevention
initiatives. Our support for national Governments
should focus on building the active engagement of
community organizations, the private sector, civil
society, women and youth in decision-making. Their
activities can help stabilize communities.

Prevention also demands that we address the
culture of impunity surrounding sexual violence. As
my Special Representative on the issue has rightly said,
sexual violence affects more than isolated individuals;
it is an assault on the peace and security of entire
communities. That is why I place such high priority on
addressing that destabilizing and dehumanizing crime.
I count on the Council to continue giving priority to
preventing and addressing sexual violence in conflict.

I thank the Security Council for its engagement
in the committed efforts of the United Nations to
address the root causes of conflict in Africa. Through
our comprehensive approach, strong partnerships and
principled action, we can usher in a new era of lasting
stability for the continent and its people.

