Mr. Desta (Eritrea): In the interests of time, I
will read a shortened version of my statement. I kindly
request that the full text be circulated in the Council
Chamber.

I wish to thank the presidency and the Council for
according my delegation the opportunity to share its
views on the current developments between Eritrea and
Djibouti. Eritrea observes with great regret that the
Government of the Republic of Djibouti has chosen to
engage in the levelling of incessant and baseless
accusations against the Government of Eritrea for the
past two months. Eritrea has made no incursion into
the territory of Djibouti, and it does not have any
territorial ambitions in the region.

There have been numerous contacts between
officials of the two Governments, including at the
highest level. The two leaders spoke about the current
development and decided to address it in a calm and
quiet manner that takes into account the sisterly
relationship between the two countries and the need to
ensure peace and security in the subregion.

However, for reasons that are best known to the
authorities of Djibouti, the understanding reached by
the highest officials of both countries was put aside and
the matter was taken to the public arena, with totally
unwarranted hostile anti-Eritrea campaigns. Attempts
to drag the Government of Eritrea into animosity
continued, but, Eritrea did not respond to the hostile
campaign. Instead, it chose the path of restraint and
patience. This was for profound reasons, because
Eritrea is keenly aware that the provocative campaign
originates from - and is designed and packaged -
elsewhere. Indeed, Djibouti and its people cannot, by
any stretch of imagination, have any interest in this
affair. The issue is not in reality an agenda or any other
matter that regards Djibouti.

The fact is there is no territorial or other dispute
between Eritrea and Djibouti. Djibouti's unwarranted
hostile campaign is underpinned by, and synchronized
with, other ulterior motives and regional developments.

Allow me to elaborate further on the dimensions
and ramifications of this manufactured crisis.

On 22 April this year, a few weeks before the
onset of this unwarranted campaign, the Ethiopian
regime set up a new military camp on Mount Musa Ali.
Ethiopia built a network of winding roads up the
mountain and deployed offensive long-range artillery
and heavy equipment directed at Eritrea, with the
apparent knowledge and acquiescence of its major
backers.

Musa Ali is perched at the intersection of the
borders of the three countries: Djibouti, Ethiopia and
Eritrea. The Eritrea-Ethiopia Boundary Commission
(EEBC) has, in the course of its delimitation and
demarcation awards of the Eritrea-Ethiopia boundary,
determined the respective sovereignties of both
countries at that trilateral junction. Ethiopia's actions,
six years after the EEBC award, are in flagrant
violation of those determinations.

In spite of those illegal acts of destabilization,
Eritrea chose to keep silent so as to pursue its
established legal approach with a higher focus. But
Eritrea's restraint in the face of that provocation only
aroused further frustration in the forces that wanted to
stir up trouble by trampling the rule of law. A hostile
campaign was set in motion, and on 10 June the
Government of Djibouti was pushed to launch a
provocative military attack on our units on the border.
The attack by Djibouti started at approximately 7 pm.
and continued to 11 June. To avoid the attack, Eritrea
pulled its forces back. On 12 June, Djibouti again
continued its attack, accompanied by helicopters. At
that time, Eritrea responded and defended itself.
However, Djibouti first cried foul, accusing Eritrea of
the very acts that it had perpetrated. As a local proverb
says, "a slingshot hits its target and emits a shrill cry
first". Djibouti thus did not only launch an unprovoked
attack, but levelled a trumped-up and well-orchestrated
accusation against Eritrea.

What was more surprising was the unbalanced
and unwarranted presidential statement that the
Security Council adopted on 12 June on the basis of
one side's information. In spite of all those adversities,
Eritrea did not relax but instead heightened its
restraint.

As I pointed out earlier, the underlying objective
of the military provocation, using Djibouti as a Trojan
horse, is to divert Eritrea from the main agenda - its
legal pursuit to ensure Ethiopia's eviction from its
sovereign territories in accordance with the final and
binding determinations of the EEBC - and to embroil
Eritrea on another front. The whole idea is to entangle
us in mutual recriminations with Djibouti. That would
lead to endless mediation missions and the aggravation
of putative regional crises.

In that light, the new campaign this week in the
Security Council is highly regrettable. Why has
Djibouti been prompted to submit an accusation
against Eritrea at this level? Why has the Security
Council been summoned to discuss a dubious and
irresponsible accusation against a Member State with
such hastiness? When the Security Council has kept
silent or shown little, if any, concern regarding
Ethiopia's flagrant violation of international law and its
occupation of sovereign Eritrean territories, how has it
been persuaded now to discuss a territorial dispute that
does not exist and where no territory has been
occupied? Why is an unwarranted skirmish, which
Djibouti provoked in the first place, being
misconstrued as an act of aggression that deserves
prompt consideration and action by the Security
Council? Why is the issue being blown up out of all
proportion? We could ask endless questions.

The Government of Eritrea wishes to underline
again that it will not be plunged - through
provocations, enticements or other mendacious
accusations - into a crisis to become a scapegoat for
misguided policies in our region. It will continue to
value close cooperation with Djibouti, as demonstrated
by the signing of several bilateral ventures recently in
the areas of trade, health, fishing and infrastructure.

Indeed, if the Security Council is to maintain
regional peace and security, it must look elsewhere. It

cannot and must not target the Victim. I wish to call on
countries with global reach and influence in the region
to take a careful look at their policies to ensure that
they become a positive force for development, peace
and security for the people in the region.

I also wish to draw the attention of the Council to
Eritrea's commitment to exercising restraint and
remaining politically committed to solving peacefully
any problem that might arise between Djibouti and
Eritrea.

