Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Farid
Zarif for his briefing. I welcome the presence of His
Excellency Mr. Aleksandar Vucic', Prime Minister of
Serbia, who has also made a statement. I also listened
attentively to the statement by Mr. Hashim Thaci.

China respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia and understands Serbia's legitimate
concern on the question of Kosovo.

China believes that resolution l244(l99) provides
the key legal basis for resolving the crisis in Kosovo.
The best way to resolve the issue of Kosovo is to
engage in dialogue and negotiations according to the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, within the framework of the relevant Council
resolutions, in order to reach an appropriate solution
acceptable to all parties.

Recently, the overall security situation in Kosovo
has remained stable, but it still presents a number of
complex factors. China appreciates the positive efforts
made by the Serbian Government and Prime Minister
Vucie himself to seek a political settlement to the
issue of Kosovo. We support continued practical and
constructive dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina
to implement the agreed bilateral agreements and to
concretely protect the legitimate rights and interests of
ethnic communities in Kosovo so that its people can
enjoy the dividends of peace and development as soon
as possible. Staying the course of dialogue to resolve
differences and conflicts and avoiding action that
might complicate or even escalate the situation, and
seeking a lasting solution to the issue of Kosovo, will
be conducive to the maintenance of peace and stability
in the Balkans and Europe at large. The international
community shares the goal of appropriately resolving
the issue of Kosovo.

China appreciates the work done by the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) under the leadership of Special
Representative Zarif and supports UNMIK'S continued
implementation of the Council's mandate. We hope that
international presences such as UNMIK, the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and the Kosovo
Force will produce a synergy based on their mandates
and that they will play a positive and constructive role
in pressing for an appropriate settlement to the issue of
Kosovo.

