Mr. Nangaa Yobeluo (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Security Council once again for giving
me this opportunity to clarify a number of issues. I
would also like to thank the President of the Conference
episcopale nationale du Congo for providing certain
details drawn from their own observation mission,
while noting at the same time that the law provides that
the mission should present its report to the Commission
electorale nationale independante, which has not yet
received any such report; we have learned about it only
from the media. In the meantime, I would like to clarify
three points.

First, the elections in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo were organized in conformity with the legal
framework as defined by the Constitution, laws and
relevant electoral provisions. Accordingly, the Electoral
Commission announced the provisional results in
conformity with that legal framework.

Secondly, the Electoral Commission has of course
taken note that the elections, as I mentioned in my
introduction, have aroused much passion so that, for
some people, as long as a certain candidate does not
win it will never be right. As I also indicated in my
introduction, the process was conducted over three
years, and at every stage there were requests and
demands that we clarify this or we do that. All of that
reflects the distrust among all the stakeholders. I was
fully expecting that, when the results were announced,
some people would say they did not agree and some
people that they did agree, but that is democracy. In
the interim, it has to be recognized that the Electoral
Commission has announced the preliminary results
of the elections and the country is calm, which shows
that the people have accepted the outcome. If that were
not the case, Kinshasa would already be in flames and
there would be blood on the streets. The country is calm
in the aftermath of the elections, and all the pressure
everyone was feeling is for the most part behind us.

Meanwhile, in conformity with the law, the
Electoral Commission has just published the
preliminary results. I must stress that they are
provisional results. The law provides that, after the
publication of the preliminary results, those who do
not agree with them may address themselves to the
relevant authorities. And we are prepared for that. If
a clarification or some other response is called for, the
Commission will answer only to those authorities. If
called upon by the Courts to provide information, the
Commission will provide information regarding its
activities. Again, regarding the Constitutional Court,
there will be two options: either to declare the results of
the Electoral Commission as valid - in which case we
will put this cycle of elections behind us and await the
next one in five years - or else to declare the results
as invalid, in which case the elections will be annulled
and the electoral process restarted - or some may
even protest that. But all such considerations are under
the jurisdiction of the Court, and in the meantime it
would be a violation of the law for me to claim to be in
a position to present any clarification or certification to
any authority other than the Court. That would not be
allowed under Congolese law.

Moreover, what is essential is that dialogue should
continue, and that whoever wins, whatever the outcome
of the elections, the people of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo speak to each other, talk to each other.
They need to look at each other and say "OK, this is
the situation we are in. What do we do now?" But my
advice, not as a representative of the Commission but as
a Congolese, would be to say, look, the elections were
organized in difficult circumstances against impossible
odds. The Democratic Republic of the Congo is a vast
country, and everything was stacked against us getting
to where we are today. One cannot clean house overnight
given everything that was done by the different parties,
or continue to act as if we can just keep starting over
every day. The Commission has published its results.
It cannot be said that the elections were perfect. Even
in the United States, we have learned that in the last
elections certain things happened. Is that a reason to
challenge the entire process? No.

At every stage, it must be said, there are always
protests, probably legitimate ones. We will duly answer
to the competent authorities and will continue to
monitor the situation. That is all we will do. I cannot
make a commitment to exceed what is provided by law
and put myself at the disposition of some other body or
organization that questions what went on and calls on
us tojustify ourselves. No. We will abide by the law and
we hope that others will do the same. We will see what
the Constitutional Court does about the presidential
and legislative elections, and what the various courts of
appeal do about the provincial elections.

Three elections in one day in a country like ours
was no easy feat. We slept only two or three hours a
day for a month. Given that we held three elections in
one day and managed to achieve what we have - that
is, the Congolese people voted and we are now enjoying
calm in the country - my advice is that we must not
poke the bear or seek justifications to be bogged down
in the perpetual beginning of negotiations.

As has been said, these elections are historic, so
let us not make the Congolese people miss what they
have been waiting for so long. We now find ourselves
within 10 days of proceeding with the establishment
of the new institutions, such as the swearing-in of
the new President-elect, if the Constitutional Court
confirms the results, and the installation of the new
National Assembly and the new provincial assemblies,
which will ultimately lead to the holding of indirect
elections - those for the members of the Senate, as
well as governors and vice-governors.

However, for the province of North Kivu
specifically, I note that we have scheduled those
elections for March. We are, of course, already
beginning to prepare accordingly, in the hope that the
efforts led by the Congolese Government, with the
support of its partners, with respect to the Ebola virus
disease will bear fruit, and that the formation of the new
Government will also lead to stability and security in
the region. For the North Kivu province, the provincial
assembly will therefore be established only after the
North Kivu elections because the related indirect
elections - those for governor and senators - will be
held only after those elections.

That is what we meant when we said that we are
not perfect. No election in the world is perfect, but I
will remain at the disposal of organizations that have
something to say. The Election Commission will remain
at the disposal of the Conference episcopale nationale
du Congo for further exchanges on anything that may
arise, in the understanding that, in our opinion, the
priority should be to move forward and turn the page.

The population is suffering. We have been in the
midst of political discussions for two, three, even four
years. There is a time for everything - a time for
elections, but also a time for development. These are
the clarifications I wanted to make at this stage, in the
hope that we will inch closer to an end with the final
reports that we will present in March, if necessary.

