Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I should like also
to join other colleagues in conveying our condolences
to the Government of Afghanistan and to the
Government of Pakistan on the losses that they have
suffered, which we learned of this morning.
Afghanistan is a country which has been at war for a
very long time and has known a great deal of suffering.
In the post-war period, with reconstruction under way,
it is still facing tragic situations.

I should like also to say that I was very pleased
with the three briefings that were presented to us this
morning by Mr. Guehenno, Ambassador Braun and
Ambassador Nishimura. These were very rich briefings
on key questions. Disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration is indeed what is required in a country
following 23 years of war, and it is good to see a
country like Japan take the lead in this respect.

In this connection, let me ask a few questions.

First of all, Mr. Nishimura mentioned the
contributions received from various countries, totalling
$50 million, adding that this is only a kick-off and that
more is required. My question is, what are the
prospects for further contributions, because, as has
already been mentioned by previous speakers, this is
going to be a long process that will require a great deal
of funding, and in particular coordination and
cooperation on the part of other countries with the lead
country.

With respect to the police, during the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
process, police are trained, new police officers are
incorporated, and it is useful to take advantage of those
who are being demobilized or brought into the DDR
process. What is the coordination between the two?
How is it proceeding? Are there any problems in
getting recruits and in getting this to move smoothly?

At last month's briefing on Afghanistan, mention
was made of the fact that the security situation could
create problems for the 2004 elections. Today, I think,
it was mentioned that elections are indeed supposed to
take place in 2004. Is it, in fact, realistic to see
elections taking place in 2004?

