Mr. Shutenko (Ukraine): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Bolivian presidency for holding today's
open debate on the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction (WMD). I also thank you, Sir, for
the statement delivered in your capacity as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004). I am also grateful for the
briefings delivered by Ms. Nakamitsu and Mr. Ballard.

While fully aligning myself with the statement
to be delivered later in this debate on behalf of the
European Union, I would like to make some comments
in my national capacity.

I fully share the view that the uniqueness of
resolution 1540 (2004) lies in its complementarity ofthe
existing international regimes on the non-proliferation
of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and
their means of delivery. Resolution 1540 (2004) adds
a new dimension to the issue of non-proliferation by
addressing the illegal trafficking in relevant materials
and by prohibiting their acquisition by non- State actors,
including terrorists.

The year 2016 marked a significant stage in
promoting WMD non-proliferation. I wish to reiterate
Ukraine's support for the outcomes of the recently
concluded comprehensive review process, which
culminated in the unanimous adoption of resolution 2325
(2016). Once properly implemented, the conclusions
and recommendations of the review will reinforce
resolution 1540 (2004). The report of the review (see S/2016/1038) - while clearly demonstrating both the
varying progress made with regard to implementation
on various types of WMD and the obligations set out
in resolution 1540 (2004) - helps to define specific
areas for each party concerned as to where national or
regional efforts should be intensified. Indeed, many
significant challenges remain in terms of keeping the
world's most dangerous materials from falling into the
wrong hands, both intentionally or as a result of neglect
or oversight.

Ukraine, as a State with a nuclear-weapons
past and as a full-fledged party to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the Chemical
Weapons Convention and the Biological Weapons
Convention, as well as all export-control regimes,
is strongly committed to the full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) and is determined to further
increase the effectiveness of the national response to
combat proliferation through collaboration, capacity-
building and outreach.

Despite all the measures taken by Member States to
reduce proliferation risks, we are witnessing growing
and even more sophisticated challenges in this area.
These risks arise not only from gaps in national
legislation or insufficient resources, but also from the
rapid development of science and technology, as well
as e-commerce, along with a lack of threat awareness
among academia, industry and civil society.

In the past decade, chemical and biological agents
have quite often been referred to as potential weapons to
be used by terrorists, other non-State actors and rogue
States. Regrettably, there have been several confirmed
cases of the use of chemical weapons, particularly in
Syria, Iraq and Malaysia. Ukraine's positon in that
regard is very clear: there can be no impunity, and all
the perpetrators must be brought to justice. We stand
united in condemning, in the strongest terms, any use
of any type of WMD, which constitutes a violation
of international law, a war crime and a crime against
humanity.

The erosion to the existing world order, continuous
breaches and unaddressed violations of international
law, along with ongoing conflicts in different parts of
the globe, continue to weaken the chemical, biological,
radiological or nuclear security architecture as a
whole. It is critical to find practical ways to ensure
that the international legal norms related to WMD
non-proliferation do not remain on paper, but that
they are also properly enforced and fully respected.
The international community should act decisively
and in a united fashion with a view to preventing any
attempts and countering every action taken to endanger
the relevant international instruments through either
aggressive policies and violations of State sovereignty
and territorial integrity or through blocking important
decisions to be adopted by the United Nations or its
bodies.

With a view to tackling the growing threat of the
proliferation of WMD globally, intensifying effective
interactions among States and building synergies among
all stakeholders, including the relevant international,
regional, subregional, non-governmental organizations
and civil society, are important and urgent tasks. In that
regard, I wish to commend the historic contribution of
Spain, the previous Chair of the 1540 Committee, to
strengthening the role of that resolution for a long-term
perspective, including through the establishment last
year of the Group of Friends of resolution 1540 (2004).
We fully support the statement to be delivered later
today on behalf of the Group.

As far as the broader context of global
non-proliferation efforts is concerned, I cannot but
mention that Ukraine attaches particular importance
to the Global Partnership initiative as a proper format
for strengthening capabilities to resist today's threats
and challenges in the area of WMD proliferation,
including its terrorist dimension. In that regard, my
country appreciates the efforts of Italy, President of the
Group of Seven, for its able leadership in this area and
for the promising results of the last Global Partnership
working group meeting, held in Rome in February.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that facilitating the
full implementation ofresolution 1540 (2004) underpins
my country's position in the field of non-proliferation
and anti-terrorist activities. Ukraine will continue to be
engaged constructively both within the 1540 Committee
and with the broader United Nations membership to
ensure that the outcomes of the comprehensive review
bear fruit. In that regard, I would like to mention that, in
November this year in Kyiv, an international workshop
on promoting the effective implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) in the context of evolving proliferation
risks and challenges will be held in cooperation with the
Office for Disarmament Affairs and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe.

