Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are glad today to welcome Mr. Petritsch
to our meeting. We consider that the report of the High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina contains
various assessments that prompt a mixed reaction on
our part. On the one hand, in the political and
economic fields, as Mr. Petritsch noted, there are
positive phenomena, but along with these there are also
facts that cause us serious concern.

We note that as a result of the elections that took
place last fall, the moderate forces, for the first time
since the signing of the Peace Agreement, have won a
victory over the nationalists. However, the latter, united
in the Croatian Democratic Union, are refusing to
participate in implementing the results of the elections
and are boycotting the majority of State institutions of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as institutions on the
entity level.

Together with growth in the gross domestic
product and measures being undertaken to right the
economic situation in the country, as mentioned by the
High Representative, the economy of the country
unfortunately remains unstable. This is having a
negative impact on the social and economic living
conditions of the majority of the population. The level
of corruption remains high, which is blocking the
implementation of the Peace Agreement and the
carrying out of reforms. Together with accelerated rates
in the return of the refugees, there continues to be an
outflow from the country primarily of young people
and the intellectual elite. This is also a cause of
concern. The listing of these contradictory facts could
be continued, but those already mentioned suffice to
describe the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina as
one that is causing difficulties.

In that context, I would also like to draw attention
to a few processes on which we would like to hear the
additional views of the High Representative. In
particular, we continue to have doubts regarding the
justification of the efforts to speedily conclude the
draft for a single united defence doctrine of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We consider this a direct step towards
building united armed forces for Bosnia, which runs
counter to the provisions of the Dayton Agreements.

In addition, everything is not clear regarding the
concept of State restructuring on the basis of
cantonization. As we understand it, the basis of this
proposal is the idea of the elimination of the entities.
How, in that case, will their interests be ensured? How
does this idea correspond to Dayton? We know that the
High Representative described this idea as an
interesting one, although premature. We would like to
hear the view of the High Representative as to what,
then, makes it attractive.

We have one more comment. According to
several assessments, proposals regarding making
amendments to the Constitution of the entities attest to
the intention of radically changing their internal
structure. For example, it is proposed that the
constitutional commissions, which were created and so
far have existed only on a temporary basis, be inserted
into the Parliaments as permanent organs. We believe
that making fundamental amendments to the
Constitution of the entities will, in fact, become a step
towards a silent review of Dayton, which cannot be
allowed.

We would be grateful to the High Representative
for his comments on the questions that we have raised.

