I thank Mr. Lowcock and Mr. Pedersen for their briefings. France takes note of the fourth session of the Constitutional Committee, held in Geneva, and calls for the fifth session, to be held on 25 January, as announced by the Special Envoy, on the basis of the agenda agreed upon by the stakeholders. It is indeed high time for the parties to finally begin substantive discussions on constitutional reform. The Syrian regime should also fully respect the operating rules of the Constitutional Committee. France will remain vigilant against any attempt by the regime to undermine the process. We call on the Special Envoy to keep the Council informed of any hindrances and to clearly attribute responsibility for them. Beyond the Constitutional Committee, there is an urgent need to relaunch a credible political process on the basis of all elements contained in resolution 2254 (2015). The Special Envoy has our full support in his work on the issue in conjunction with the main stakeholders. Concrete results must be achieved in particular with regard to the situation of detainees and missing persons. It is essential that all Syrians, including those in the diaspora, finally be given a voice in preparations for the holding of elections in accordance with the provisions of resolution 2254 (2015) and under United Nations supervision. France will not recognize the results of any elections that take place outside the Geneva political process. France is concerned by the reports of increasing hostilities on the ground. We must work together on the implementation of a lasting and verifiable cessation of hostilities at the national level, as per the calls of the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy and in line with Council resolutions. We warn against any new offensive, whether in the north-west or the north-east of the country. The Council should be deeply concerned by the continued deterioration of the humanitarian situation in Syria, where there are now 13 million people in need of humanitarian aid - almost 2 million more than a year ago. We deplore the methodical reduction of cross-border crossings for the delivery of aid, which is all the more worrisome given the current health crisis. Obstacles to humanitarian access, particularly by the Syrian regime, are unacceptable, especially in the context of the pandemic. I refer in particular to the province of Damascus, in southern Syria, as well as in the north-east, where the regime has impeded humanitarian access by refusing for two months to allow the delivery of food aid to more than 200,000 people in Raqqah. The protection of civilians, including humanitarian and medical personnel, must remain a top priority. I recall that respect for international humanitarian law is of course something we all have an obligation to uphold. After 10 years of conflict, any attempt by the regime and its allies to have us believe in any normalization of the situation in Syria will fool no one. The figures from the High Commissioner for Refugees speak for themselves - of the 5.5 million Syrian refugees in the region, only 260,000 have chosen to return to their home country since 2016. They will not return so long as the regime continues to threaten their lives and deprive them of their property. France is therefore working with all international actors, first and foremost the United Nations, to ensure that the right of refugees and displaced persons to a voluntary, safe and dignified return. However, we will not participate in campaigns to spread disinformation. Furthermore, France, along with its European Union partners, will not deviate from its position on normalization, sanctions or reconstruction in the absence of a credible political settlement. Those who believe that the time is ripe can already begin funding the reconstruction process. Grave violations of international humanitarian law and human rights cannot go unpunished. That is the rationale behind our support for the fight against impunity, in particular for the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. We are determined to ensure that the Mechanism is provided with the necessary budget to function properly. Without a political solution to the conflict, there can be no lasting stabilization in Syria. It is high time for all members of the Council to hear that message and truly commit to discussions to end the crisis.
