In his comprehensive report (S/2020/366), the Secretary-General highlights the great challenges in protecting civilians in urban warfare. He also reminds us of the grim reality that urban warfare will continue to be a defining feature of armed conflict in the years to come. However, while the Secretary-General's report discusses the threats that stem from urban warfare, it does not discuss the reason for the shift to that new battlefield. It could be understood from the report that urban warfare is the unfortunate and unwanted consequence of modern armed conflict, but that is not always the case. For terrorist organizations and regimes, urban warfare is not a blip but, rather, a feature of a carefully designed strategy to advance their deadly ideologies. They choose to operate in urban areas, they choose to put civilians at risk because it serves their interests in a number of ways. Hiding in homes, building bunkers in hospitals and establishing command centres in schools provides them an additional layer of protection - innocent civilians. In using human shields, terrorist organizations know that countries that abide by a moral code will think twice, even three times, before engaging their forces and putting civilians at risk. Those terrorist organizations know that even when all precautions are taken and measures of proportionality are expended, sometimes civilians are still harmed. Yet, they do not see that as tragedy but, rather, as an opportunity. They cynically use the death of civilians, for which they are responsible, as propaganda against the forces that exercised every measure of restraint possible to minimize harm to civilians. They work to delegitimize the efforts of countries by painting them as the evil enemy in order to gain support at home and around the world. All of that is in addition to their purposeful targeting of innocent civilians. Unfortunately, Israel has witnessed such tactics in action many times, both against itself and against many of the members of the Council and the international community. Terrorist organizations and regimes disregard international law. They do not value human life, they do not care about their own civilians and they definitely do not care about our civilians. As the report describes, the methods of the terrorist regimes and organizations recklessly put the most vulnerable in harm's way. The Houthis in Yemen use tens of thousands of children as child soldiers. Hamas has built ammunition bunkers in the basement of schools in Gaza run by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees. The same children that are put in risk in those schools are then sent to risk their lives with Hamas operatives rioting on the fence with Israel. Hamas also uses hospitals in Gaza for their military operations, putting health-care workers, as well as the sick and vulnerable, at risk. Hizbullah in Lebanon digs terror tunnels from private homes across the border and into civilian populated areas in Israel. Unsurprisingly, Hamas, Hizbullah and the Houthis are all supported by the tentacles of terror of the same regime. In fact, the Iranian regime is involved in nearly half of the 10 conflicts that the report blames for injuring and taking the lives of over 20,000 civilians in the past year. Since the outbreak of conflict in Syria, the Iranian regime has spent at least 30 billion dollars to support Syrian President Bashar Al-Assad, who has not only targeted civilians but has done so with illegal chemical weapons. The Iranian regime transfers $700 million to Hizbullah and $100 million to Hamas and the Palestinian Islamic Jihad annually. All are recognized terrorist organizations that put civilians at risk as they turn their neighbourhoods into urban battlefields. The Iranian regime uses its citizens' money to train and arm terrorist organizations around the world. It teaches them how to use urban, highly populated areas to maximize the risk to civilians and then how to cynically profit from their death. The regime trains them to use civilians as dispensable pawns. Israel has been dealing with terrorist organizations for decades. Our unfortunate familiarity with urban warfare has forced us to develop new combat doctrines and methods that take into account the complexity of an urban battlefield and allow us to achieve results while minimizing harm to civilians. Israel is a leader on that front and has shared its expertise with many countries now facing the same struggle. Israel looks forward to cooperating with many more countries and sharing its knowledge and capabilities in order to protect civilians in every conflict around the world. Adjusting the way that we fight to fit the new urban battlefield is not enough. As I said earlier, urban warfare is not the result of modern armed conflict but a key feature designed by terrorist organizations and those who fund them. Therefore, if we wish to rid ourselves of the dangers that urban warfare presents, we must destroy it at the source. We must fight the ideology that preaches that to harm civilians, both your own and those of your adversary, is desirable. We must stop the funding that allows such an ideology to spread around the world and pays for the training enabling it to come to fruition. We must not allow the Iranian regime to continue down the dangerous road on which it is set. The Iranian regime is the world's largest sponsor of terror. Any money that the regime gets its hands on is not used to better the lives of its citizens but, rather, is used to the detriment of civilians in the region and around the world. That has been made even clearer during the coronavirus disease crisis, where the regime continues to neglect its citizens as it pursues its military and terrorist objectives. Not only do sanctions on Iran hamper the regime's dangerous nuclear ambitions, it prevents them from spreading the terror and instability that put millions of civilians at risk. The Secretary-General's report also touches upon the important issue of missing persons. An alarming number of persons continued to go missing in armed conflicts last year, and the families of the missing were left in despair, not knowing the fate and whereabouts of loved ones. In 2014, Hamas killed and kidnapped Oron Shaul and Hadar Goldin. Hamas is also holding Avera Mangistu and Hisham Al-Sayed, two young Israeli civilians who suffer from mental illness. Hamas has refused to provide any sign of life to the families of the men and does not permit visits by the International Committee of the Red Cross. More needs to be done by the Council to ensure the return of Oron, Hadar, Avera and Hisham and all other missing persons. As the Secretary-General's report rightly states, urban warfare threatens to take the lives of many more civilians. It is not enough to learn new doctrines of urban warfare; we must stop it from spreading in the first place. The Iranian regime poses a threat to civilians all around the world. It aspires to turn every civilian into a civilian in conflict. We cannot let that happen. The Iranian regime must be stopped.
