The President (spoke in Spanish): As this is the
first formal meeting of the Security Council this year, I
should like to extend my warm Wishes on the occasion
of the New Year to all members of the Security Council,
the United Nations and the Secretariat.

In presiding over this first formal meeting of
the Council in 2019, I am happy to welcome the
new members Belgium, the Dominican Republic,
Germany, Indonesia, South Africa. We look forward
to their participation in the work of the Council. Their
experience and wisdom will be of invaluable assistance
in the discharge of the Council's responsibilities.

I also take this opportunity to express the Council's
gratitude to the outgoing members - the Plurinational
State of Bolivia, Ethiopia, Kazakhstan, the Netherlands
and Sweden - for their important contributions to the
work of the Council during their terms.

Expression of thanks to the outgoing President

The President (spoke in Spanish): 1 should also
like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf
of the Council, to His Excellency Ambassador Kacou
Houadja Leon Adorn, Permanent Representative of
Cote d'lvoire, for his service as President ofthe Council
for the month of December 2018. I am sure I speak
for all members of the Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Adorn and his team for the
great diplomatic skill with which they conducted the
Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Somalia

Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia
(S/2018/1149)


The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Somalia to
participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Nicholas
Haysom, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Somalia and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia; and Mr. Francisco
Caetano Jose Madeira, Special Representative of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission for
Somalia and Head of the African Union Mission in
Somalia.

Mr. Madeira is joining this meeting via video-
teleconference from Dar es Salaam.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/1149, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on Somalia.

I now give the floor to Mr. Haysom.


