Mr. Ladsous: In View of the time, Mr. President, I
will be brief.

On international cooperation, I want to mention a
very recent example. I was in Abidjan a week ago for
the ceremony to commemorate the seven soldiers killed
in the western part of Cote d'Ivoire. Precisely on that
occasion, a very important quadripartite meeting took
place. It included the Governments of C6te d'Ivoire and
Liberia and both United Nations Missions. Together, in
the course of a single day, they reached a number of
agreements on very specific activities - for instance,
on not just joint patrolling but also parallel patrolling
on both sides of the border, completely coordinated
on both sides of the river that demarcates the border.
That is just one example of a very solid programme of
joint work. I understand that it will now be possible for
the tactical helicopters to be used on both sides of the
border without differentiation. I thank that that should
provide our two Commanders with a very effective tool
to step up, by one or several notches, the fight against
the spoilers who were responsible for that lamentable
attack.

On the question of the standards, I would like to
recall that we have thus far devised a policy of standards
in three categories, namely, for infantry battalions,
staff officers and medical units. In the case of infantry
battalions we have gone one step further. It just happens
that, two days ago, we finalized internally the manual
for infantry battalions, which will actually strengthen
the standards. When we talk of standards we are talking,
of course, about flexibility. But standards also have the
advantage of setting the level of expectation in terms
of preparation, training and professional behaviour. I
think this is all part of the policy that we are trying to
develop of enhancing the quality of the troops that we
take on board and use.

The issue of caveats was mentioned. Of course,
Mr. President, you will realize that caveats are totally
unacceptable. It is a matter of faith and trust in the
Secretary-General and our force commanders. I know
that it happens, but that does not mean that we accept it.
As we go for more quality and as our splendid generals
do their jobs, I think we must no longer accept this as
a fact of life.

Finally, I notice that the Ambassador of France
has left. But to his colleagues I would say that
multilingualism is indeed a concern. I was very
surprised to see what I saw in Haiti, for instance. While
I would not have expected anybody to speak Creole, I
would have expected that the vast majority could speak
French. But no, only about 30 per cent of the Mission's
staff speaks French. I find that very strange. Let me say
that, to my mind at least, the fact that one can write a
report in Chinese or in American is not a problem. The
fact is that in francophone countries people should be
able to speak French. That takes time. There are also
sometimes difficulties in getting candidates. But I think
this is simply common sense. I do take that on board.
