Mr. Simonoff (United States of America): I would
like to thank the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her briefing.

The United States strongly supports justice and
accountability for war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide. Although the best way to promote
accountability for such atrocities may depend on the
circumstances, the United States will always believe
that victims, including the victims in Darfur, deserve
justice. Hundreds of thousands of people have been
killed during the conflict in Darfur, with more than
2 million remaining internally displaced and 5 million
negatively affected since the onset of the conflict.
Although there are now fewer reports of civilian
displacement across Darfur, internally displaced
persons (IDPs) still cannot safely return home and risk
attacks when they leave IDP camps. As the 21-23 May
attacks by the Sudan's Rapid Support Forces on three
separate IDP camps demonstrated, even IDPs who stay
within camp boundaries face substantial risks.

The United States is troubled by the resurgence of
violence in J ebel Marra in April and May, which resulted
in injuries and deaths of civilians, including children,
the destruction of homes and food, and the displacement

of 9,000 people. We also remain concerned by violence,
including intercommunal violence, in other areas of
Darfur outside of Jebel Marra, and the lack of access
in various parts of Darfur afforded to the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). Of particular concern are the increasing
reports of a potentially calamitous harvest failure
across the Sudan in October because of the ongoing
economic and fuel crises, which might contribute to a
return to a return to large-scale conflict and conflict-
related atrocities as conditions become more unstable
and people become desperate for resources.

We call on the Sudanese Government to show
restraint and to allow UNAMID, the United Nations
country team, humanitarian organizations and the
media unfettered access to the areas where violence has
taken place and where communities remain vulnerable
to violence so that they can investigate these troubling
reports, monitor current needs and conditions, and
provide assistance to those in need.

It is shameful that sexual violence, including
such violence committed by personnel in military
attire and Rapid Support Forces uniforms, remains
prevalent in Darfur and that the Sudanese Government
often denies that this violence is taking place, despite
clear evidence to the contrary. As the United Nations
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict
has noted, conflict-related sexual violence against
children has increased recently and cases of conflict-
related sexual violence in Darfur go uninvestigated.
That deterioration and the lack of accountability
are unacceptable.

The culture of impunity that continues to surround
those atrocities, in particular those involving sexual
violence, must end. With hopes that peace could return
to Darfur, the United States included ceasing military
offensive and aerial bombardments in Darfur and the two
areas as a key component of the five-track engagement
plan that we launched with the Sudan in June 2016. We
are pleased that the Government of the Sudan made
some progress under that framework, including ceasing
military offensive and aerial bombardments, during
that period. However, much more progress is needed.
We are determined to remain engaged as we work
to develop a phase-two follow-up engagement plan,
which will aim for improved respect for human rights
and religious freedom, a sustainable end to internal
conflicts and improvement in humanitarian access,
among other priority objectives.

To achieve stable and lasting peace in Darfur,justice
and accountability are essential. Those responsible for
human rights violations and abuses in Darfur, including
by targeting civilians, must be held accountable. That
includes allegations that official security forces use
excessive force against civilians and that members of
armed militias perpetrate atrocities against civilians
in Darfur. We welcome the arrest by the Sudanese
Government of former Janjaweed commander Musa
Hilal, who is subject to United Nations sanctions for his
commission of atrocities in Darfur following clashes
between the Sudanese security forces and our militia,
loyal to Hilal.

However, we are concerned about the lack of
transparency around Hilal's military trial and the
charges he faces. We call on the Government to
investigate promptly and credibly all allegations
against Hilal, including those related to atrocities, in
accordance with the Sudan's human rights commitments
and obligations, and to hold Hilal to account if he is
found to have committed violations.

The United States has noted for many years that it
is unacceptable that the suspects in the Darfur situation
have not been brought to justice and remain at large.
In particular, we have expressed disappointment that
Sudanese President Omar Al-Bashir continues to travel
around the world. His being received on such visits has
served only to diminish the seriousness of the charges
against him and to compound the tremendous suffering
of the victims. Regardless of the power wielded by
those who are responsible for violations and abuses,
we must stand with the victims as we have in the past.
For example, in Cambodia and Sierra Leone, where
leaders have in the past committed atrocities against
their own citizens, they have been called to answer for
their alleged crimes.

Moving forward, we will use all appropriate tools
at our disposal to press the Sudan to improve its human
rights practices, protect fundamental freedoms and
promote justice for the people of Darfur. A Sudan that
adheres to the rule of law, respects human rights, allows
unfettered humanitarian access to all populations in
need and breaks the cycle of impunity is one that will
enjoy sustainable peace and prosper. We look forward
to the day when the Sudan is a demonstrable proponent
of human rights.

In conclusion, I would reiterate the concerns of the
United States about the ICC's activities with respect to
the situation in Afghanistan, which is different from
the current situation in many ways. We continue to have
a long-standing and principled objection to any ICC
investigation or other activity concerning United States
personnel, absent United States consent or Security
Council referral.

