Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): I would like to
begin by thanking the Secretary-General for his
statement and Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, for his briefing on the
current situation in the Middle East.

This debate is pertinent as a forum in which
delegations, particularly those of concerned countries
from the region, and relevant organizations can reflect
on ways to respond to the challenges of collectively
bringing peace to the Middle East region.

The Middle East conflict has been going on for
sixty years, and hope and despair have featured in
every effort to end the conflict. The Annapolis
conference is the most recent initiative aimed at ending
a deadlock in the peace negotiations. It has injected a
new vigour and has given new hope to the peace effort.

Yet, there is the risk of a disconnect between such
hope and the situation on the ground. The cycle of
violence has continued unabated. It has eroded
confidence on both sides. Now there is an urgent need
for rebuilding confidence. That will certainly require a
complete end to Violence. It will require immediate
termination by Israel of all illegal activities, including
the construction of settlements.

Compliance with international law by all parties
must be promoted, and the utmost restraint must be
exercised. Indonesia also shares the View of the
Secretary-General, expressed during the Council's
emergency meeting on the humanitarian situation in the
Gaza Strip held on 1 March 2008, that incidents in
which civilians have been killed or injured must be
investigated and accountability must be ensured.

Indonesia believes that achieving the Annapolis
goals will pave the way for a more comprehensive
settlement of the Middle East conflict. We therefore
welcome the resumption of Israeli-Palestinian peace
talks on 17 March 2008, especially after a break of
several weeks.

Indonesia also welcomes the forthcoming Middle
East conference to be hosted by the Government of the
Russian Federation. My delegation believes that the
conference will provide a forum for strengthening the
Annapolis process to achieve comprehensive peace in
the region, including on the Israeli-Lebanese and
Israeli-Syrian tracks.

Continued political and de facto divisions among
Palestinians pose a particular constraint to unified
efforts for the establishment of a sovereign and
independent Palestinian State. We therefore continue to
believe that an inter-Palestinian dialogue remains
crucial.

The role of neighbouring countries in promoting
inter-Palestinian reconciliation also remains important.
The series of recent talks on inter-Palestinian dialogue
within the framework of the Arab League or the
initiative of individual neighbouring States is
commendable. In that regard, my delegation is
encouraged by the recent initiative of the Government
of Yemen to promote inter-Palestinian dialogue.

The formation of a viable Palestinian economy is
also key to the creation of durable peace in the region.
We must, therefore, find ways to rebuild the devastated
economy in the occupied Palestinian territory. In that
regard, we underline the importance of the continued
support and assistance of the international community,
including the realization of pledges made during the
Paris donors conference. Indonesia, together with
South Africa, will convene later this year the Afro-
Asian Conference for Capacity-Building of the
Palestinian people, to be held in Jakarta.

Peace is of little value to someone who is dying
of sickness or hunger. In the same vein, peace talks
will mean nothing to a large part of Palestinians, who
continue to live in harsh conditions. With nearly 85 per
cent of the Gaza population relying on food assistance
from the United Nations and other humanitarian
agencies, the humanitarian situation in Gaza remains
an issue of concern.

The freedom of Palestinians in Gaza from want
and destitution must be immediately ensured. Thus, my
delegation fully supports the work of the many United
Nations agencies and other humanitarian partners on

the ground. We also join the call of the Secretary-
General on the international community to heed the
consolidated appeal for Palestine launched in February
2008.

Humanitarian relief itself cannot address the
suffering in Gaza as long as the Gaza crossings remain
closed. My delegation therefore continues to underline
the importance of the opening of the border crossings
into Gaza permanently and without delay to facilitate
the passage of imports and exports and the access of
humanitarian workers to the area. Full implementation
of the Agreement on Movement and Access is critical,
particularly in View of the impact of crossings on the
Palestinian economy and daily life. We also welcome
the proposal made by the Palestinian Authority to
assume responsibility for the Palestinian side of the
Gaza Strip's border crossings and encourage contacts
between Israel and the Palestinian Authority to act on
that proposal.

With regard to the situation in Lebanon, peace
and stability in the country are essential, not only for
the Lebanese themselves, but also for all peoples in the
region. Thus, the continued political impasse and
repeated postponements of the presidential election
remain issues of concern to my delegation.

Prolonging the constitutional void in Lebanon
will be harmful not only to internal stability but also to
the democratic process. It must, therefore, be avoided.
While efforts exerted by the international community
and regional States are of paramount importance, the
final resolution of the internal conflict will be at the
hands of the Lebanese people. We therefore stress the
urgency of concerted efforts being made by all parties
concerned in the country to end the political deadlock
and build a consensus that leads to the election of a
President.

The Middle East conflict has been for far too long
tarnishing what our time could offer in creating a
peaceful and liveable region. It has for far too long
been wearing on the parties of the region. Finding a
peaceful, just, lasting and comprehensive settlement to
the conflict will thus be absolutely critical. Indonesia is
committed to such an endeavour, on the basis of the
relevant resolutions of the Council, including
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1515 (2003),
the Madrid terms of reference, the principle of land for
peace, and the Arab Peace Initiative.

