Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): About a year and a half has now passed since
the Security Council seriously took up the problem of
piracy off the coast of Somalia and began to develop
measures to combat this evil. We think it is now time to
offer an interim assessment of the results of the work
done, on the basis of the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2009/590) submitted to the Council under
resolution 1846 (2008).

The situation in the Gulf of Aden is still far from
normal, and the danger of a further increase in piracy
has not been eliminated. Yet much has been done in
mobilizing the international community to counter this
threat. First of all, there is now a firm understanding
that the most important element in resolving the
problem of piracy off the Horn of Africa is the
stabilization of the situation in Somalia: bringing order
on land. We believe that along with maintaining a
naval presence in areas dangerous to shipping, our
other priority must remain the stabilization of the
military and political situation within the country. In
this connection, we note the important part played by
the African Union Mission in Somalia. Russia has
always advocated sustainable peace and national
reconciliation in Somalia on the basis of the Djibouti
Agreement, in the interests of strengthening security
and stability in the region.

The world community must broaden its
participation in efforts in the area of security, including
those of the United Nations, the African Union, the
European Union and other organizations, with the
focus on building up the potential of the Government
of Somalia to discharge its basic functions. States and
regional organizations cooperating with the
Transitional Federal Government of Somalia in
combating piracy are cooperating closely in military,
political and legal areas, and are working to improve
them through the appropriate coordination
mechanisms. In this context, we would stress the key
part played by the Contact Group on Piracy off the
Coast of Somalia.

There has been growing awareness in the
international community and the shipping industry of
the methods used by pirates when they attack, and thus
a growing arsenal of measures has been developed to
counter such attacks. We note here the important
contribution of the International Maritime
Organization. We welcome the initiatives taken by the
United Nations in combating piracy and call for further
strengthening of its role in this area. We are
particularly grateful to the Secretariat for acting as an
information exchange centre and for its valuable work
relating to peace on land, as well as for its ideas in the
area of capacity-building.

We must combat impunity and give greater
attention to prosecuting people suspected of piracy.
This is not just about ensuring that punishment is
unavoidable, but also about meeting appropriate
standards in the area of human rights. We note the
significance of efforts to resolve this problem at the
level of the national judiciary, and particularly
cooperation on the part of authorities in Kenya and
other countries in the region. We welcome the decision
of the Contact Group on Piracy to set up a trust fund to
support anti-piracy initiatives.

At the same time, as experience shows, it is not
always possible to ensure criminal prosecution of
pirates in national courts. Initiatives aimed at studying
possible additional mechanisms concerning this
problem are therefore still relevant. Work in this area
not only does not contradict efforts at the national
level, it is capable of organically complementing them.
The Russian Federation continues to be actively
involved in combating piracy off the coast of Somalia.
We currently have a group of ships from the Russian
Navy in the area, the third since October 2008. We
intend to build up interaction with other interested
parties in dealing with all aspects of this issue. It is
important to ensure that international anti-piracy
efforts go uninterrupted within the existing mandate. In
this connection, we support the extension of Security
Council sanctions, as requested by the Transitional
Federal Government, on comprehensive measures to
halt piracy and armed robbery at sea under resolutions
1846 (2008) and 1851 (2008).

