Mr. Bamba (C6te d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation takes note of the excellent report
of the Secretary-General contained in document
S/2013/76l, of 24 December 2013. We thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
C6te d'Ivoire, Ms. AIchatou Mindaoudou Souleymane,
for her outstanding briefing on the situation in C6te
d'Ivoire. We congratulate her on the remarkable work
she has accomplished in such a short time since her
arrival in cote d'Ivoire six months ago.

I would like to make a few brief comments on some
aspects that my delegation views as critical with respect
to the security situation, political dialogue, the national
reconciliation process and economic recovery.

With regard to the security situation, we agree
with the report of the Secretary-General that the
security situation has improved significantly since the
Head of State assumed responsibility for the defence
sector. During the past year, no major attack against
the security forces or public institutions was noted.
The establishment of the Centre for the Coordination
of Operational Decisions has reduced the incidence
of serious crimes such as raids and armed robberies.
That has led to a positive trend in the security index
recognized by the United Nations, which rose from 3.8
in 2012 to 1.3 in 2013 across the country.

That improvement has created conditions conducive
to the return of international organizations that had
left the country - including the Japan External Trade
Organization, AfricaRice, the African Development
Bank, which will be in the country until 2015, and the
Regional Office of UNESCO - and to the planned
establishment of a regional office of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime in Cote d'Ivoire. However,
as the Special Representative noted, concerns remain
with regard to the border with Liberia, given the ongoing
presence of mercenaries and the illegal trafficking of
weapons.
Nevertheless, we note significant calm in the
west of the country. No attacks have been reported
there for over a year. Thus, the situation has improved
significantly following the strengthening of the
quadripartite cooperation among the security services
of the C6te d'Ivoire, those of Liberia, the United
Nations Operation in C6te d'Ivoire (UNOCI) and the
United Nations Mission in Liberia.

With regard security sector reform (SSR), major
activities undertaken by the Ministry of Defence
include the strengthening of the legal and institutional
frameworks and the reorganization of the armed forces;
the strengthening of the managerial and operational
capacities of the army; the improvement of the security
situation; the promotion of unity within the army and
the bolstering of social cohesion; the promotion of the
spirit of defence; the management of the military forces;
the development of a training system; contributions
to subregional, regional and international peace and
stability; and the promotion of good governance.

I would like to point out that the Head of State
personally presided over 43 sessions of the National
Security Council and the Prime Minister presided over
six sessions. Some 32 per cent of the SSR goals have
been met, and 44 per cent are in the process of being
met. The remaining 24 per cent should soon be met.
In that regard, we thank our partners, in particular
UNOCI, and all of our international, bilateral and
multilateral partners, who provide valuable assistance,
especially in the framework of the consultative group
that meets monthly to take stock of the SSR situation
in cote d'Ivoire.

With regard to disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR), as of 31 December 2013
the Authority for Disarmament, Demobilization and
Reintegration had returned or reintegrated 27,351
former combatants, representing 91 per cent of the
goal of 30,000 sought for the end of 2013. Weapons
collected include 6,521 Kalashnikov assault rifles,
6,398 grenades, 409 shells, 632 rockets and 390,777
munitions. It should also be noted that the DDR process
led by the C6te d'Ivoire Government is fully inclusive
in that it integrates former combatants from both sides
without exception. There are branches of the DDR
Authority in the south in Abdijan; in the centre in
Bouake'; in the north, in Korhogo, Ferke', Boundiali and
Bouna; and in the west, in Man, Duekoue, Toulepleu,
Guiglo and San Pedro. The DDR Authority was even
able to account for former combatants who fled to
Togo, Ghana and Liberia.
With respect to funding, the State of C6te d'Ivoire
has financed 80 per cent of that process. In that regard,
we would like to thank UNOCI, the European Union, the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the
World Bank and the International Fund for Agricultural
Development (IFAD) for their support for the process.
I note that there are still 47,000 former combatants to
be reintegrated or returned. The task is daunting, but
thanks to the experience of the Authority for DDR, we
hope that by the end of 2015 all former combatants will
be effectively reintegrated or reinstated. In that regard,
we wish to thank in advance the European Union,
the African Development Bank and the Government
of Japan, which have indicated their intention to join
UNOCI, UNDP, the World Bank and IFAD in helping
C6te d'Ivoire to achieve all its DDR goals.

With regard to the particular case of the dozos, the
traditional hunters who participated in some clashes
during the post-election crisis, which the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General mentioned,
initiatives have already been undertaken by the
Ministry of the Interior and Security to urge them to
return to their traditional activities. That commitment
was strongly reiterated recently by President Alassane
Ouattara in his capacity as supreme commander of the
army.

With regard to political dialogue, we welcome
the thaw in the political situation in Cote d'Ivoire,
as was underscored by the Special Representative.
In that regard, President Alassane Ouattara has
demonstrated his leadership in creating a peaceful
political environment and give the opposition room to
better express its differences of opinion in a democratic
context. That commitment has been exressed in
powerful gestures, such as the provisional release of 14
members of the former regime and the upcoming review
of other cases that could also benefit from that measure;
decisions taken by the Council of Ministers to unfreeze
the bank accounts of members of the former regime;
and appeals by the President to the politicalopponents
and army officers and soldiers in exile to return to the
country.

The President of the Republic's initiatives have led
to a relaxing of the situation, which we commend. That
was constructively manifested by the resumption on
15 January of direct dialogue between the opposition
and the Government, which is promising; the effective
return to cote d'Ivoire on 17 January of the former
Director General of the Autonomous Port of Abidjan,
a leading member of the party of former President
Gbagbo; and the return from exile of 1,288 former
members of the Forces de defense et de securite with
a guarantee for their safety, who were welcomed on
Friday, 24 January at a ceremony held in the parade
grounds of the Ministry ofDefence, thanks to an appeal
launched by President Alassane Ouattara. Before
arriving, I was informed that the former Minister of
Defence of President Gbagbo had also returned to Cote
d'Ivoire this weekend.

Along the same lines, it is worth mentioning the
draft law on the status of the opposition, which has
been adopted by the Council of Ministers and will soon
be submitted to the National Assembly, as well as the
draft text on the funding of political parties. All of
those developments clearly indicate President Alassane
Ouattara's intention to firmly establish a genuine and
transparent culture of democracy in C6te d'Ivoire.

With regard to national reconciliation, after
two years of operation the Truth, Dialogue and
Reconciliation Commission officially provided
its report to the President on 21 November 2013.
The report recommends in particular the effective
implementation of the rural land law, the adoption of a
gender perspecyive in the country's overall policies, the
reduction of inequalities in regional development, the
establishment of a republican army with appropriate
and modern resources, good governance, the fight
against impunity and the strengthening of democracy.
On that occasion, the President of the Commission
noted that the majority of Ivoirians consulted want to
uncover the truth about the period from 1990 to 2011 to
be established. The Dialogue, Truth and Reconciliation
Commission therefore intends to make a public appeal
to those who were victims between 1990 and 2011.

With regard to the economic recovery, under the
leadership of President of the Republic and with the
coordination of the Prime Minister, Cote d'Ivoire is
experiencing a robust economic recovery, as evidenced
by the growth rate of 8 per cent achieved in 2013, and
that of 9 per cent predicted for 2014. The country is
consolidating its position as the world's leading cocoa
producer, having produced 1,449,000 tons of cocoa
beans in 2012-2013, representing 40 per cent of world
cocoa production.

In general, numerous economic and social
infrastructure construction or restoration projects
have been completed or are in progress, in particular
in the sectors of roads, water, education, health, social
housing and energy. Regarding the energy sector, it
should be noted that the sixth gas turbine of the Ivorian
Electricity Production Company, a private operator,
came into service last week, increasing the production
capacity of the national grid by 1,600 gigawatt hours a
year.

It is useful to recall that an international forum to
promote investment will be held in Abidjan between
29 January and 1 February. Some 2,200 participants
are expected, and the forum will be of great relevance
to the economic recovery of Cote d'Ivoire.

On the basis of all of these positive developments,
the Government of C6te d'Ivoire, fully aligned with
the United Nations approach, supports the planned
drawdown and reconfiguration ofUNOCI's military and
police presence between now and 2015, as mentioned in
the report before us.

Finally, the Government of C6te d'Ivoire, aware of
its primary responsibility to re-establish lasting peace
and stability in the country, is committed to playing its
full role in achieving the operational objectives agreed
in coordination with the United Nations, in the context
of the strategic planning of the transition from UNOCI
to a Peacebuilding Commission configuration.

