Mr. Fesko (Ukraine): 1 thank Special Representative
Yamamoto for his briefing and express my appreciation
for Foreign Minister Rabbani's presence and
his remarks.

The overall picture as presented in the Secretary-
General's report (S/20l7/783) revives disconcerting
feelings and causes renewed concern over the situation
in Afghanistan and its implications for international
peace and security. We welcome the National Unity
Government's firm commitment and steps taken to
promote the Afghan-led and Afghan-owned inclusive
peace process that would embrace, inter alia, factions
of the Taliban demonstrating openness to negotiations.
We also welcome the efforts of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
in support of the Government's initiatives and its
facilitation oflocal-level peacebuilding.

However, despite those efforts, no significant
progress has been made in fostering negotiations. We
recognize that the Independent Election Commission
announced the date of the long-awaited parliamentary
and local elections to be held in 2018, as well as
presented sound proposals to guarantee the credibility
of the electoral process through, inter alia, the use of
voter verification procedures and the introduction of
polling and results management technologies. Yet there
is still no political decision on the implementation of
those proposals.

It is praiseworthy that the Government took
into serious consideration the fact that international
financial support to Afghanistan, which is key for
securing steady improvement of the economic and
social situation in the country, depends upon the
successful implementation of the anti-corruption and
anti-drug policy. Since corruption has seeped into every
facet of the country's life, resolute steps undertaken
by the Anti-Corruption Justice Center in tackling
such a complex problem are a welcome development.
The implementation of those steps requires powerful
impetus and, importantly, political commitment at
every level of local and central Government.

We also commend the dedicated work of the
Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission
in promoting and monitoring human rights and the
investigation of human rights abuses. In particular,
we welcome the launch of a national inquiry on the
protection ofthe rights of victims of armed conflict and
terrorism. We call on the Government of Afghanistan to
cooperate fully with the Commission in that regard, as
well as in investigating abuses against women, children
and human rights defenders.

The terrorism threat remains an uphill challenge in

Afghanistan. Despite having been partially degraded by
Afghan and international military operations, it remains
increasingly diverse. Attempts by the Taliban to take
over a number of strategic areas and communication
lines and destroy critical infrastructure, as well as their
attacks on health-care facilities and their forced closure,
should be considered as acts of terror. The Taliban's
continued influence over regional Al-Qaida affiliates,
whose fighters from the Afghanistan-Pakistan border
region have integrated into the Taliban, which has led
to an increase in its military capabilities, is extremely
worrying. Attempts by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant to expand its presence in the north of the
country are equally disturbing.

Against that backdrop, I would like to stress the need
for concerted actions by Afghanistan's international
partners to reduce terrorism activity, facilitate the safe
return of refugees and promote the economic recovery
of the country.

Although there can be no military solution to the
conflict in Afghanistan, a military dimension is vital.
In that context, we welcome the recently announced
new strategy of the United States for Afghanistan,
as well as the commitments of other NATO member
States, which ought to contribute to increasing the
effectiveness of counter-terrorism efforts of the Afghan
national security and defence forces.

Yet, without constructive dialogue from all regional
actors and their practical engagement in eradicating
terrorists' safe havens and depriving them of sources
of financing, especially drug trafficking, all of those
achievements will be irrelevant. Double-dealing should
no longer be tolerated.

The United Nations plays a key role in efforts to
make Afghanistan stable and prosperous. Given the
current state of play, we need a strong UNAMA that is
able to effectively deliver its mandated responsibilities.
In that regard, I would like to thank the Secretary-
General for providing us with the report (S/2017/696) on
the strategic review of UNAMA and express our support
for its swift implementation. Among the Mission's
major tasks should be the provision of mediation
services in support of the national reconciliation
process, the promotion of reforms, good governance,
respect for human rights and the rule of law and support
for humanitarian and development projects.

The upcoming 2018-2019 election cycle, along with
the subsequent evolution of the political environment in
the country, will also require UNAMA's special focus
on the efficiency of all of its components, especially its
field presences. Yet we fully agree with the Secretary-

General that, while the situation on the ground remains
increasingly insecure and fragile, the security of
UNAMA personnel should certainly remain a priority.

In conclusion, let me reiterate Ukraine's strong
support for UNAMA. Its activities in Afghanistan
are vital for creating a sound foundation for peace,
security and prosperity both in the country and in the
wider region.

