Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): Since this is our first
meeting this month, let me join others in congratulating
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency. I would
like to assure you of our full support as you carry out
your duties.

I would also like to commend Ambassador Van
Oosterom and his team on a successful presidency
last month.

We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2018/241) on the implementation of the mandate
of the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH), based on resolution 2350 (2017).
We thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his
briefing on the most recent developments in Haiti and
the activities of MINUJUSTH over the past six months.
We take note of his recent visit to Haiti and discussions
held with Haitian authorities to address ways and means
to enhance cooperation and prepare for the transition to
a non-United Nations peacekeeping presence that would
continue to support Haiti's peacebuilding endeavours.

In that regard, we welcome the development of an
exit strategy for MINUJUSTH, which was developed
over the past three months in close consultation with
Haitian stakeholders, outlining clear benchmarks for a
staggered withdrawal over a two-year time frame, based
on results achieved and the situation on the ground.
Accordingly, we support the renewal of the mandate
of MINUJUSTH for one year. The establishment
of the Mission is indeed very important in order to
consolidate peace by strengthening justice and rule-of-
law institutions and supporting the institutional and
operational capacity of the Haitian National Police.
The renewal of its mandate will enable it to continue
assisting the Government to strengthen rule-of-
law institutions.

We appreciate the initiatives and efforts being
undertaken by the Mission to build the capacities of the
Haitian police in strategic and operational planning,
criminal intelligence, investigations, organized crime,
crime-scene management, recruitment, training,
gender mainstreaming, crowd control, information
technology, communication, logistics and infrastructure
maintenance. However, we note the challenges being
faced in the area of justice and corrections and the
efforts of MINUJUSTH to address them, as highlighted
in the report of the Secretary-General.

We welcome continuous progress in Haiti
towards consolidating its democracy and institutional
stability, as indicated in the report of the Secretary-
General. We also take note of the progress made in
the overall security situation in the country, which
remains relatively stable. Nonetheless, we understand
that Haiti continues to face enormous challenges and
vulnerabilities. Therefore, decisive steps must be taken
towards creating greater social and political cohesion
and reinforcing State institutions in order to sustain
the gains made in recent years. In that regard, we take
note of the various initiatives of the President of the
Republic of Haiti and hope that MINUJUSTH will
provide the necessary support by working closely with
the Government, civil society organizations and others.

The sustained and coordinated engagement
of all bilateral and international partners is very
critical to securing, sufficient and timely assistance
for the sustainable development of Haiti in a manner
that respects its sovereignty. We hope that the new
partnership established between Haiti and the United
Nations, with the establishment of MINUJUSTH,
will lay a solid foundation for long-term stability and
sustainable development in Haiti.

We welcome the approval by the Peacebuilding
Fund ofa new $3-million conflict prevention and social
cohesion project to strengthen the role of the youth
by facilitating better participation of young women
and men in community affairs and peaceful conflict
resolution. We also recognize regional and subregional
organizations, in particular the Organization of
American States, the Union of South American Nations
and the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), for their
important role in the process of the stabilization and
reconstruction of Haiti. We note that Haiti has now
assumed the chairmanship of CARICOM. and hosted a
summit meeting of the organization last month in Port-
au-Prince. Finally, we thank the police-contributing
countries of MINUJUSTH, the United Nations country
team and other international partners operating on the
ground for their continued support to Haiti.

I wish to conclude by reiterating our solidarity with
the brotherly people and Government of Haiti as they
continue striving to consolidate the progress made in
recent years and address the multiple challenges facing
their nation.

