Mr. McKell (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by reiterating the United Kingdom's continued
support for both the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). Their work
is essential in helping to tackle impunity and deliver
justice to the countless victims of atrocities in the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda.

I would also like to express my thanks to President
Meron and President Joensen, as well as to Prosecutor
Brammertz and Prosecutor Jallow. The reports (see S/2012/349 and S/2012/354) and briefings we have
received were, once again, of the highest standard. I
congratulate President Meron and Prosecutor J allow on
their appointments to the Residual Mechanism. Their
knowledge and expertise will be a tremendous asset as
it enters a crucial phase of its mandate, and will help
ensure a smooth and effective transition.

In respect of the ICTY, we note with appreciation
that the Serbian authorities have fully met the Tribunal's
expectations in terms of providing trial-related
assistance. Such cooperation is essential. On the other
hand, there is no information on the various support
networks that allowed Mladic' and HadZie to evade
capture for so long. Investigating those networks is
important, and we agree with the report (see S/2012/3 54)
that the Serbian authorities must intensify their efforts
in that regard.

We welcome the positive trial assistance afforded
by Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. With regard to
Croatia, we are aware that the Gatovina appeal is under
way and that a judgement is expected by the end of the
year. We hope that all sides will respect the process and
any verdict that is reached. The capture of Radovan
Stankovie in January by the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina was welcome news. We do, however,
share the concern expressed in the report about delays
in processing domestic war crimes cases in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We encourage the authorities to address
those delays as a matter of urgency.

The start of the Mladie' trial represents an important
milestone for the Tribunal, leaving only one trial yet
to begin, namely, that of Hadeie. The Mladie trial is a
powerful reminder that the age of impunity is over and
that those responsible for atrocities, like those that took
place in Houla in Syria, will be held accountable.

It is disappointing that judgement in the Karadeie
trial is now expected to be delivered five months later
than anticipated. While we understand the reasons
for the delay, we urge the Tribunal to do what it can
to prevent any further delays. The effective and timely
completion of trials will be increasingly important over
the coming months as the transition to the Residual
Mechanism nears.

We recognize that staff retention continues to
be an issue for both Tribunals. We are mindful of the
additional pressures that staff shortages can place on
existing members of staff. We very much welcome the
measures that have been undertaken to address the issue,
and we encourage the Tribunals to continue to prioritize
their resources as effectively as possible.

Moving on to the ICTR, we remain concerned that
nine fugitives are still at large. Apprehending those
fugitives is a priority, as justice cannot fully be done until
they are apprehended. We encourage all States Members
of the United Nations, especially Kenya and Zimbabwe,
to provide the ICTR with their full cooperation in order
to bring those fugitives to justice.

While it is unfortunate that the Ngirabatware trial
will not be completed before the commencement of the
Residual Mechanism, we are pleased to see that it is on
course to be completed soon, with the judgement to be
delivered by the end of the year. We recognize that the
ICTR has been working closely with the ICTY to ensure a
smooth transfer of activities to the Residual Mechanism.
That is essential, and we encourage both Tribunals to
continue that close cooperation in the coming months.

