Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I join other speakers in
thanking Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Zarif for his comprehensive update on the
situation in Kosovo. I also thank the President of Serbia
and Ms. Atifete Jahjaga for their statements.

Nigeria expresses its deepest sympathy to the people
of Serbia for the loss of life and substantial material
damage caused by the recent floods in the country.
The continued collaboration between the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo,
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) and other facilitators, such as the Kosovo
Force (KFOR) and the Organization for Security and
Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), has helped with the
consolidation of peace and stability in Kosovo and the
attainment of progress in the implementation of the First
Agreement of Principles Governing the Normalization
of Relations of 19 April 2013. This is evident in the
willingness of the parties to narrow their differences
in their respective positions, thus making it easier to
achieve consensus on residual issues.
The integration of former Serbian police officers
into the Kosovo Police, as well as the ongoing European
Union-facilitated dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina to commence accession negotiations are
further indications of commitment towards the 19 April
Agreement. These strategies, aimed at facilitating
sustainable peace and stability, should be encouraged
by all parties.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2014/305)
indicates that members of the Assembly of Kosovo
representing the Kosovo Serb and other minority
communities have expressed concern that certain
provisions of the draft law on general elections are
setting new criteria for voter eligibility, which these
groups believe will affect their eligibility to vote. The
OSCE considers that draft law to be incompatible with
other laws, and has acknowledged that the changes
in the voter eligibility criteria might discourage
participation in elections by minority voters. In the
interests of fairness and inclusiveness, we believe that
the law should take into consideration the concerns of
the Serbs and other minority groups in Kosovo.

One of the recommendations emerging from the
two-year Strategic Security Sector Review is for the
Kosovo Security Force (KSF) to be transformed into the
Kosovo armed forces. We note that neither NATO nor
KFOR was involved in drafting the recommendation.
That is significant, as the report indicates that any
changes to the mandate and structure of the Kosovo
Security Force might have an impact on NATO's
provision of continued support to Kosovo.

The report also shows that the Serbian authorities
and Kosovo Serb representatives have expressed serious
reservations about the proposed transformation of the
KSF into the Kosovo armed forces. Indeed, the Serbian
authorities view it as a violation of resolution 1244
(1999). In that regard, we see the need for the Kosovo to
proceed carefully with this aspect of its security sector
review by taking into consideration the concerns of all
stakeholders. We welcome the assurances given here
today by Ms. Jahjaga that the authorities of Kosovo will
continue their engagement on this issue.

While we acknowledge the gains made in the
implementation of the first agreement, the situation
in northern Kosovo remains a cause for concern.
Increasing political tensions arising from arrest,
detentions, protests and offences against EULEX give
rise to heightened insecurity in Kosovo, and must be

comprehensively addressed. Restrictions imposed on
visits to Kosovo by Serbian officials, police actions in

Shterpce/Strpce and retaliatory attacks on the Kosovo
Police are issues that require urgent attentions in order
to avoid an escalation of tensions.

We urge all sides to take steps to prevent a relapse
into violence while making strident efforts to reach
a comprehensive and mutually acceptable solution to
issues in the territory and the region. We also encourage
the unimpeded resettlement of minority returnees and
internally displaced persons in Kosovo. We believe that
the effort of the Government to address the low rate of
voluntary return and reintegration of displaced persons
is vital. We take note of the strategy for communities
and returns for 2014-2018 and hope that it will promote
voluntary returns in the medium-to-long term.

We welcome the extension of the EULEX mandate
until 14 June 2016 and commend its role in stabilizing
the region. We look forward to the finalization of its
strategic review, which will adjust its operations and
improve the Mission's performance on the ground.

Finally, we commend Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Zarif and his team for their
unrelenting efforts in promoting peace and stability in
Kosovo, as well as in the region. We assure him and his
Mission of our continued support.

