The President: I thank the representative of
Mauritius for his kind words addressed to me.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
the representative of Norway.

I should like to make a couple of comments.
First, I would like to commend the Security Council for
agreeing to send a mission to Ethiopia and Eritrea at
this important stage of the peace process. This mission
underlines the strong, supportive commitment of the
international community and its desire to understand
the parties and engage them in a constructive dialogue
on the way forward.

I would also like to commend the parties for their
commitment to implement fully the Algiers
Agreements. I met personally with the leaders of the
two countries in Addis Ababa and Asmara in the days
immediately before the visit by the Security Council
mission. I praised both countries for having opted for
an international legal mechanism for resolving the
conflict by peaceful means. I also commended them for
giving the United Nations such a central role in
implementing the Boundary Commission's decision.

A final settlement, based on the forthcoming
decision of the Boundary Commission, is about to be
reached. Ethiopia and Eritrea, with the assistance of the
international community, will be able to embark on and
again concentrate all their efforts on their economic
and social development, with the support of the world
community. With the peaceful resolution of the conflict
between Ethiopia and Eritrea, the enhancement of
peace and stability in the rest of the Horn of Africa
could also gain momentum.

On the eve of the decision of the Commission, the
message from the international community is
unambiguous: the United Nations and the international
community will continue their support to help
implement the practical and physical demarcation of
the border, thus consolidating the achievements of
peace.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Eritrea. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.

