Mr. Lucas (Angola): We align ourselves with the
part of the statement made earlier by the representative
of Venezuela that was on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

We are grateful to the briefers in this open debate on

the situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question, on which we will focus our attention.
Regrettably, Under-Secretary-General Stephen
O'Brien and Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov
were unable to report any positive developments in the
region in intra-Palestinian relations and reconciliation,
or between Israelis and Palestinians.

We would like to stress at the outset the fact
that Angola maintains good relations with Israel and
Palestine and that our stance, which we will spell out,
is exclusively based on the fundamental duty to uphold
justice and the rights of the Palestinian people. Despite
our friendly and very fruitful relations with Israel,
we are not by any means prepared to appease and
condescend to policies that we deem wrong, harmful
to international peace and security and, in the last
instance, harmful to the Israeli people themselves.

Our tenure in the Security Council ends soon, and
it is with sadness and great frustration that we note not
only the lack ofprogress in the Israeli-Palestinian peace
process, but a regression in the prospects for a two-
State solution and the continuing lack of unity within
the Council on how to reverse those negative trends and
get the peace process back on track.

The most negative trend is the continued expansion
of illegal settlements in Palestinian territories, which
maintains an atmosphere of mistrust, hostility and
violence among Israelis and Palestinians and the
frustration and despair of the international community.
We believe that a crucial point in time has come to
step up efforts to counter such an unfortunate and
dangerous trend. It seriously undermines the prospect
for a two-State solution, on which rests the hopes of the
international community, of the Palestinians and even
of Israelis as the only reasonable outcome for a just
and lasting solution to that protracted and distressing
conflict and on which to build a stable, peaceful and
prosperous future for Israelis and Palestinians.

Once again we would like to stress that such a state
of affairs also flows from the persistent lack of unity
within the Security Council and the Council's reluctance
to hold anyone to account for illegal policies and actions
that are in violation of international law. The lack of
cohesion within the Council and the double standard
applied when it comes to holding selected perpetrators
of violations of international and humanitarian law
accountable for their deeds are unacceptable and
unsustainable. The Middle East Quartet, which the
Security Council endorsed as a driving force to bridge
the gap between the two sides, has proven powerless in
its assertion ofprinciples and strategies for negotiations
towards a solution to the conflict.

Symptomatic of such a state of affairs is that since
the recent report ofthe Middle East Quartet (S/2016/595, annex) -which offered recommendations for the way
forward 4 the Israeli Government has increased
settlement-related activities, as well as demolitions of
Palestinian homes and civilian infrastructure, in total
disregard for international initiatives aimed at reviving
the peace process. The settlement regime upheld by
Israel, which the international community should put
at the centre of its concerns, became the pillar of the
colonization policies and the means to entrench the
occupation of the Palestinian territories by recourse to
military force in its systematic expansion of settlements
in the occupied West Bank, particularly in and around
East Jerusalem. That policy led to the settlement of
over half a million Israelis on Palestinian soil, a move
in total contravention to the creation of a Palestinian
State.

With such a backdrop, we would like to put a few
straight questions to Israel. What does Israel intend to
achieve with the expanding occupation of Palestinian
territories? How does Israel intend to resolve the
wrecking of territorial contiguity of Palestine if a
meaningful peace process is finally engaged? Does
Israel intend to perpetuate the status quo of permanent
violence, dissent and the irremediable separation of
the two peoples - the Israelis and the Palestinians?
With the accomplished facts on the ground towards
the effective physical separation of the two peoples,
does Israel intend to build an apartheid-style regime?
Since the two-State solution seems to vanish under
the decisions taken on the ground, does Israel intend
to move towards the creation of a one-State solution,
embracing Israelis and Palestinians, with equal rights
of citizenship and to end the Jewish character of the
State of Israel?

Those are candid questions that we raise in order
to understand the medium- and long-term purpose of
Israeli policies in its relations with the Palestinians and
the international community at large.

As always stated, this conflict has global
repercussions and time is running out to bring about a
meaningful solution to create a viable political horizon.
In fact, we currently witness a dangerous descent into
chaos in the Middle East region, mainly due to the
conflicts in Palestine, Syria, Yemen and Iraq and the
volatile political climate in several other countries
resulting from mass migration due to those conflicts.
In order to counter and prevent further instability and
conflicts in the region, we must tackle the root causes:
widespread discontent, radicalization and sectarianism.

We therefore support the call for urgent action, by
demanding the active mobilization of the international
community in order to preserve the two-State solution.
International players - particularly the Quartet, the
permanent members of the Security Council and regional
stakeholders, namely, the Arab Peace Initiative - must
do all in their power to restore a political horizon
conducive to the revival of the peace process.

We wish to reiterate our support to both Israelis
and Palestinians who seek to live side by side in peace
and security in their own independent States. The
current state of affairs is unsustainable, and we call on
both sides to urgently undertake confidence-building
measures with policies and actions aimed at creating
conditions for direct and meaningful peace negotiations.

