Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like at the outset to thank all the briefers. In my
statement I will focus on two main topics: the status
of implementing the Stockholm Agreement and the
humanitarian situation in Yemen.
With regard to the status of implementing the
Stockholm Agreement, notwithstanding the first phase
of redeployment, which is at a stalemate, in addition
to the ongoing impediments facing the work of the
Redeployment Coordination Committee (RCC) due
to deliberately hampering the activities of its Chair
and personnel, frequently affecting their freedom
of movement and obstructing the implementation of
their mandate under the relevant Security Council
resolutions, we welcome what Mr. Griffiths said in his
briefing today on reaching a detailed agreement among
the parties concerned to implement that phase.

As Special Envoy Mr. Griffiths said, the political
will of the two parties is an extremely important matter
in order to achieve the desired progress. However,
we reiterate that it is of the utmost importance to
demonstrate goodwill and to translate words into
action by fully implementing all aspects of the
Stockholm Agreement, including the Al-Hudaydah
and the prisoner exchange agreements, in addition
to the memorandum of understanding on Taiz, as
the best approach towards resuming the next round
of consultations, which will focus on cross-cutting
issues to end the crisis, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions, in particular resolution
2216 (2015), the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative
and its Implementation Mechanism, as well as the
outcome of the National Dialogue Conference.

We reiterate our full support for the efforts of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen,
Mr. Martin Griffiths, as well as the Head of the
United Nations Mission to Support the Al-Hudaydah
Agreement and the Chair of the RCC. We are cognizant
of the fact that there can be no military solution to
this prolonged crisis, and we do not want the conflict
in Al-Hudaydah to go back to square one. We should
therefore immediately begin the implementation of
resolution 2452 (2019), which requested the Secretary-
General to report on instances of non-compliance.

On the humanitarian situation, we have repeatedly
stressed at previous meetings the importance of the
full implementation of the Stockholm Agreement as a
gateway to a political settlement. The Agreement has a
humanitarian dimension whose ultimate purpose is to
alleviate the suffering of the brotherly Yemeni people.
This includes the opening of safe corridors to enable
the delivery of humanitarian assistance to all affected
and to the areas most in need, while enabling the United
Nations and its relevant agencies to reach the Red Sea
Mills, where there are vast grain stocks that could feed
3.7 million people for 30 days, as noted by Mr. Lowcock
in his briefing.

Despite the positive cooperation on the part of
the Yemeni Government in the form of announcing
its willingness to ensure safe access to roads and to
open routes for humanitarian delivery, access to the
Mills remains stalled. The impediments placed before
the RCC in reaching the Mills could cause the stocks
to spoil.

The humanitarian situation in Yemen has seen a
significant reaction from the international community,
as clearly reflected in the magnitude of the response to
the United Nations response plan for 2019, which was
commensurate with the scope of the crisis. Kuwait has
pledged $250 million. Since 2015 we have provided
a total of $600 million, in addition to the generous
donations by major donors such as the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, the United
Kingdom, Germany, the European Union and other
countries. This underscores the need to address this
difficult aspect of the crisis that has afflicted Yemen
since September 2014.

Regarding the humanitarian concerns about the
recruitment of children, and taking into account what
was said by Ms. Gamba in her briefing, two thirds of
those children were recruited by the Houthis. We note
also that the joint command of the coalition has set up
a child-specialized unit in order to protect and receive
recruited children, rehabilitate them by providing
them with medical and psychological support and
ensure their handover to their families with the help
of international specialized agencies, including the
International Committee of the Red Cross. The unit has
handed over 120 children to date and has defined rules
of engagement so as to ensure that military operations
are carried out in accordance with international
humanitarian law.

In conclusion, we reiterate our call on the Yemeni
parties to fully implement the Stockholm Agreement on
Al-Hudaydah and its three ports, the prisoner exchange
agreement and the statement of understanding on Taiz,
in order to complement the efforts of the Special Envoy
to bring about a political solution underpinned by the
three agreed terms of reference: the Gulf Cooperation
Council Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism;
the outcome of the comprehensive National Dialogue
Conference; and the relevant Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 2216 (2015). That
would end the crisis and ensure the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Yemen as well
as prevent any interference in its domestic affairs.
