Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Never before has a serious development in the
Palestinian situation demanded such international
concern and such a response as the premeditated and
meticulously planned Israeli act of aggression on a
residential building in the crowded Al-Daraj quarter, in
northern Gaza City, carried out at midnight on Monday.
That act of aggression resulted in the deaths of more
than 15 martyrs and the injury of 150 people, as a
result of laser-guided and missile shelling from an F-16
aircraft.

Even Israel's sympathizers have deplored and
rejected this act. No logic can justify what occurred, let
alone the motives behind it. We, who have long been
familiar with Israeli terrorist policies and have suffered
their aftermath for more than half a century, know all
too well Israel's goals in planning its policies and
defining its objectives and ambitions.

Many Israelis described the aerial missile attack
on a residential quarter in the north of Gaza City as a
war crime, in the real sense of the word, in the context
of international humanitarian law. That description was
given by Israelis. Some went so far as to say that it was
a real act of State terrorism. Many world leaders
described the Israeli aggression as senseless, flagrant,
brutal and unjustified. They said that it would
exacerbate the conflict. They also said that Israel's use
of the most lethal modern weapons and missile and
laser attacks against Palestinian civilians and their
property cannot be tolerated. The most modern fighter
jets were used in the attack.

Many world leaders called for immediate and
decisive action to put an end to brutal Israeli acts of
aggression. They also called on the Security Council to
shoulder its responsibility to protect the Palestinian
people, on the grounds that such aggression reflects the
Israeli Government's clear rejection of peace and of
efforts to achieve it.

We cannot fail to respond to the images of dozens
of body parts strewn everywhere, body parts of
Palestinian children and women amid the tears of the
tens of thousands of Palestinian citizens carrying the
bodies of their brothers and sons to their resting places;
to images of infants killed in the attack - some
younger than two months - being carried to their
graves. Even The New York Times carried a photograph
of a father carrying the body of his little girl on its
front page.

Amidst the protests of the leaders and peoples of
the world, the Israeli Prime Minister very clearly and
unambiguously made no secret of his real intentions.
At a meeting of the Israeli Cabinet he proudly stated
that this operation had been one of the most successful
ones launched by the Israeli army in recent times. Was
that not the same declaration relayed by all media
outlets? Did not that statement reflect pleasure and
sadism at the killing of innocent people, particularly
children?

The Syrian Arab Republic was very clear in
defining its view of the situation in the Middle East
region, namely, that the situation has deteriorated in
recent years as a result of the way in which Israeli
policies and practices have contradicted the aspirations
of the international community and of all those who
believe in reaching a just and comprehensive peace.
Syria has affirmed that successive Israeli leaders have
used every pretext and means to circumvent the
requirements of the peace process, particularly those
relative to Israel's withdrawal from all occupied Arab
territories - including the Syrian Golan, the West
Bank, the Gaza Strip and Jerusalem - to the 4 June
1967 borders, as well as from occupied Lebanese
territory. Had Israel been serious about, and truly
interested in, achieving peace in the region on the basis
of the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, 242
(1967) and 338 (1973) in particular, the Madrid terms
of reference, and the principle of land for peace -
which was reaffirmed by the "quartet" in its last
communique - we would not have had to waste our
time, efforts and means. But Israel has persisted in
continuing its occupation and annexing more land, at
the expense of the rights of the Arab people.

Since 1948, Israel has committed one massacre
after another; this is not the first massacre against the
Palestinian people. Israel justifies its actions by
employing all sorts of unfounded linguistic ploys. At
times it justifies its actions under the pretext of self-
defence, at others under the pretext of fighting violence
and terrorism. It has been proven that when it
committed the recent massacre at Jenin and destroyed
hundreds of houses in that camp, Israel was pursuing a
systematic policy of destruction in a show of senseless
force, for the sole purpose of preventing the Palestinian
people from exercising their rights to self-
determination and to establish their State on their land,
continuing its occupation of that land and maintaining
its grip over the illegal Israeli settlements, policies
which are rejected by the international community. The
current attack yet again confirms that policy of terror,
killing and destruction. We have surely not yet seen the
end of attacks on northern Gaza, as such attacks have
been an ongoing pattern of Israel's policy over the
years.

The war against international terrorism will be
severely damaged if we are complacent about Israel's
premeditated terror and believe the lies of Israel's
leaders when they say that the carnage perpetrated
against the defenceless Palestinian people is an act of
self-defence. That lie cannot be accepted by anyone.
Israel, which is heavily armed with nuclear weapons
and every sort of weapon of mass destruction, is
capable of defending itself in any circumstances should
it decide to withdraw to the lines it held prior to 4 June
1967.

The new carnage, among whose 15 victims 9
were children, provides yet another incentive for the
Security Council, the United Nations system,
international law and all States of the world to bring all
possible pressure to bear upon Israel in order to hold it
responsible under international humanitarian law, as
well as to make it respect the Fourth Geneva
Convention, of 1949. Israel's crimes in Gaza, Jenin,
Deir Yassin, Khan Younis and Kibya, the assassination
of Egyptian soldiers by burying them alive, and the
massacres at Sabra and Shatila are crimes in a series of
crimes against humanity. They were not acts against
terrorism. The international community should not take
such crimes lightly, for they threaten the ethical norms,
international laws and legal instruments that we have
all long respected.

The Syrian Arab Republic strongly denounces
this senseless crime, this carnage. We support action by
the Council to strongly condemn the massacre
committed by Israel in Gaza. We would hope that
doing so would deter Israel from continuing its acts of
aggression against the Palestinian people. The Council
should call upon Israel to lift the stifling and barbaric
siege that has been imposed on hundreds of thousands
of Palestinians for over a month, which threatens to
cause a human catastrophe of unknown dimensions.
Israel should also be called upon to end its acts of
aggression against the Palestinian people, as well as the
liquidation of Palestinians under the pretext of fighting
terrorism. The policies of Israel have become all too
well known to the world. Are we going to allow Israel
to remain above the law? Can Mr. Sharon and his
Minister for Defence, who planned and oversaw the
execution of this and other massacres, remain out of
the reach of the International Criminal Court?

Security in the Middle East will not be enjoyed
by anyone in the region unless there is just and
comprehensive peace. Bringing about peace and
security and ending the occupation of all the occupied
territories are the only way to guarantee an end to the
violence.

