Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (interpretation from Chinese): In principle, the Chinese delegation supports the
work of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia. At the same time, our reservation,
expressed at the time the Council adopted resolution 827
(1993), remains unchanged.

The Council established the Tribunal on the Former
Yugoslavia in 1993 on an ad hoc basis, with a specific
target. This has been the common understanding of the
members of the Council. The Tribunal is not a permanent
court of law, nor is it an organ that can intervene at any
time in the internal affairs of any country in the Balkan
region that fall purely within that country's domestic
jurisdiction.

The problems in the Kosovo region of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia by their very nature originated in
terrorist and separatist activities. China condemns the
terrorist forces in this region for the crimes against
humanity and in Violation of human rights. Double
standards should not be used in the fight against

 

terrorism. We note that the Government of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia is now investigating and handling
these matters through its internal judicial procedures. China
supports the measures taken by that Government in this
regard. The handling of these matters falls entirely within
the internal jurisdiction of the Government of the Federal
Republic. On this question, the principle of respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Federal Republic,
reaffirmed time and again by the Council, should be strictly
observed.

The Council's basic purpose in establishing this
Tribunal was to restore lasting peace and stability in the
former Yugoslav region in close cooperation with the
parties to the conflict there. Mutual respect and cooperation
are an important guarantee for the Tribunal to be able to
carry out smoothly its functions and duties. The problems
that crop up in the course of its work should be resolved
through consultations among all parties concerned. The
Tribunal should seriously consider the questions and
concerns raised by the parties. It should not become a
political tool to exert pressures on any party.

In the light of those considerations, the Chinese
delegation is unable to support the invoking of Chapter VII
of the Charter as a means of putting pressure on the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, as well as some other provisions
in the draft resolution. We proposed our amendments to the
sponsors, and we thank them for accepting some of them.
Nonetheless, we regret that some of our other important
views were not incorporated into the text. Therefore, the
Chinese delegation will abstain in the vote on the draft
resolution.

