Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for
his briefing, which confirmed a very alarming situation
of which we had already been aware.

I also thank the representatives of Palestine and
Israel for their statements, which provided additional
information for our discussion of the situation.

The circumstances that have brought us to meet
today in the Security Council are a cause of sorrow and
concern to all. Restrictions of access to the Gaza Strip,
the lack of fuel supplies and the power cuts -
regardless of their scope and consequences for the
population - dash the hopes that had arisen for a
peaceful and lasting settlement in the region.

All the news agencies, many non-governmental
organizations and other actors in the region have
reported on the unsustainable situation created by
recent Israeli measures. However, it is not this
Council's job to act solely on the basis of reports from
such people and organizations. The Council's job is
principally to analyse the official reports and balanced
assessments of the situation provided by its own
representatives. If we fail to heed those who act as our

eyes in the field - as we noted just a few days ago
when we were discussing the attack on a United
Nations convoy in Darfur - we will be opening a

veritable Pandora's box and end in total chaos. I would
therefore recall the recent words of certain
representatives of our Organization.

My delegation recalls that, last Friday, the
Secretary-General made a statement in which he very
clearly said that the Israeli decision to close the border
crossings between Israel and the Gaza Strip that are
used for humanitarian assistance deprives the
population of the critical supplies of fuel needed to
pump water and generate power for housing and
hospitals. After calling on Israel to abstain from taking
measures that would harm the welfare of the civilian
population in Gaza, the Secretary-General also
expressed regret for actions that affect the communities
of southern Israel. He reminded both sides of the need
to comply with international humanitarian law.

That very day, the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Holmes, said that the
restrictions on access to the Gaza Strip are unjustifiable
and unacceptable. Having noted the disastrous
consequences of those measures, Mr. Holmes said that,
although the attacks on Israel from Palestinian territory
should be repudiated, the response of the Israeli forces
has not been proportionate. The Under-Secretary-
General asserted that it was his firm position that
"[t]his kind of action against the people in Gaza cannot
be justified, even by those rocket attacks".

Those are the assessments of the highest
representatives of this Organization, which prompt us
to urge the Security Council today to send a clear
message, first and foremost to the Government of
Israel. We believe that the appeal should be pure and
simple, but we also deem it essential to ensure that all
actors in this tragedy understand that the Security
Council has a complete overview and full grasp of the
lack of compliance by several protagonists with their
responsibilities.

We are witness to a drama in which the various
actors have, so to speak, common but differentiated
responsibilities, if I may borrow language usually
applied to other spheres of the Organization's
activities. From our perspective, the Palestinian
authorities are obligated to control the activities of
terrorists on their territory. That is their responsibility
in this drama, and their obligations must also be
recalled here. The State of Israel should also be urged
to meet its obligations as a subject under international
law and a Member of this Organization.

The Security Council needs to act definitively
and decisively. The inclusion of the item under
discussion on the Council's agenda over the past six
decades is a cause of concern to all of us and should
act as a stimulus for the decisive and sustained action
of which I spoke earlier. Now if a peaceful and
definitive settlement of the problem appears on the
horizon, the Council must carefully assess its actions to
identify those that could effectively contribute to a
sustained improvement in the situation.

My delegation shares the view that the Council
should today offer a clear demonstration of its resolve
to protect the 860,000 suffering civilians in Gaza. We
have heard with optimism the news that some
restrictions imposed by the Israeli Government have
begun to be lifted as a result of the concern expressed
by the international community and of a timely
exercise in self-criticism within the Government of
Israel itself. We hope and trust that the situation will
soon be normalized as a result of recent progress in the
peace process necessary to put an end to the tragedy.

