Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like at the outset to express my thanks to the Chairman
of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992)
and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea, the
Permanent Representative of Venezuela, for his efforts.

We highly value the efforts made by the Somalia
and Eritrea Monitoring Group as well. The sanctions
regime against Somalia and Eritrea is one of the oldest
regimes imposed by the Council. It clearly demonstrates
the necessity for the Council to accord adequate
importance to the working methods of subsidiary
organs of the Security Council. That should be done
in order to develop those working methods, modernize
the sanctions regime for further effectiveness and
impact, and attain the political objectives we all seek.
I therefore affirm what I said at the open debate in the
Security Council on 11 February (see S/PV. 7620).

The recent developments in Somalia show how
important it is for the Council and for all international
and regional parties to work to use the momentum,
realize an effective political reconciliation, re-establish
the State and confront the security threats posed by the
Al-Shabaab movement. We call upon all States to do
the necessary work and provide all necessary support
to the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
in order to guarantee the Mission's success in fulfilling
its mandate. We also call upon States to accord greater
importance and provide further material assistance to
the Somali Government in order to build the capacity
of the Somali forces. This is the only way to reach
the desired result; it is a cornerstone for all efforts to
restore peace and security in the country.

We express our concern with regard to the continued
threats to relief organizations and the obstruction of
delivery of humanitarian assistance to civilians, as well
as the continued exportation of charcoal from many
Somali ports. We call on the Somali Government,
AMISOM. and all international parties to provide the
necessary protection for humanitarian efforts and
guarantee that the international embargo on charcoal
exports is respected.

We reiterate the importance of improving the
effectiveness and efficiency of sanctions regime on
Somalia and Eritrea in a manner that is commensurate
with peace efforts and which does not have a negative
impact on international efforts to counter terrorism in
the southern Red Sea region and in the Bab el-Mandeb
Strait.

