Mr. Fedotov: I am grateful for this opportunity to
update the Council on the work of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) against illicit
drugs in Afghanistan and their impact on health,
development and security. Since my last briefing (see S/PV.7802), UNODC has published its Afghanistan
Opium Survey 2016, referred to in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2016/ 1049), which shows a
worrying reversal ofthe efforts to combat this persistent
problem. Opium poppy cultivation has grown by 10 per
cent and production by 43 per cent, an increase driven
by a 30 per cent rise in the average opium yield. In the
past year, the number of provinces that are poppy-free
has gone down from 14 to 13, while eradication, which
has dropped by 91 per cent, is in free fall.

The efforts of UNODC and its partners in
Afghanistan are continuing against that background
and that of the bitter ongoing insurgency. The
Brussels Conference on Afghanistan and the resulting
communique underlined the importance of these
activities. Countries and organizations committed to
a sustained and integrated approach to dealing with
the production and trafficking of illicit drugs and
precursor chemicals. The Conference highlighted the
importance of fighting organized crime, including
money laundering, corruption and the financing of
terrorism, as well as of treating and rehabilitating drug
users. The communique expressed the international
community's determination to counter all forms of
terrorism and extremism.

UNODC activities, delivered through our
integrated and comprehensive projects and
programmes, are targeting those and other challenges.
Our country programme for Afghanistan, linked
to our Regional Programme for Afghanistan and
Neighbouring Countries, is assisting in building the
capacity of the Ministry of Counter-Narcotics and
the narcotics police. Earlier this month, I visited the
Domodedevo Project, supported by Russia and Japan,
which is using professional training to improve the
capacity of Afghanistan's narcotics police. UNODC
is promoting cooperation in the region through the
Regional Programme, its Triangular and Afghanistan,
Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan Initiatives, the Central Asian
Regional Information and Coordination Centre and the
Gulf Cooperation Council Criminal Information Centre
to Combat Drugs.

In order to build links between the regional bodies
operating along the major opiate trafficking routes,
UNODC has introduced a networking-the-networks
initiative designed to leverage information-sharing.
Our work forms part of an overall interregional drug-
control response to illicit trafficking. Its activities
include support, including in the field, for the Paris Pact
Initiative. UNODC recently established an air cargo
unit at the Kabul international airport. Afghanistan is
now one of the first countries in the world to implement
the air-cargo segment of the UNODC-World Customs
Organization Container Control Programme.

In the essential area of health, UNODC supports
treatment services founded on scientific evidence and
human rights, especially for vulnerable children and
young people exposed to drugs, as well as their families.

Afghan heroin is also linked to terrorism and
the insurgency. The bulk of opium cultivation takes
place in areas controlled by the Taliban, and they
receive tens of millions of dollars through their taxes
on drug trafficking. UNODC welcomes the Afghan
Government's decision to develop a national action
plan on violent extremism, and we are helping to
implement it. While we appreciate donors' interest in
alternative development projects being carried out in
Afghanistan in cooperation with other United Nations
agencies and the Government, much more needs to be
done. The adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development is driving momentum for more ambitious
alternative development projects for Afghan farmers
who are currently growing illicit crops. Illicit drugs
fuel corruption. UNODC, as a guardian of the United
Nations Convention against Corruption, is working
with Afghan counterparts to draft a new, comprehensive
anti-corruption law based on international standards
and best practices.

Goal 16 of the 2030 Agenda promotes peaceful
and inclusive societies. UNODC is working with the
relevant Afghan authorities to enhance the capacity of
financial intelligence units and regulatory and criminal
justice institutions to analyse, detect, investigate and
prosecute cases of economic crime. The new National
Peace and Development Framework and the national
drug action plan underscore the Afghan Government's
willingness and determination to counter illicit
production and trafficking and to reduce demand.

UNODC will continue to work over the long term
with partners, including the Afghan Government, to
counter illicit drugs, crime, corruption and terrorism in
Afghanistan and in Western and Central Asia, as well
as along the main drug trafficking routes to the rest
of the world. In its pursuit of that strategy, UNODC
is helping to integrate those activities into economic
and national security planning. Afghanistan is hard
pressed under the impact of illicit drugs, and I call on
the international community to remain fully committed
to helping to alleviate that destructive threat.

