Mr. Minah (Sierra Leone): What we can take away
today, if nothing else, is that we are nowhere near the
end of this challenge that we all collectively face. What
we can also take away today is that the international
community has fully woken up to the threat that we all
face. It is also quite clear that an investment in the fight
in the epicentre, West Africa, is an investment in our
collective health and security.

We are gratified by the briefers today, but in
particular I would like to single out Mr. Banbury
and Mr. Nabarro, who have remained available to the
three most affected States, giving us information,
clarifications and briefings whenever we seek them. We
are fully aware of the demands on their time; there can
be no two finer public servants of the United Nations.

Sierra Leone continues to suffer from a spike in
the rate of reported cases. The rate of infection remains
critical and depressing, and we look forward to a grim
Christmas period. We are grateful for the setting up
and the establishment of the United Nations Mission
for Ebola Emergency Response; however, we hope that
it will soon evolve into an institution of sustainable
competence and of excellence in the fight against Ebola.

The effects on our economy and the economy of
Africa and West Africa have been well documented
and noted. Gross domestic product rates, economy,
employment levels, the transportation of food, crops
and agricultural cycles have all been affected. The
most productive members of our community, those
aged from 25 to 55, have been affected. The majority
of our populations, who are women, have been
disproportionately affected by this disease by virtue of
their role as caregivers, nurses and mothers.

We remain resolute, and the President of the
Republic of Sierra Leone, Mr. Ernest Bai Koroma, when
required to act, has acted. Our Ebola operations centre
has evolved into the national Ebola response centre,
and the Chief Executive Officer is a former defence
minister who is well respected by His Excellency.

He has called for a sustained and committed
change in the attitude of our populations, in that only
change from our traditional practices will ensure that
rates of proper burial remain at a promising level, as
Ambassador Power has indicated.

There is no time for complacency, and while we can
be cautiously optimistic that things are moving in the
right direction, we know that the fight is going to be long
and hard. Everything that you can think of is needed
in greater quantity. Personal protective equipment,
human technical support, logistics experts, food drops,
sustainable support for livelihoods, incentive payments
for burial teams, all of this is required in greater
quantities.

We acknowledge the efforts of those Council
members that have provided supplies and put their
citizens in harm's way in West Africa. We are grateful
to those who contemplate further support as they make
an assessment of the situation. We call on the United
Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response
(UNMEER) to ensure the rapid deployment of staff and
personnel to the affected States. We call on UNMEER
to ensure that it has a nimble bureaucratic footprint and
that the materials at its disposal at this time are well
deployed and well used.

We also acknowledge the ultimate sacrifice of
those who have fallen. We have lost seven doctors in the
fight, and across the region various communities, towns
and cities have lost valuable health workers. We wish to
record and note the sacrifice of Dr. Sheik Umar Khan,
Dr. Modupe Cole, Dr. Olivet Buck, Dr. Godfrey George,
Dr. Sahr Rogers and Dr. Michael Moses Kargbo, among
those who have fallen, including Dr. Martin Salia, who
recently passed away in the United States. We also offer
our prayers for Dr. Felix Baez Sarria of Cuba, who was
recently diagnosed with Ebola virus disease and is
currently undergoing treatment in Geneva. Our prayers
go to his family and all those who continue to be under
quarantine and in isolation.

We are grateful not only for the lead that the United
Kingdom has provided in Sierra Leone in terms of
support, both human and material, but also for all the
high-level visits that have been paid to Sierra Leone,
including by representatives of the United Kingdom,
the United States, the Netherlands, the Republic of
Korea and other high-level delegations that have gone
to show by their presence Sierra Leone that will not be
isolated.

We have thought long and hard about the enigma
of Ebola and its origins in West Africa. There are
various theories, but none of us - neither doctors
nor laymen - can be sure as to where it originated.
Unfortunately, we do not have the luxury to indulge
in philosophical or intellectual debates or exercises,
because we are all geared to the fight in the emergency
phase of this response.

But as other Member States and colleagues have
pointed out, we also have to keep one eye to the future.
For that, we are grateful for Mr. Nabarro's paper,
which concerns recovery, revival and resilience for the
situations in all countries, looking forward. While we
have lost citizens to the disease, it would be a greater
tragedy if we lose our economies to it as well. As I have
said before, we are being decimated in terms of our
economies and our livelihoods, but if the international
community looks forward not only to the short and
medium terms but also to the long term, we believe that
the interventions of international financial institutions,
working together, will ensure that our economies
recover and remain resilient. We are grateful to Cuba,
which has shown through its fearless medical diplomacy
that it remains committed to the fight. As I have said
before, our investment in this fight in West Africa is an
investment in our collective public health.

We know that the health situation in our countries
prior to the onset of Ebola was precarious. The public
health systems were precarious. With the advent of
Ebola, those public health systems are tottering on
the edge of ruin. We look forward not only to the
interventions of international actors to help us beat
Ebola, but also to rebuilding our public health systems.
It would be a true tragedy if we beat back Ebola and
yet down the road another epidemic should come and
invade our countries.

Ebola, it has often been said, knows no ideology.
It knows no religion. It is no respecter of age. It is no
respecter of creed. Therefore, our response must be
suitably multifaceted and nimble. We are grateful that
members of the Council and all those who have provided
support have set aside ideology, political affiliations
and the normal diplomatic engagements that concern us
to focus on what needs to be done. We as a nation State
realize that our primary responsibility is to look after
the health of our citizens. We are grateful for the early
leadership provided by the peacebuilding architecture,
the chairs ofthe country-specific configurations and the
Ambassador of Brazil to help us focus on the long-term
economic dangers that we face. We are also grateful
to the World Bank Group, the African Development
Bank, the African Union, the Mano River Union and
the Economic Community of West African States for
providing the right political weight to the fight. We ask
that the United Nations system, as it moves forward,
remain fully engaged with African institutions and
other international actors, such as the European Union,
which have also mobilized and will remain engaged.

We as a country and as a region are perplexed by the
origins of this disease, but we are not defeated yet and
we do not intend to be defeated, because with the level
of support of our partners, our friends and members
of the Council, we have no doubt that Ebola can be
beaten and beaten successfully. There are no words that
could properly and appropriately express our sense of
satisfaction or praise those who have gone to the front
line. We are grateful to the survivors who, through their
blood, may perhaps offer a cure. We are grateful to
those who continue to experiment and conduct clinical
trials in Mali, and recently in Sierra Leone and other
countries, to give us a sense of hope and that a solution
in terms of better testing and a possible cure can come
about. From what we hear, some of the testing and some
of the clinical trials might yield fruits by the end of the
year.

We are also concerned about the survivors. For as
we commiserate with the victims' families, we should
also celebrate the survivors. But it would be a bleak
future indeed if the survivors should beat the disease
yet face a life of orphanhood and without a significant
or satisfactory livelihood to sustain them. The response
that we are all engaged in must be multifaceted, and we
must be fully engaged in the fight.

Why is it that West Africa became the epicentre
this year or last? No one knows, but what we do know
is that the United Nations, with its special skills and
unique talents, can make a difference. As the three or
four most affected countries, we remain available for
briefings and clarifications and to make our presence
felt in all chambers of the United Nations. We are
grateful to the General Assembly for its focus, to the
Security Council and to the peacekeeping architecture,
but we also know that other institutions and agencies of
the United Nations have joined the fight.

The Secretary-General and our Presidents have said
that this extraordinary disease requires extraordinary
measures. We call on all within the Organization and
the Council to help the Secretariat bypass the normal
bureaucratic entanglements and the information silos
to deliver the results we want. For the ambassadors of
the most affected States, this valid battle is personal,
for we have families in harms' way and colleagues,
members of our communities, who call us and tell
us of the situation on the ground. The cities of our
collective countries have become places of silence in
some regions. We believe that the sense of hope that we
call on the international community to provide will be
sustained and collective and will not relent.

As the three or four most affected States, we are
suffering the worst of it, but this is a collective fight
in which we know that we have to play our role, no
matter how limited. There are bright sparks of hope.
The rates of infection have decreased in Guinea and
Liberia. We see survivors who appear to be immune.
We see the roll-out of the United Nations Mission. We
see the work of the United Nations Ebola Multi-Partner
Trust Fund. As advisory members of that body, we are
dedicated to making sure that the funds are applied to
the most viable projects - those projects that will fulfil
the strategic objectives of the Trust Fund. For we know
that money in a bank account or money held as petty
cash is of no good to anyone.

There are times at which we can despair; this is not
one of those times. There were times at which we can
think that perhaps the task we face is too much for us.
But when we do that, let us think of those day in and
day out on the front line who have to wear the personal
protective equipment suits all day and change three
times a day, and risk paying the ultimate sacrifice. We
diplomats are away from the front line, and we are not
in immediate danger. It is therefore imperative for all
of us that we do all that we can to support those on the
front line and make sure their actions and words are
matched by our deeds.

