The President (interpretation from Spanish): As this
is the first meeting of the Security Council for the month
of October, I should like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency Mr.
Alfredo Lopes Cabral, Permanent Representative of Guinea-
Bissau to the United Nations, for his service as President of
the Security Council for the month of September 1996. I
am sure I speak for all members of the Security Council in
expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Lopes Cabral
for the great diplomatic skill with which he conducted the
Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the former Yugoslavia

The President (interpretation from Spanish): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the discussion,
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sacirhey
(Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a seat at the Council
table.


The President (interpretation from Spanish): I have
received a request dated 1 October 1996 from Mr.
Vladislav Jovanovie to be allowed to sit at the Council
table. With the consent of the Council, I would propose to
invite him to sit at the Council table.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Jovanovie took
a seat at the Council table.

 


The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The Security Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/1996/815, which contains the text of a draft resolution
prepared in the course of the Council's prior
consultations.

I should also like to draw the attention of members
of the Council to the letter dated 1 October 1996 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council, transmitting the report of the High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, which will be
issued as document S/1996/814.

It is my understanding that the Security Council is
ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
(5/1996/815) before it. If I hear no objection, I shall put
the draft resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Botswana, Chile, China, Egypt, France, Germany,
Guinea-Bissau, Honduras, Indonesia, Italy, Poland,
Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America

