Mr. Ndekhedehe (Nigeria): Mr. President, on
behalf of the Nigerian delegation, I wish to thank you,
and, through you, the other members of the Security
Council, for having convened this meeting on Iraq.
This meeting, like previous ones, affords Member
States the opportunity to express their views on the
important issue of finding a peaceful solution to the
Iraqi issue.

The issue of the disarmament of Iraq has been on
the agenda of the Security Council for about 12 years,
since the adoption of resolution 687 (1991). It is the
view of the Nigerian delegation that, as protracted as
the process appears to be, the Security Council should
be commended for the able manner in which it has
handled the issue. In its painstaking efforts to find a
peaceful solution to the issue of disarming Iraq, the
Council came up with a robust inspection regime,
encapsulated in resolution 1441 (2002). The collective
will of the peace-loving States Members of the United
Nations was expressed through the collective wisdom
of the Security Council in that unanimously adopted
resolution. It is for this reason that the Nigerian
delegation has implicit hope in the ability of the
Security Council, acting on behalf of the United
Nations Member States, to resolve amicably the Iraqi
situation and any other situations that may pose a threat
to international peace and security.

It will be recalled that the inspection regime in
Iraq under resolution 1441 (2002) was established only
in November 2002, barely three months ago.
Consequently, the weapons inspectors have not been
working in Iraq for too long. From all accounts, the
inspection teams have done wonderful work within the
relatively short period of time available to them.
Accordingly, it is the view of the Nigerian delegation
that the United Nations inspectors in Iraq should be
given time to maximize their efforts and reach the
optimum level of achievement of their goal.

It is not in doubt that the robust inspection regime
established under resolution 1441 (2002) is aimed
expressly and unequivocally at disarming Iraq
peacefully of all chemical, biological and nuclear
weapons of mass destruction. Consequently, we need to
exercise patience, and, indeed, to exercise that patience
with tenacity, as patience is a key ingredient for peace.
In this regard, we need to remind ourselves that the
United Nations was established to, among other things,
ensure the maintenance of international peace and
security - "to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war". It is therefore imperative that every
effort should be made to avoid the use of force.
However, where the use of force becomes inescapable
in order to enforce resolutions of the Security Council
and ensure its credibility, such enforcement action
should be the result of the collective will and decisions
of the Security Council, under Article 42 of the
Charter.

The first preambular paragraph of the Charter of
the United Nations opens with the words "We the
peoples of the United Nations". This refers
unmistakably to the various peoples of the world whose
countries are Members of the United Nations. It is clear
from the sheer number of the various concerned
peoples of the world who took part in peaceful
demonstrations before and during the weekend -
particularly on Saturday, 15 February 2003 - that the
peoples of the world want the Iraqi issue to be resolved
peacefully. Accordingly, since the United Nations is the
people's parliament, so to speak, the voices of the
peoples of the world, which are clearly against the use
of force, should be listened to and respected.

Consequently, Nigeria calls on Iraq to comply
with its obligations under the various United Nations
resolutions, including resolution 1441 (2002), and to
cooperate with the United Nations inspection teams, so
that the issue can be resolved peacefully. This will
facilitate the lifting of restrictions, which will bring
relief to the Iraqi people, especially women, the elderly
and children. Nigeria therefore urges all concerned to
make sustained efforts to avoid the use of force while
ensuring the effective implementation of resolution
1441 (2002).

In conclusion, it is pertinent to state that, like the
menace of international terrorism, the issue of ridding
the world of weapons of mass destruction is a global
responsibility which can best be resolved collectively
under the auspices of the Security Council.
Accordingly, while Nigeria, like all other peace-loving
nations, acknowledges the urgent need for the
eradication of weapons of mass destruction in Iraq, we
believe that this should be done collectively, in a truly
multilateral manner, under the auspices of the Security
Council, which has the responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

