The President: I thank the representative of the
United States for the kind words he addressed to me.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Oman.

It has been more than two months since the Security
Council received a report from the Secretary-General with
regard to the tragic events that have taken place in the safe
areas of Srebrenica and Zepa. The report of the Secretary-
General (S/1995/755), which was submitted in accordance
with paragraph 4 of resolution 1010 (1995) of 10 August
1995, contains information on some of the most horrible
attacks on human lives and an account of across-the-board
violations of human norms and values ranging from mass
murder, rape and the deportation of civilians to "ethnic
cleansing".

That is the latest account the Security Council has
received of the atrocities that are being committed by the
Bosnian Serbs. Oman believes that this response is rather
late, but better late than never. We supported the resolution
just adopted for various reasons, the most important of
which is that it reiterates the Council's demand that the
Bosnian Serbs comply fully with the demands issued by the
Council on previous occasions. These demands include
immediate withdrawal from the safe areas of Srebrenica and
Zepa, as called for in the statement of the President of the
Security Council of 25 July 1995 (S/PRST/1995/34),
refraining from any act that might go counter to
international humanitarian law, and a halt to their
systematic programme of "ethnic cleansing" of all non-Serb
ethnic groups. We are greatly concerned at reports,
including those by the representative of the Secretary-
General and by other humanitarian agencies, of such
atrocities. To date, the Bosnian Serbs have not heeded the
demands of the Security Council, and are still refusing to
give access to the International Committee of the Red
Cross and other humanitarian agencies to areas under
their control where such atrocities are believed to have
taken place.

The Security Council and its members stand united
today, demanding with one voice that this party and all
other parties concerned, including the Government of
Croatia, comply fully and immediately with the demands
of the Security Council. Council members stand united
against "ethnic cleansing" and all other types of social
and religious hatred, whoever commits them in any part
of the territory of the former Yugoslavia. We believe that
those responsible for these atrocities bear personal
responsibility for their acts and therefore should be
brought to justice. That is why my country supports the
work of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia. In this regard it hopes that all States,
in particular those in the region of the former Yugoslavia,
and all parties to the conflict, particularly the Bosnian
Serbs, will comply fully with the obligations set out in
paragraph 4 of resolution 827 (1993), and will cooperate
in good faith with the Tribunal, including by providing
access to individuals and all relevant information the
Tribunal deems important for its investigation and by
complying with decisions issued by a Trial Chamber, in
accordance with article 29 of the Statute of the Tribunal,
the latest of which was the decision issued on 20 October
this year.

Oman supports the resolution that has just been
adopted, and hopes that all the parties will fully
understand its demands and take them seriously. We
believe that the time has come for those involved in the
peace process now under way to refrain from any act or
violation that might jeopardize the ongoing peace talks.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no further speakers for this meeting.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda. The

Security Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 7.50 p.m.
