Ms. Colakovie (Bosnia and Herzegovina):
Mr. President, at the outset I wish to thank you for
convening this important debate. I am sure that this
meeting, under your able guidance, will be very
fruitful.

Bosnia and Herzegovina aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of the
Czech Republic on behalf of the European Union.
I also would like to express my appreciation to
the Secretary-General for his skilfully crafted report on
enhancing mediation and its support activities.

The modern world is going to face new
challenges. There are some prognoses that predict a
number of possible future drivers of conflicts, such as
severe economic and social problems, oil, some
strategic minerals and climate change and, in that
connection, the depletion of resources.

We have learned from modern history that the
vast majority of conflicts cannot be solved by the use
of force. There is no need to mention that war takes a
nation's valuable economic and financial resources and
its most precious resource: human lives. My intention
is not to stress that armed conflicts are expensive but
rather that they are meaningless. At the end, all parties
involved in a conflict arrive, by themselves or through
other players in international relations, at a solution by
which to end the conflict. My statement concludes that
the peaceful settlement of disputes through mediation
is and will be an indispensable tool in resolving
contemporary and possible future conflicts.

Theoretically speaking, mediation as a method of
peaceful settlement of disputes can be traced to the
ancient world. This proactive method means that the
mediator is active and takes part in negotiations,
suggesting terms of settlement to the parties, and sets
preliminary arrangements based on areas in which the
parties can agree. Also, a mediator has to enjoy the
confidence of the parties to a dispute and must be
impartial. This definition provides basic elements of
the notion of mediation, which is a truly sensitive and
very delicate matter. But when this method comes to
life with its complexity, many questions arise and have
to be answered.

In that regard the report of Secretary-General,
with its sophisticated methodology and precise
analysis, is a real masterpiece in this matter. It should
be included in the literature for any future mediators,
and publishing it in a handbook edition should be
considered.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has its own painful
experience. Unfortunately, Bosnia and Herzegovina has
experienced mediation in all three stages of conflict. It
is unnecessary to say that mediation at the first stage,
when the conflict still had not escalated into armed
conflict, failed. Because of our "street smart"
experience, my delegation would like to underline
some points from the report.

First, disputes should be resolved at an early
stage, before they turn into violent conflict, and the
process should be as inclusive as possible. The United
Nations, with all its capacity, should be engaged in the
process as soon as possible. Every avenue - I repeat,
every - must be explored to persuade actors to engage
in negotiations at a very early stage of conflict.

Secondly, the mediator should possess good
listening and problem-solving skills and should be
supported by a highly skilled professional team. In that
regard, women should be appropriately represented at
decision-making levels.

Thirdly, leverage in mediation is very useful tool,
but it must be used delicately or it can cause resistance.
It this connection, managing spoilers is crucial,
especially if powerful international actors are in play to
control them. Sometimes it is very useful when some
neighbouring countries or regional powers that are in
close relationship with actors exert pressure on them in
order to persuade them to sit at the table.

Fourthly, the United Nations should continue to
build closer partnerships with regional, subregional and
non-governmental organizations in mediation capacity-
building. Acting in synergy, all those organizations
may be considerably helpful in the field of conflict
prevention.

Finally, Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the
establishment of the Mediation Support Unit in the
Department of Political Affairs and supports the
recommendation by Secretary-General that the United
Nations develop the next generation of mediators who
will have the skills to manage any future challenges.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that only
strengthening the capacity of the United Nations to
prevent conflict in its every phase - the first stage,
before it escalates into armed conflict; the second
stage, after the outbreak of violence; and the third
stage, the implementation of peace agreements - can
guarantee that the future world will be a much safer
and better place to live.

