The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Mr. Nebie
for his briefing.

I now give the floor to Brigadier General Maio.

Brigadier General Maio: I am grateful and very
honoured to have this opportunity to address the
members of the Security Council on the redeployment
of the Forces armees centrafricaines (FACA) and the
operational and logistical support of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA). The
European Union Military Training Mission in the
Central African Republic (EUTM. RCA) contributes
to defence sector reform as part of the security sector
reform coordinated by MINUSCA. Our Mission
mandate includes providing strategic advice, education
and training to the Ministry of Defence and the Forces
armees centrafricaines and supporting the Central
African authorities in modernizing FACA as an self-
sustainable, credible, accountable and ethnically
balanced armed force that is under democratic control.

The EUTM. RCA is now completing its first two-
year mandate. We have completed the training, or the
validation, of nearly 3,000 soldiers, including three
infantry battalions. Our future two-year mandate,
which depends on the decision of Member States,
will allow us to continue that training, enlarging our
Mission area to a new training centre in Bouar, and to
support the internal security forces. The EUTM. RCA
mandate establishes the need for close coordination
with MINUSCA, including our role as an advisory
body on defence issues for the redeployment of FACA
countrywide. All political actors and international
partners agree on the necessity to restore State
authority quickly throughout the country as a key
factor in resolving the crisis. Therefore, the progressive
redeployment of the armed forces, as well as the internal
security forces, is recognized as an urgent key element
that would enable public institutions and services to be
restored to the entire territory, deter armed groups and
foster conditions for reconciliation and peace.

The Council may be aware that armed forces trained
by EUTM. have already started to deploy operations
with the support of MINUSCA in Obo, Paoua, Sibut,
and recently, in Bangassou. Despite considerable
logistical and tactical capabilities constraints, all
operations are ongoing. Last week, the number of FACA
personnel deployed out of Bangui reached 638. Reports
on their performance in the joint operations have been
favourable, both from the operational perspective and
on the part of non-governmental organizations and
public opinion.

FACA troops trained or validated by EUTM. are
now being armed and equipped by third States. We
should not lose momentum in their redeployment and
operationalization. To that end, MINUSCA remains a
critical element. Continued support to FACA in joint
deployments in limited military operations is essential.
As the letter of the Secretary-General states,

"It is important to note that, should the operational
and logistical support outlined not be provided by
MINUSCA or through bilateral agreements, the
ability of these Central African armed forces and
accompanying police and gendarmerie to perform
critical security tasks entrusted to them, and
progress in the political process and stabilization
of the country, may be significantly undermined."
(S/2018/463, para. 38)

Therefore, we stand by the recommendations on
operational and logistical support outlined in paragraph
32 of the same letter.

However, it is important to bear in mind the limits
of FACA's immediate deployment, resulting from
logistical and command-and-control difficulties to
manage a multiplicity of operations across the vast
territory of the Central African Republic. Therefore,
immediate deployments must be considered a transition
phase, complemented by the garrison deployment, which
is the base model for the new FACA, as established in
the national defence plan. Garrison-model deployment
will allow FACA to sustain operations if needed in the
designated areas, thereby reassuring the population
and contributing to a safe and secure environment.
Nevertheless, garrison deployment will represent a
major effort, especially with regard to infrastructure
and sustained capabilities.

The first step should be taken in Bouar, as an entry
point for subsequent operations in western Central
African Republic, thereby allowing control in a region
that is critical to the country's economy. Bouar will
be established in accordance with the garrison model,
where the authorities of the Central African Republic
plan to deploy a battalion-size unit and create a
non-commissioned officer school and training centre
in close coordination with EUTM. The European
Union is firmly committed to that plan and will be
responsible for essential infrastructure projects. Other
countries or international organizations could support
similar projects in other regions of the Central African
Republic, in accordance with the national defence plan
signed by President Touadera.

Last by not least, I would like to draw the Council's
attention to the importance of the African Initiative
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic. Despite the progress made in the FACA
build-up, the crisis in the Central African Republic will
not be resolved by military force. The increase of FACA
capabilities and its operational deployment contribute
to the creation of conditions conducive to the political
negotiations process, leading to national reconciliation.
In that context, the commitment of the countries of the
region and the implementation of the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation process
are absolutely essential ifpeace is to be achieved in the
Central African Republic.

In conclusion, MINUSCA support for the FACA
redeployment is of the utmost importance. In that way
the Government's plans for its armed forces, based on
the garrisoning of forces already trained or validated
by EUTM, will perhaps be made possible and enable
the authority of the State to be extended and exercised.
National reconciliation is the ultimate goal in order
to create the conditions for a MINUSCA exit strategy
from the Central African Republic.

The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Brigadier
General Maio for his briefing.

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make a statement.


