Mr. Poukre-Kono (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): It is a pleasure for me to take the
floor before this body under your presidency, Sir, to
convey the viewpoint of the Government of the Central
African Republic on the report of the Secretary-
General on the situation in my country (S/2009/627).
First, however, let me express my appreciation for the
mediation role that Burkina Faso has been playing in
the various crises in West Africa. We are all well aware
of the results of those efforts.

Let me also thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report, which will help the Council to
assess the role of the peacebuilding partners of the
Central African Republic.

I endorse the statements made earlier by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and by
the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission's country-
specific configuration for the Central African Republic.

One year has passed since the holding of the
inclusive political dialogue that launched the process to
establish peace and stability in my country. Clearly,
meaningful progress has been made, but there have
also been delays. Some recommendations were
urgently required for the effective implementation of
the conclusions of that dialogue, including the
establishment of a national unity Government, the
establishment of the Steering Committee on
Disarmament, Demobilization And Reintegration
(DDR), the establishment of the Dialogue Follow-Up
Committee for the implementation of the
recommendations arising from the dialogue, and the
holding of elections in 2010.

That vast programme can be implemented only
through priority actions agreed with outside partners,
including security sector reform, the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) of ex-
combatants, the establishment of good governance and
the rule of law, and the setting up of development poles
necessary to socio-economic development.

A country that truly wants to aspire to genuine
and lasting peace must be duty-bound to reject the
logic of war. Thus, the Government and the political-
military parties have agreed to adopt as our top priority
the disarmament and demobilization of rebels. On
13 August 2009, the Central African Republic's
independence day, the sensitization campaign for the
DDR programme was formally launched by President

09-6489}
Bozize', reflecting the Government's political will to
put an end to that logic. Except for one single rebel
group, all of the others have decided to cooperate. A
tally of the exact number of soldiers has already begun
and pre-cantonment has also been announced.

On the initiative of the Government, the
Economic Community of Central African States and
the DDR Steering Committee have signed a
memorandum of understanding that clears the way for
the deployment of military observers to monitor the
DDR process. With current funding, the launch of the
DDR programme should logically be under way before
the end of December 2009. However, DDR cannot take
place without security sector reform measures.

Here too, efforts are being undertaken to deploy a
defence and security force in the liberated areas, but
training is needed in order to restore trust between the
people and the security forces. We also need to provide
a context of peace and security in which all actors can
move freely. The relevant authorities are working to
that end.

The Central African Republic is currently
experiencing electoral fervour. The Government is
determined that this civic duty will be fulfilled by the
deadline set in the Constitution, even if the schedule is
tight. It is only a process: the electoral code has been
adopted; the Independent Electoral Commission has
been set up drawn from the six groups, as provided for
by the electoral code, and its President has been
elected. With total available funding of 331 million
CFA francs, the Commission could usefully work out a
time-bound programme. Furthermore, the technical
expertise is in place, and assistance from the United
Nations Development Programme poses no problems.

With the start of the disarmament and
demobilization process, the elections can be held on
schedule, yet it must be understood that the overall
programme is complex and requires a lot of time. To do
this, an enormous amount of awareness-raising and
support will be necessary for a successful outcome.

Ownership needs to remain national, as has been
repeatedly demonstrated. At the same time, the
Government has to be supported in its difficult and
very delicate mission. The challenges are enormous,
but the will is there. The problem of financing the
various programmes requires a response from the
international community. Gains already made need to
be preserved. We are grateful for the Secretary-
General's appeal in his report for support for the
Commission and the electoral process and for his

participation in the round table on security sector
reform. The international community is duty-bound to
assist the Central African Republic, in a spirit of
solidarity.

Much positive progress has been made in the
economic sphere, which shows that the Government is
determined to carry out its programmes in a spirit of
good governance, which requires implementation of
the plan to modernize the justice system, fight
corruption and bring about administrative reform. All
of these measures will have positive effects on the
people of the Central African Republic, who ultimately
remain the beneficiaries of the peace dividends.

Reform in all sectors has at last enabled the
Central African Republic to attain the completion point
under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries initiative
and to benefit from external debt alleviation. The
Government intends to take advantage of this turn of
events to curb part of its internal debt.

The concerns of the Government do not relate
only to the reluctance of certain national rebel groups
that refuse to join the peace process despite the
mediation and reconciliation efforts under way; there is
also the presence of foreign armed groups that
undermine the process, while the security sector is
suffering a shortage of capacity to extend its authority
into remote rural regions. We therefore commend the
subregional efforts to put together a single
transboundary front against banditry and the illegal
circulation of small arms.

On 28 September, the Central African Republic
acceded to the Paris Principles on children associated
with armed conflict, thanks to UNICEF and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict. This is important because it
demonstrates the commitment of the Government to no
longer allow children to be used in armed groups. We
commend UNICEF and the Peacebuilding Fund for
their commitment and for having created a training
centre for these young people so that they can be
reintegrated into civilian life with income-generating
activities.
8

I take this opportunity to sincerely thank the
country-specific configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission on the Central African Republic for its
remarkable and committed efforts for peacebuilding in
Central Africa. The Peacebuilding Fund is also taking
concrete action that encourages sectors of the
population that has been subject to the repercussions of
conflict. The United Nations has always stood with my
country in times of serious crisis and continues to
support it even in a period of calm. We are grateful for
the work done together with other partners. I encourage
the establishment of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic
as a replacement for the United Nations Peacebuilding
Support Office in the Central African Republic, which
bequeaths nine years of attention on the Central
African Republic.

I must not conclude without paying tribute to
Ms. Sahle-Work Zewde, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic,
who, through her work and her unequalled devotion in
a difficult context, has been able to bring her vast
experience to bear in building the trust of Central
Africans. I wish her every success.

We also would thank our bilateral and
multilateral partners for their contributions to the cause
of peace in the Central African Republic.

Finally, I would be remiss if I did not
congratulate Gabon, whose mandate as a mediator in
the Central African crisis was extended during the most
recent summit of the Economic Community of Central
African States.

