Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): The Security
Council has for a month now had before it the report of the
Panel of Experts established by resolution 1237 (1999) to
study violations of the sanctions imposed by the Council
against UNITA. The draft resolution before the Council
today endorses three fourths of the recommendations of the
Panel's report and is aimed at intensifying the work of the
Committee established under Security Council resolution
864 (1993) on Angola, and in particular at enhancing the
effectiveness of current sanctions covered in earlier
resolutions of the Council relating to the illegal supply of
arms, petroleum and petroleum products, the export of
diamonds, the freeze on UNITA's financial assets and on
the closing of UNITA's representation offices and other
offices abroad. By adopting the draft resolution, the Council
will be strengthening the United Nations sanctions regime
against UNITA and demonstrating its resolve to make a
positive and concrete contribution to the restoration of
peace and security in Angola. It is for these reasons that the
delegation of Mali will vote in favour of the draft
resolution.

Mali deplores the continuation of the conflict that has
now been taking place in Angola for 25 years, for which
Jonas Savimbi and UNITA are primarily responsible. The
people of Angola have suffered too much from the war; the
time has now come for the international community to
adopt strong measures to put an end to it. The
implementation of the draft resolution we are to adopt at
the end of this meeting will help to dry up the income
UNITA gets from illegal diamond exports and will
substantially limit its acquisition of weapons and munitions,
petroleum and petroleum products.

In this connection, I would like to pay tribute to the
tireless efforts made by Ambassador Robert Fowler, in his
capacity as Chairman of the sanctions Committee on
Angola, to contribute to the achievement of a political
settlement of the Angolan crisis by diminishing UNIT A's
capacity to wage war.

Along the same lines, the establishment for a six-
month period of a new monitoring mechanism for sanctions
violations will make it possible to give effective follow-up
to the results of the report of the Panel of Experts. Those
will have lasting effect only if there is control of and some
pressure on Savimbi and his entourage. This will also make
it possible for the Council to avoid a return to practices of
the past.

For these reasons, Mali, which stands in solidarity
with the people of Angola in their struggle - and I
welcome the presence at this meeting of Mr. Miranda,
Minister for External Relations of Angola - is convinced
that the draft resolution we will adopt today will enable
us to apply more effectively the sanctions regime against
UNITA in order to curb and put an end to sanctions
violations.

