Mrs. Vioti (Brazil): I would like to associate my
delegation with the expressions of sympathy to the
Governments of India and Pakistan for the suffering and
loss of life caused by the earthquake that struck that
region.

I wish to thank you, Sir, for organizing this open
debate on East Timor. It shows the commitment of your
country and yourself personally to the objective of
building a solid basis for the future independent East
Timor.

Allow me to express my delegation's deep
appreciation to Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello for his
comprehensive presentation and admirable work. It is
also a great honour to have with us today Mr. Jose
Ramos-Horta, who has been a key political figure in
the construction of a free and independent East Timor.
We listened with great interest to the personal
testimony of the President of the General Assembly, as
well as to the briefings of the Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme and the
representatives of the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund.

Brazil remains committed to the efforts towards
building a democratic and stable East Timor. This was
the main thrust of the Visit of President Fernando
Henrique Cardoso to East Timor early this week. I
would like to share with the members of the Council
and other delegations some information on the
Presidential visit. The Permanent Representative of
Brazil, Ambassador Gelson Fonseca, Jr., who
accompanied the President, will be in a position to
complement this report upon his return to New York.

As President Cardoso stated in Dili, his visit was
intended to convey a message of solidarity to the East
Timorese people, whose struggle for independence and
freedom captured the hearts and minds of all
Brazilians. In Dili, President Cardoso, accompanied by
Xanana Gusmao and Bishop Carlos Ximenes Belo, laid
a floral wreath at the monument in the cemetery of
Santa Cruz in honour of the victims of the struggle for
independence.

President Cardoso had extensive talks with
Special Representative Sergio Vieira de Mello and the
East Timorese leadership. He also attended a special
session of the National Council. In order to underline
the practical and concrete aspects of our assistance to
East Timor, he personally presided over the launching
of Brazilian cooperation projects in the fields of
capacity-building, professional training and literacy.

During his visit, President Cardoso announced
that the current cooperation could be expanded to other
areas, including public health, agriculture, assistance
regarding the establishment of regulations on oil
prospecting, and use of satellite-gathered data for
natural resource assessment and environmental
monitoring. With regard to the Brazilian participation
in the peacekeeping force, the possibility of reinforcing
our contingent with the addition of a field hospital unit
is under consideration.

After visiting East Timor, President Cardoso flew
to Jakarta, where he had a fruitful dialogue with
President Wahid. In his cordial talks with President
Wahid, President Cardoso brought up the issue of the
East Timorese refugees in West Timor and the need to
overcome the security threat posed by the militias.
Both Presidents agreed to study the possibility ofjoint
cooperation initiatives to be mutually agreed by the
two countries with East Timor in projects designed to
help in the efforts of reconstruction and reconciliation,
as was also reported by Mr. Ramos-Horta in his
statement to the Council.

It is important to start planning for a smooth
transition to self-government, and that includes
creating the environment for self-sustained
development. It is notjust a matter of ensuring political
stability and putting in place the right regulations. It
has to do with the need to ensure that the international
community does not turn its back on East Timor after it
becomes independent.
The creation of conditions for development will
not be attained in the short term and will require
generous international cooperation long after
independence. This is the rationale behind our projects
in East Timor, which focus mainly on education and
capacity-building. Such programmes also have a
positive impact on the preparation ofthe East Timorese
people to take over the future democratic State of East
Timor.

The Timorization of the administration is under
way. The efforts in capacity-building are starting to
bear fruit with the training of police, judges and other
civil servants. But the obstacles ahead cannot be
overlooked. Less than 10 per cent of permanent
management positions have been filled. Management
levels are of particular importance for the transition -
these are the people who will be at the helm of the
administration after independence.

Allow me to state briefly Brazil's position on the
pressing issue of the transition to independence and the
mandate of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET).

Brazil supports the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to extend UNTAET's mandate until
31 December 2001. We look forward to receiving the
recommendations of the Secretary-General concerning
the successor mission of UNTAET. It is clear, however,
that regardless of the format of the new mission, the
international presence will have to remain substantial.

Despite the impressive progress achieved by
UNTAET under the able leadership of Sergio Vieira de
Mello, the situation in the areas of security, law and
order and public administration do not allow for
scaling down the international presence. In the
sensitive area of security, it is essential to maintain the
current level of troops until a reliable security
assessment by the people in the field provides the
necessary assurances for downsizing the force.

In conclusion, I would like to highlight the fact
that, in East Timor, the United Nations and the
international community have embarked on an
unprecedented exercise of cooperation in nation-
building. We are bearing witness to the birth of a
nation-State that will embody the universal values
enshrined in several international documents adopted
under the aegis of the United Nations. For such values
to become deeply ingrained in East Timorese society
and shape its polity, they need to be shored up by the
improvement of the day-to-day reality on the ground at
the very grass-roots level. And to that end, our efforts
must be untiring.

