Mr. Holmes: Thank you for this opportunity to
brief the Security Council on the protection of civilians
2

in armed conflict. That is one of my top priorities, as
indeed it should be for all Member States. In the four
months that I have been Emergency Relief
Coordinator, my visits have included the Darfur region
of the Sudan, Chad, the Central African Republic,
northern Uganda and Somalia. In each of them, and in
too many other places as well, I have seen how
hundreds of thousands of civilians have been uprooted
from their ordinary lives by the effects of conflict and
left stranded, their fate of no apparent consequence to
those who fight around them. Countless thousands
have been killed, injured, maimed, assaulted,
humiliated, ignored and treated as less than human.

It is hard not to conclude that for all our advocacy
on behalf of civilians in need of protection, and for all
the resources that are now devoted to all aspects of
protection by the humanitarian and peacekeeping
communities, we are still failing to make a real and
timely difference for the victims on the ground. That is
an oversimplification, as I shall try to explain. But we
cannot afford to do anything but look the facts in the
face. Lip service is easy; effective action is much
harder.

Protection can mean different things. To most
people it means what it says: physical protection of
innocent people from those trying to harm them. We
must not lose sight of that primary meaning. However,
protection of civilians in armed conflict also has a
particular significance in the work of humanitarian
organizations and in the context of the Council's
responsibilities. For the Council, it represents a series
of primary objectives outlined in its own aide memoire
(S/PRST/2002/6, annex), prepared at the request of and
adopted by the Council, which aim to transform the
security, political, legal and moral environment in
which all concerned operate. Those objectives include:
security for displaced persons and host communities;
ensuring access to those in need and a secure
environment for humanitarian workers; strengthening
the rule of law, in particular police and justice systems;
protection of women and girls in particular from
gender-based violence; involvement of women in
decision-making and incorporating gender perspectives
at every level and in all areas; ensuring the rights of
children by preventing their recruitment, ending
abduction, supporting family reunification and
fulfilment of basic needs; action on disarmament,
demobilization, rehabilitation and reintegration of
07-39152
soldiers; and finally, arms control, mine action,
reconciliation and reconstruction programmes.

The list is long and important. And the
increasingly widespread acceptance of these ideas and
principles, together with the existence of institutions
and staff specifically charged with monitoring and,
where possible, ensuring their observance, is a huge
step forward. So too is the agreement of 191 Member
States in the 2005 World Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1) on a fundamental
"responsibility to protect", a norm that not only
emphasizes the primary responsibility of each State to
protect its citizens and those within its jurisdiction
from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity but also recognizes the role of
the international community and the United Nations in
helping States to exercise that responsibility.

I believe we are gradually making a difference as
to what is regarded as acceptable and normal and that
that will have a profound effect over time. The
activities of the International Criminal Court (ICC), the
four seminal resolutions of the Council and the specific
inclusion in peacekeeping mandates of provisions on
the protection of civilians are all key steps in changing
the international environment. And we are seeing
improvements on the ground in some areas. More
robust peacekeeping and the strategic deployment of
peacekeepers in the interests of protecting civilians has
helped to facilitate returns or, at the least, an
environment conducive to the provision of assistance
in places such as the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. In northern Uganda, southern Sudan and Nepal,
relative peace and stability are allowing some refugees
and internally displaced persons (IDPs) to return to
their homes and to begin the arduous task of re-
establishing their lives. Implementation of the cluster
approach should lead to a more coordinated protection
response at the field level among United Nations
agencies and their partners through the action of a
specific protection cluster.

In many places, however, the picture remains
sombre and profoundly worrying. Allow me to
highlight three areas of particular concern.

The first is the targeting of civilians, whether
deliberately or through lack of concern about the
consequences of the use of force. As noted by the
Council in its resolutions on the protection of civilians,
such acts are flagrant violations of international
07-39152
humanitarian law. Yet, day in and day out, they are too
often what we see, particularly in the internal conflicts
and civil wars that have increasingly replaced wars
between States in today's world.

Civilians bear the brunt of indiscriminate firing
and violence in populated areas, including cities, where
warring parties fail to distinguish, or even to try to
distinguish, between combatants and the civilian
population; or where they employ methods of combat
or types of weapons - such as cluster bombs - that
are out of all proportion to any military advantage to be
gained; or where, just as culpably, they deliberately
place themselves among civilian populations to try to
deter attacks or at least ensure that the opposing side
will damage its own image by killing civilians if they
do attack.

In Somalia, fierce fighting in Mogadishu
involving heavy weapons, between March and early
May, resulted in the killing of over 400 civilians and
the wounding of 700 more - for the most part, older
people, women and children - as well as the
destruction of countless homes and livelihoods.
Civilian casualties resulting from the indiscriminate
use of force - whether from Israeli military
operations, from violence between Palestinian factions,
or from indiscriminate rocket attacks on Israel itself -
have characterized fighting in the occupied Palestinian
territory.

In Afghanistan and also in Iraq, in addition to the
dreadful toll of civilian deaths caused by insurgents
and militias on all sides, the civilian casualties
resulting from security operations of multinational
forces and Government security forces are of
increasing concern, even if there is no suggestion of
deliberate targeting. Last weekend in Afghanistan was
particularly tragic - 18 children died as a result of
separate attacks by insurgent and multinational
forces - and the overnight news of possible further
civilian deaths reinforces that concern. In Iraq, the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
estimates, an average of 94 civilians died violently
every day throughout 2006 owing to the actions of all
sides in the conflict.

Civilians are too often deliberately targeted in
order to create a climate of fear and to destabilize
populations. We see this in calculated attacks by
Janjaweed and other militias on innocent villagers in
Darfur and Chad; in brutal sectarian, ethnic and
3
political violence in Iraq; in the large-scale killing and
abduction of civilians, particularly women and girls, by
ruthless armed groups in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, as well as arbitrary executions and acts of
banditry attributed to Government forces; and in
assassinations, disappearances and other violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law
by those bearing arms in places as far apart as Sri
Lanka and Colombia.

One particularly horrifying trend is the increasing
use of suicide attacks including car or truck bombs, or
improvised explosive devices (IEDs), to use the
chilling technical term. Such attacks are most often
perpetrated quite intentionally in public places: places
of worship, markets, squares and other civilian areas
where people gather in the normal course of their lives
and where there is no military advantage to be gained.
The inevitable result is carnage among wholly innocent
civilians, thousands of lives ruined forever and a
pervading sense of insecurity, disrupting even the most
basic forms of public life. In Iraq, UNAMI reports,
over 700 civilians were killed and more than 1,200
injured in such attacks during the first three months of
this year alone. Only three days ago, the bombing of a
mosque in Baghdad resulted in the death and injury of
over 200 civilians. Similar trends in countries such as
Afghanistan, Lebanon and Somalia are profoundly
worrying.

Those who send so many young men and women
to their bloody ends, along with their innocent victims,
in order to foment ethnic or sectarian tension and
violence bear a heavy responsibility. Those who keep
quiet about such attacks or even privately applaud
them share that responsibility and appear heedless of
the likelihood that they, or their societies in their turn,
may become victims of this inhuman method of
spreading pointless death and destruction.

Another repugnant manifestation of the deliberate
targeting of civilians, also too common in too many of
today's conflicts, is gender-based violence, particularly
sexual violence. It has been used as a calculated
method of warfare in places such as Bosnia, Rwanda
and Liberia and is currently used in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and occasionally in other
conflicts too, including that in Darfur. Its aim is to
brutalize and instil fear in the civilian population -
especially women and girls, but also sometimes boys
and men - to weaken their resistance and resilience
through humiliation and shame and to destroy the

social fabric of entire communities. Survivors are left
with horrific physical and psychological scars. In the
South Kivu province of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, over 27,000 cases of sexual violence were
reported in 2005 and 2006. From March 2006 to April
2007, 6,000 cases of sexual violence were reported in
Ituri, also in the east of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Only a handful of those cases have ever been
the subject of ajudicial process.

In its resolution 61/134, the General Assembly
urged all Member States to take effective measures to
address gender-based violence in humanitarian
emergencies and to make all possible efforts to ensure
that their laws and institutions are adequate to prevent,
investigate and prosecute acts of gender-based
violence. The Council, in its resolution 1674 (2006),
condemned in the strongest terms all sexual and other
forms of violence against civilians in armed conflict, in
particular women and children. The Council undertook
to ensure that peace support operations work to prevent
such violence and address its impact where it takes
place. That is vital, as is the International Criminal
Court's recent decision to investigate cases of rape in
the Central African Republic.

Nevertheless, the nature of sexual violence and
its consequences demand that we, the United Nations
and its Member States - particularly those within
whose borders such crimes are committed - do much
more to prevent and respond to them and to hold to
account their perpetrators, as well as the commanders
under whom such crimes are committed. That requires
more robust coordination and more coherent action by
United Nations agencies and their partners. The United
Nations recently launched United Nations Action
against Sexual Violence in Conflict, a coalition of 12
United Nations entities that aims to do just that, as well
as to support national efforts to prevent sexual violence
and respond effectively to the needs of survivors.

Combating gender-based violence also requires
still greater stigmatization of such violence by national
courts and the ICC as a particularly grave form of war
crime and crime against humanity. Last but not least,
the United Nations itself and Member States must do
still more to prevent sexual exploitation and abuse by
peacekeeping forces operating in the name of the
United Nations and to ensure that there is no impunity
for those responsible.
07-39152
A second area of particular concern is the
continuing displacement of civilians as a result of, or
sometimes as the very purpose of, conflict. The Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) reports that there were an
estimated 9.9 million refugees at the end of 2006, an
increase in the global refugee population for the first
time since 2002 - primarily because of refugee flows
from Iraq - as well as 24.5 million internally
displaced persons, all people deliberately forced from
their homes and normal lives, or having had to flee to
avoid violence and conflict and to meet their basic
needs and those of their families.

In Iraq, UNHCR currently estimates that there are
2.2 million people internally displaced, while a further
2.2 million have sought refuge abroad. In Darfur, the
ranks of the internally displaced continue to swell, with
over 150,000 people displaced during the first five
months of this year alone, bringing the total number
again to well over 2 million. More than 237,000 people
have also fled Darfur for neighbouring Central African
Republic and Chad, countries which are also
confronted by large internally displaced populations of
212,000 and 150,000, respectively.

In the Central African Republic, the figures have
increased by more than 60,000 in the last six months.
In Somalia, the intense violence in Mogadishu between
March and early May displaced some 390,000 people,
to add to the many hundreds of thousands long-term
displaced. There may still be as many as 700,000 IDPs
in Cote d'Ivoire, despite recent political progress. And
in Sri Lanka, 300,000 people have been internally
displaced during the last 15 months due to hostilities.
Overall, it is estimated that so far this year an
additional 1.5 million people have been internally
displaced by war in those and other countries.

While displacement is as old as war itself, that
does not mean that we should accept it as inevitable.
On the contrary, we must look for better ways of
preventing the conditions that lead to displacement, as
well as trying to deal with the results. That includes
emphasizing, in our actions and resolutions, the right to
voluntary, safe return and the rejection by the
international community of the results of ethnic or
sectarian cleansing. To do otherwise would be to
condemn millions to lasting misery and degradation.
As I heard and saw for myself in the camps that I
visited in Africa, becoming displaced often marks only
the beginning of further frightening challenges to
survival. These include continuing insecurity;
occasionally, as we have seen in Darfur, repeated
displacement through attacks on camps; and exposure
to further serious risks, especially in militarized camp
settings, such as gender-based assaults and forced
recruitment.

Despite the efforts of relief agencies,
displacement too often leads to hunger and illness, both
physical and mental. It erodes human dignity, as
individuals and families become dependent on others
for their survival. Where children are deprived of
access to education and adequate health care, the
effects of displacement can last a lifetime and ruin
future generations, too, with camps becoming the
frame of reference for what is normal. For too many of
the world's displaced, the experience will translate into
a permanent loss of livelihood, culture and
opportunities, and turn into chronic destitution. Life in
a camp, even when basic needs are met, is a life of
misery: inactivity and boredom are profoundly
debilitating and commonly lead to increasing
politicization and militarization on the part of those
concerned, thus perpetuating cycles of violence and
further reducing the chances of returning to peace,
stability and normality.

Even if peace can be restored, there is still the
enormous challenge of returning home and re-
establishing lives, sometimes after a few months but
often after many years or even generations. As we see
in northern Uganda and southern Sudan, that also
involves addressing specific protection challenges if
return is to be truly voluntary, safe, dignified and,
ultimately, sustainable. Aside from the provision of
basic services, these challenges include restitution of
land and property, community reconciliation, and the
painstaking clearance of landmines and unexploded
ordnance in areas of return.

The third area I would like to emphasize today is
access and security for humanitarian workers
themselves. The Council has often underlined the
importance of safe and unhindered access for
humanitarian staff to civilians in armed conflict. In all
my encounters in the field, aid workers have
emphasized access as the main prerequisite for
humanitarian action, which, for millions of vulnerable
people caught up in conflict, is often their only hope
for survival. Yet frequently, and, I fear, increasingly,
we see that such access is anything but safe and far
from unhindered.

In Darfur, the targeting and harassment of aid
workers continues to place enormous strain on the
delivery of life-saving assistance to millions of people.
Between January and May of this year, more than 60
humanitarian vehicles were hijacked, usually by rebel
groups of one kind or another, and 56 staff temporarily
abducted. Thirty-one aid convoys were ambushed and
looted, and 13 relief organizations forced to relocate
due to attacks. Of particularly grave concern are
incidents of assaults against, and detention of,
humanitarian staff and the killing of one non-
governmental organization (NGO) and one United
Nations staff member and 10 African Union personnel.

Certain agencies and NGOs contributing to
providing some measure of protection to the displaced
and drawing attention to abuses have been harassed by
the authorities. The Joint United Nations-Government
of the Sudan communique agreed in April has begun to
produce some results in terms of reductions of other
so-called bureaucratic obstacles, which is most
welcome, but there remains a long way to go.

In Sri Lanka, more than 600,000 inhabitants of
the Jaffna peninsula have faced shortages of basic
necessities since August of last year, when the
Government and the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam
(LTTE) restricted access to the peninsula by road and
by sea, respectively.

In Iraq, access for United Nations agencies and
international N GOs is extremely limited throughout the
country due to the high level of insecurity. If we are to
do more to tackle the growing humanitarian crisis
within that country, it will be important to establish an
understanding with the parties to the conflict, regional
actors and key Member States on the fundamental
importance and inviolability of access and security for
humanitarian workers.

Elsewhere, too, we continue to see deliberate and
unacceptable attacks on aid workers. This month alone,
we have seen the killing of two staff members of the
Lebanese Red Cross at the Palestinian refugee camp of
Nahr el-Bared, the scene of fighting between Lebanese
forces and Fatah al-Islam militants; the killing of a
Medecins Sans Frontieres staff member in the Central
African Republic after her vehicle was shot at,
apparently by members of the Popular Army for the
Restoration of Democracy; the killing in West Darfur
of a staff member of Action by Churches Together-
Caritas; and the murder of two workers from the Sri

Lankan Red Cross. Let us remember that in 2006, 24
aid workers were killed in Sri Lanka, including 17 staff
of Action Contre La Faim in a single horrifying act.
The perpetrators of all these crimes are yet to be
brought to account.

Killing humanitarian staff and arbitrarily denying
access violates international humanitarian law. It also
threatens the lifeline to hundreds of thousands of
vulnerable people. I therefore propose that we should
follow and assess more systematically the reasons for
and consequences of such denials or restrictions and
report instances of grave concern back to the Council,
in accordance with resolution 1674 (2006).

In conclusion, if I have portrayed a somewhat
bleak picture in this briefing, the reason is that there is
still a lot to be bleak about, and no room for the
Council or anyone else to be remotely complacent
about what has been achieved so far. Nevertheless, as I
have also tried to suggest, the picture is not devoid of
progress or even of a certain degree of hope. The
humanitarian community continues to work hard to
improve its performance in protection on the ground,
through its focus on the issue, its monitoring and
advocacy, awareness-raising and capacity-building, and
devotion of specific staff to this cause. International
presence on the ground, even an unarmed presence, can
make a huge difference in inhibiting violence against
civilians, which is why access and a keen interest in
protection from those who have access are so vital.

This Council has taken important steps towards
better protection for civilians through its actions and its
resolutions, the dividends of which are, for example,
being seen in terms of more robust peacekeeping and
more strategic and protection-related deployment of
peacekeepers in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. I suggest that it may also be useful to take a
systematic look at the practical effect that the inclusion
of protection of civilians in a number of peacekeeping
mandates has had on the ground in order to draw the
right lessons for future deployments.

And if there is one thing we need to do above all,
it is to end the culture of impunity which underlies so
many abuses. Rule of law and judicial redress are
crucial and should be emphasized in everything we do.
In the particular case of sexual violence, more
involvement of women in all aspects of protection,
including peacekeeping itself, would make a real
difference to attitudes.
More broadly, while humanitarians can ensure
survival and dignity to a certain degree; while
peacekeepers can enhance the safety and security of
affected populations; and while, together, we can help
create a climate conducive to reconciliation, it is worth
repeating again that only political solutions can end the
vast majority of conflicts. The United Nations,
including this Council and the Member States, must
decide once and for all to invest more in conflict
prevention, in facilitating political solutions through
increased mediation capacity and support to help
resolve conflict, and in immediate post-conflict
measures to prevent rapid relapse into conflict.

For my part, I will continue to work with
colleagues in the Department of Political Affairs and
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to ensure
that protection concerns are fully integrated into our
mediation and peacekeeping efforts. I will also
continue to engage this Council and Member States in
seeking improved implementation of the resolutions on
protection of civilians and more systematic inclusion of
protection of civilians concerns in the work of the
Council. I will also continue to bring situations of
grave humanitarian concern to the Council's attention
through briefings, through the reports of the Secretary-
General, or where necessary, and pursuant to resolution
1674 (2006), directly through the Secretary-General.
Only where the international community is united and
resolute can we hope to protect the defenceless, as we
have the obligation to do.

