Mr. Biaboroh-Iboro (Congo) (spoke in French):
My delegation thanks you, Mr. President, for having
organized this meeting on Iraq relating to the work
assigned to the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Iraq (UNAMI). We would also like to thank the Under-
Secretary-General for the briefing that he gave on the
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to resolution
1770 (2007).

A perusal of that report provides a review of the
overall situation in Iraq, with signs of hope but also -
and primarily - areas of great concern. In fact, Iraq
remains a country where violence reigns, fuelling
insecurity with tragic consequences for the daily lives
of people and increasing the phenomenon of internally
displaced persons and refugees flowing to
neighbouring countries and further. It is urgent for
Iraqi authorities, who hold the primary responsibility
for protecting their people, to take appropriate
measures to reduce that violence in order for the
decline in the number of casualties noted in September
not become a distant memory.

My delegation nevertheless welcomes the
ceasefire by the Mahdi army and the alliance of the
Sunni insurgents against Al Qaida, which has
contributed, even if only minimally, to a reduction in
the violence. As emphasized by the Secretary-General
in his report, the challenge will be "transform these
military-political developments into a basis for national
reconciliation." (S/2007/608, para. 65)

National dialogue must continue in Iraq without
complacency, but also without exclusion, in order to
meet the challenge of violence and insecurity and roll
back the threat of civil war, which has for so long
hovered over the country. That effort, which must be
led by both political and religious Iraqi authorities,
must also be strongly supported by the international
community, which must not let its assistance flag in
that regard.

We are grateful to the Multinational Force, which
is carrying out a dangerous task in extreme conditions,
as just reported to us by the delegation of the United
States. However, we call on the Force to take into
particular consideration the repeated instances of
civilian casualties in its operations, so as not to lose the
hard-won support of the Iraqi people.

The same concept must be applied to private
armies that are not controlled by the Iraqi Government.
In that context, we welcome the adoption of resolution
1770 (2007) of 10 August, which has broadened the
mandate of UNAMI and the involvement of the United
Nations in coordinating tasks to rebuild Iraq in all
areas.

Congo notes the specific measures called for by
the United Nations to follow up on resolution 1770
(2007). The acknowledged experience of the United
Nations is incomparable in important areas such as
political and institutional assistance, in particular in
promoting political dialogue and electoral assistance,
economic development with a concerted implementation
of the International Compact with Iraq, the protection
of human rights, humanitarian aid and legal and
judicial assistance. There is no doubt that that
experience will make a great contribution to rebuilding
Iraq, which we all want to see unified, democratic,
prosperous, sovereign and at peace with itself and its
neighbours. In that regard, the constructive
commitment of neighbouring countries and other
countries in the region, as suggested by the Secretary-
General, remains vital to ensuring the stability of Iraq,
and my delegation encourages that vision.

In conclusion, my delegation would call for
solidarity on the part of Member States of our
Organization in supporting both financial and logistic
resources for Iraq in its difficult task of reconstruction.

Finally, we are pleased with the appointment of a
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and wish him much success in his difficult work.

