Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
Allow me at the outset to congratulate you most sincerely,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Council.
Your rich diplomatic experience and well-known
leadership skills guarantee that the Council will discharge
its responsibilities this month in the best possible manner.

I also take this opportunity to express my deep
appreciation to Ambassador Legwaila of Botswana for the
remarkable efficiency that characterized his presidency of
the Council last month.

At the outset, the delegation of Egypt wishes to
reaffirm the importance of the principle of the Council's
holding public meetings in order to familiarize itself with
the opinions of the States concerned on the various
subjects before it.

My delegation wishes to express its thanks and
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his report on the
latest developments in the situation in Afghanistan. The
valuable United Nations efforts to find a peaceful
settlement and in the field of humanitarian assistance
deserve all our support and gratitude. In this regard, a
special word of appreciation is due to the United Nations
Special Mission to Afghanistan, headed by Mr. Mahmoud
Mestiri, for its ongoing efforts on behalf of a just,
comprehensive and peaceful settlement of the Afghanistan
question that would achieve the desired objectives of the
friendly Afghan people - namely, the restoration of
peace and stability through national reconciliation - and
ensure the preservation of its sovereignty, territorial
integrity and unity.

The delegation of Egypt would also like to seize this
opportunity to express its great appreciation for the
continued and important role played by the Organization
of the Islamic Conference and its Secretary General, Mr.
Hamid Algabid, in helping the United Nations promote a
peaceful settlement in Afghanistan.

This morning we listened with great interest to the
wide-ranging statement made by the Vice-Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan. This statement, together
with a careful reading of the Secretary-General's report,
can only deepen our pessimism about the situation in
Afghanistan. The consequences of the human tragedy
there have affected a large segment of the population. The
warring parties show no genuine desire for a serious
dialogue to achieve peace. All this casts a pall over the
prospects for the ultimate objective of a peaceful
settlement and the way to achieve it.

 

We share the Secretary-General's grave concern over
the failure of the warring parties to respond to his appeals
and to those of his special representative for an immediate
cessation of hostilities and the unconditional initiation of
peaceful dialogue. Our concern is all the greater in View of
the active preparations for a new round of fighting in and
around the capital, Kabul.

In three paragraphs, the report refers to an important
factor that not only increases tension between the warring
factions but also complicates the peace process: increasing
foreign interference, both political and military. The
complete cessation of foreign interference, including an end
to the provision of arms to the warring parties, would
certainly help establish the climate necessary for the
achievement of a comprehensive political settlement based
first and foremost on the will of the people of Afghanistan.

The delegation of Egypt has supported and continues
strongly to support ongoing efforts to establish the
expanded mechanism, referred to by the General Assembly
in its resolution 50/88 B, of a fully representative and
broad-based authoritative council as the most appropriate
formula for opening the way towards national reconciliation
in Afghanistan. The mechanism should be mandated,
inter alia, to perform the following tasks: first, the
negotiation and supervision of an immediate cease-fire;
secondly, the establishment of a national security force
responsible for ensuring security throughout the country,
supervising the collection of all heavy weapons in the
country and stemming the flow of arms and related materiel
to all parties; and, thirdly, the formation of an accepted
provisional Government that could, inter alia, control the
national security force pending the establishment of the
conditions necessary for the holding of free and fair
elections throughout the country, of course with the
possibility of utilizing traditional decision-making
structures.

If it is faithfully implemented and good will is evinced
by all Afghan parties, this mechanism will put a halt to the
bloodshed and the many years of civil war during which the
Afghan people has been deprived of stability and peace. At
present, the basic obstacle facing this mechanism is how to
persuade the Afghan parties to accept it not in the manner
perceived and desired by each faction separately, but rather
from an inclusive and equitable viewpoint that transcends
the individual interests of the parties in favour of the
general and definitive interests of the people of Afghanistan
as a whole.

The continuation of the armed conflict in
Afghanistan has become in itself a serious threat to the
stability of the region. Its repercussions have been felt
beyond the region and now threaten the stability of many
others. The Security Council issued a presidential
statement on 15 February 1996 in which it expressed its
deep concern that:

"the continued conflict in Afghanistan provides
fertile ground for terrorism, arms transfers and drug
trafficking, which destabilize the whole region and
beyond." (S/PRST/1996/6, fifth paragraph)

The Security Council must now discharge its
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security by adopting clear and well-defined measures
to limit the spread of consequences of Afghanistan's
instability to other regions pending the achievement of a
comprehensive political settlement there.

The Secretary-General's report refers to the proposal
to convene an international conference to address all
aspects of the Afghan question. This proposal deserves
careful consideration, since it could be an appropriate way
to bring all the Afghan parties to the negotiating table.
History provides many examples of other international
problems in which the parties concerned were brought
together to hold a dialogue for national reconciliation, as
was the case in Lebanon, Cambodia and Yugoslavia.

But the convening of such an international
conference would require a great deal of preparation by
the Secretary-General's special representative, whose task
would be to narrow the differences between the parties
before the conference in such a way as to ensure the
successful adoption of a comprehensive settlement plan.
In this regard, my delegation welcomes the decision to
move the special representative's headquarters to
Jalalabad, which will increase his personal interaction
with the events and enhance the parties' sense of the
United Nations desire to reach a political settlement to
their problem as soon as possible.

Resolution of this matter must be based on the
presence of political will on three levels. First, the
warring Afghan parties must demonstrate a will for peace.
As the Secretary-General states in his report, the military
option still seems the course of action preferred by those
parties. Secondly, there must be political will on the part
of States which, through their support for one or another
of the parties to the conflict, are contributing to the
persistence of the conflict and complicating the settlement

 

process. Finally, the international community must
demonstrate political will; it must put this question on its
list of urgent priorities.

There is no doubt that efforts by all States,
individually, or through a group of friends of Afghanistan,
or through any other grouping of interested States, if
coordinated by the representative of the Secretary-General,
would contribute to the achievement of a just and
comprehensive settlement of this question.
My delegation hopes that this Security Council debate
will provide the fresh impetus needed for the settlement of
this question, beginning the process of adoption by the
Council of effective measures to ensure serious steps to
settle the problem.

