Mr. Mammadyarov (Azerbaijan): At the outset,
I would like to thank the President of the Argentine
Republic, Her Excellency Ms. Cristina Fernandez,
for presiding over this meeting on the very important
and timely topic of cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security. We are
also grateful to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
the representatives of the African Union, the League
of Arab States, the Community of Latin American and
Caribbean States and the Union of South American
Nations for their briefings. Iwould also like tojoin others
in congratulating the new United States Permanent
Representative to the United Nations, Ms. Samantha
Power. I hope that her first day will go very smoothly,
just as the other four years she will be here.

In accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, States Members conferred upon the Security
Council the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security and agreed that, in
carrying out its duties under that responsibility, the
Council acts on their behalf. At the same time, Chapter
VIII of the Charter encourages cooperation between
the United Nations and regional arrangements in the
peaceful settlement of disputes.

Since the 2005 World Summit and the adoption of
resolution 1631 (2005), important progress has been
achieved in enhancing cooperation between the United
Nations and regional partners across a full range of
areas, from the maintenance of international peace and
security and humanitarian assistance to development
and the protection of human rights. Indeed, in a number
of instances, the relevant regional organizations
have proven to be indispensable mechanisms for
promoting international and regional peace, security
and cooperation, in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. I would
like to refer to some such examples.

Over the past decade, the role of the African Union
has increased significantly. There is no doubt that the
challenges that Africa faces today and that are the
subject of a considerable part of the Security Council's
deliberations can be better addressed through collective
political and diplomatic efforts. In that regard, we
welcome the progress achieved in developing the
strategic relationship between the United Nations and
the African Union in the area of peace and security.

The League of Arab States has also proved to be
one of those regional organizations that is able to take
the lead in promoting peace, security and stability
in the region. We are pleased to see that cooperation
between the United Nations and the League of Arab
States has been instrumental in carrying out important
tasks in such areas as conflict prevention and resolution,
crisis response and management, and the fight against
terrorism and organized crime. We are confident that
continued engagement by the United Nations and the
League of Arab States, together with strengthened
cooperation between them, will effectively contribute
to peace and security in the region.

As a member of the Security Council and an
observer to the African Union and the League of Arab
States, Azerbaijan will further support the development
of partnership relations between those regional
organizations and the United Nations.

We also note the activities of new subregional
organizations such as the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States and the Union of South
American Nations, and we welcome their presence at
this meeting and their contribution to our discussion.

Furthermore, the increasing role of organizations
formed on the basis of the shared cultural and linguistic
values oftheir member States, such as the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation and the Cooperation Council
of Turkic-speaking States, gives rise to the need to
explore opportunities and appropriate approaches to
better serve the purpose of enhancing interaction and
cooperation between those organizations and the United
Nations across a broad agenda of mutual interests and
concerns.
At the same time, we should admit that serious
challenges remain. While regional organizations are
normally well positioned to understand the causes
of armed conflicts, owing to their knowledge of the
region, it is obvious that not all of them can boast the
ability, political will and institutional capacity to ensure
compliance by member States with their statutory
commitments.

First and foremost, it is crucial that all Member States
adhere to their obligations as laid out in the Charter
of the United Nations with respect to the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of States.
We express our concern at the attempts undertaken in
some situations of armed conflict to misinterpret the
norms and principles of international law and downplay
the relevance of Security Council resolutions. It is
therefore important that, at our meeting today, the
Council has stressed the importance of a coordinated
international response to causes of conflict and called
on the international community, including United
Nations organs and agencies, to assist with efforts at
the regional level aimed at the peaceful settlement of
disputes and the prevention and resolution of conflicts
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations
and the relevant Security Council resolutions. The
Council has also stressed that regional partners must
at all times keep it informed of their activities in the
area of peace and security. As a matter of priority,
special attention should be given to the implementation
of Security Council resolutions, in particular those
related to the prevention, management and settlement
of conflicts.

It is also essential, when dealing with conflict and
post-conflict situations, that the relevant organizations
and entities ensure that peace and justice are both
present in a mutually reinforcing manner. Such an
approach ensures that no peace settlement is reached
that is inconsistent with international law. That
understanding is particularly important, as it would
provide guidance not only for the parties to the conflict
but also for the international community as a whole
and, when appropriate, mediation efforts undertaken at
the regional level.

In the presidential statement just adopted
(S/PRST/2013/12), the Security Council emphasizes
that ending impunity is essential in a conflict and post-
conflict society's efforts to come to terms with past
wrongs and that regional and subregional organizations
should contribute to individual accountability. As a
country that is itself suffering from the occupation and
large-scale ethnic cleansing of a significant part of its
territory, Azerbaijan strongly supports that approach
in working to address protracted conflicts and their
humanitarian and human rights consequences in
different parts of the world.

In conclusion, I would like once again to thank
Argentina for convening this important meeting and to
welcome the adoption of the presidential statement as
its outcome. We also wish the delegation of Argentina a
successful presidency in August.

