Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): Allow me to thank
Judge Khalida Rachid Khan, President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR),
and Judge Patrick Robinson, President of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), for their reports (see S/2011/316 and S/2011/317) and for their leadership of those two
judicial institutions, which have been so important in
the fight against impunity. I am also grateful to
Mr. Hassan Jallow and Mr. Serge Brammertz, the
Prosecutors of the ICTR and ICTY, respectively, for all
their efforts. I would also like to offer a word of
appreciation to the former President of the ICTR, Lord
Dennis Byron, who has presided over the Tribunal
since 2007. I am aware that Judge Byron will be
relinquishing his position in charge of the Tribunal to
take up new challenges. We wish him well in his new
endeavours. At the same time, we welcome Judge Khan
and wish her all the best at this crucial time in the life
of the Tribunal.

While the reports raise many of the same issues
that have been presented to the Council in previous
reports, notably the impact of staffing challenges on
the Tribunals' capacity to meet their completion
strategy, these particular reports come at an important
time in the life of both Tribunals. On 22 December
2010, the Council adopted resolution 1966 (2010),
which established the International Residual
Mechanism for the Tribunals. The reports prepared
since the adoption of that resolution have to be
considered against that backdrop.

In that regard, as of 1 July 2012 and 1 July 2013,
respectively, the jurisdiction rights, obligations and
essential functions of the ICTR and ICTY will be
transferred to the Mechanism. There is thus added
urgency for both Tribunals to take all possible
measures to expedite their remaining work, in order to
ensure a smooth transition to the Mechanism, as stated
in both reports on the Tribunals. If they are to meet the
Completion Strategy, innovative judicial administrative
steps will have to be taken. An important measure,
which we hope the Tribunals will rely on more, is the
referral of cases to domestic courts, in accordance with
the respective statutes established in the Tribunals. We
continue to believe that, to the extent possible, cases
should be handled by domestic courts. This is both to
enhance domestic capacity to promote the evolving
principle of complementarity, and to ensure that, to the
extent possible, justice is meted out close to the people
affected by the atrocities. Thus, we call upon the
Tribunals to make full and generous use of the Statutes'
provisions relating to referrals. In this context, we are
pleased that the ICTR Prosecutor intends to make
greater use of referrals to domestic courts in future,
and we welcome the domestic trials referred to by the
ICTY, which are at various stages of progress. We are
aware, of course, of the challenges faced by the
Tribunals in finding suitable domestic courts.

My delegation also welcomes the
recommendations adopted by the ICTY in June 2010
on speeding up trials that it is hearing, particularly the
recommendation that the trial chambers require parties
to present motions on admission of evidence as
efficiently as possible.

While we continue to stress the importance of the
Tribunals taking all possible measures to carry out
their functions as quickly as possible, we stress that
this should not prejudice the rights of the accused or
fair trial standards.

The responsibility to do all that is necessary to
ensure early completion of the Tribunals' work rests
not only with the Tribunals but it is equally the
responsibility of the international community - on
whose behalf the Tribunals act 4 to provide necessary
resources to enable the attainment of this goal. We thus
assure the Tribunals that this delegation will do all that
it can within the Council and the General Assembly to
ensure that the necessary support is forthcoming.

We also take this opportunity to stress the
importance of cooperation between the Tribunals in
accordance with their respective Statutes, in particular
article 28 of the ICTR Statute and article 29 of the
ICTY Statute, and the relevant Security Council
resolutions. We stress especially the obligation to
cooperate with the Tribunals in effecting the arrest of
those wanted by the Tribunals. In that connection,
South Africa commends the Governments of Serbia
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo for their
arrests of Ratko Mladie and Bernard Munyagishari on
26 and 27 May, respectively.

We have noted the concern of the ICTR regarding
the need to relocate persons acquitted by the Tribunal.
But South African is also concerned about the human
rights implications of retaining acquitted persons in
safe houses and the slow pace of identifying adequate
places for relocation. We remain of the view that
location matters must be addressed, on a case-by-case
basis, with States willing and able to receive relocated
persons in their territories. The ability of a State to put
the necessary measures in place for effective relocation
is a conclusive factor in this regard. We encourage the
ICTR to continue in the context of article 26 of the
Statute - which we believe is analogous - to engage
Member States in the region and elsewhere with a view
to identifying suitable places.

Finally, as the Tribunals move towards
completing their work in accordance with the
completion strategy, it is important that they also begin
preparations for a smooth transition to the Residual
Mechanism. We are thus pleased to note that the
Tribunal organs have begun to interact with a view to
ensuring a smooth transition.

Once again, South Africa thanks the Presidents of
the ICTY and ICTR and the respective Prosecutors of
the Tribunals.

