Ms. Kang: On behalf of the Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Mr. Stephen O'Brien, I have the honour
to deliver the following briefing on the humanitarian
situation in Syria.

For more than four years, the humanitarian
community, including United Nations agencies and
non-governmental organization (NGO) partners,
sounded the alarm about the impact of Syria's conflict
on ordinary men, women and children. We have
written scores of reports, given numerous briefings
and made countless statements describing the brutality,
desperation and destitution facing Syria's people.
We have requested, called for, insisted - even
demanded - that the conflict be brought to an end,
that civilians be protected from the relentless violence
and that access be granted for life-saving humanitarian
assistance. Our requests have mostly gone unanswered,
and the people of Syria continue to live in a nightmarish
reality dictated by a conflict that respects few rules and
obeys no laws.

In recent days, harrowing images of malnutrition
and hunger from the Syrian town of Madaya have
shocked the world's conscience. Regrettably, the use of
siege and starvation as a weapon of war has become
routine and systematic in Syria, with devastating
consequences for civilians. The barbarity of this tactic
cannot be overstated. By besieging civilian towns and
villages, the parties to the conflict have launched a
vicious war on ordinary men, women and children,
with callous indifference for their lives, health and
well-being. A siege that denies people access to the
basic necessities of life is unlawful, unacceptable and
unconscionable. There can be no reason or rationale, no
explanation or excuse, for preventing aid from reaching
people in need. It is a grave violation of international
law, and it must stop immediately.

The primary responsibility for this suffering lies
with the party maintaining a siege. It is, however, shared
by those that conduct military activities in or from
populated areas, thereby using civilians as shields and
placing them in harm's way. As the Secretary-General
pointed out in his statement to the General Assembly
yesterday, all sides, including the Syrian Government,
which has the primary responsibility to protect the
Syrian people, are committing atrocious acts prohibited
under international humanitarian law.

Tragically, the situation in Madaya is not unique.
Around 400,000 people in Syria are trapped in areas
besieged by the various parties to the conflict. That
includes towns and villages besieged by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant, Government and allied
forces, and non-State armed groups and the Al-Nusra
Front. More broadly, the United Nations estimates that
4.5 million people reside in areas in Syria that are hard-
to-reach, subject to various forms of restrictions on the
movement of people and goods that severely limit their
access to services and assistance. In addition to conflict
and insecurity, that includes the deliberate obstruction
of, or delays in, the delivery of aid, as well as the denial
or removal of certain relief items, such as medical and
surgical supplies, from aid convoys.

The United Nations and its partners, including the
International Committee of the Red Cross, the Syrian
Arab Red Crescent and NGOs, have worked tirelessly
for over four years to bring life-saving assistance to
people to need across Syria. In 2015, that included,
for example, food assistance for over 6 million people
on average each month, safe drinking water for over
8 million people, non-food items for over 4.8 million
people, and nutrition interventions for over 1.6 million
people, many of them children. This week, on 11 and
14 January, inter-agency convoys made up of 130 trucks
reached the town of Madaya and the nearby qune, as
well as Fu'ah and Kafraya, with urgent assistance for
over 60,000 people, including food and nutritional
support, medicines and medical equipment, and
non-food items. Separately, the third part of a series
of convoys brought assistance to over 37,000 people
in Al-Waer, Homs governorate. Further assistance is
scheduled to reach the areas later this week. Those
and other aid deliveries have saved thousands of lives,
often at great cost. More than 80 humanitarian workers
have been killed since the conflict began. Many others
remain missing.

In some cases, simply bringing assistance to
people in need is not enough. In Madaya, the siege has
resulted in conditions so severe that people have lost
their lives, and many others currently suffer severe
acute malnutrition, which, if left untreated, may result
in death. Teams on the ground are working on multiple
tracks to provide urgent treatment on site, conduct
screening to identify critical cases and, where required,
negotiate for the timely medical evacuation of patients.
At present, almost 390 patients have been screened,
9 have been evacuated together with their family
members and at least 19 others are in need of urgent
evacuation. The United Nations has requested approval
for their immediate and unconditional transfer to a safe
place for treatment and for sustained access to the area
for medical and humanitarian partners.

While those developments are positive, they are but
a trickle. In 2015, the United Nations was able to reach
less than 3 per cent of the population of besieged areas
on average, with assistance in any given sector; in 2014,
the figure was less than 5 per cent. Throughout the
year, 80 requests for inter-agency cross-line convoys
to besieged and hard-to-reach areas, out of a total of
113, went unanswered. This week, the United Nations
submitted requests for further inter-agency convoys to
bring life-saving assistance to besieged and hard-to-
reach communities across the country. Those requests
and other outstanding requests must be approved as a
matter of urgency and without further delay. Similarly,
the slow and bureaucratic procedures that have been
imposed on humanitarian operations in Syria must be
simplified and streamlined. Food, water and medicine
are not bargaining chips or favours that the parties
to a conflict can grant or deny at will; they are basic
necessities that lie at the very essence of survival and
the right to life, which the Security Council and its
members have a responsibility to protect. The Council
cannot let more people die on its watch.

As highlighted by the Emergency Relief
Coordinator to the Security Council last Monday, there
is no alternative to a political, negotiated solution to
this desperate conflict. The Council and all the relevant
stakeholders, in particular those that support the
warring parties, must put their differences aside and
place Syria on a firm path to peace.
In the meantime, I would reiterate the Emergency
Relief Coordinator's call - on behalf of the
humanitarian community and all people in need - that
the parties to the conflict immediately end the practice
of siege and starvation and fully adhere to international
humanitarian law. That will require, first, facilitating
full, unhindered, unconditional and sustained access
to all people in need, including in besieged and hard-
to-reach areas, for all types of assistance, including
medical and surgical supplies. Secondly, it will
require allowing freedom of movement for civilians,
of all ages, to enter and exit besieged and hard-to-
reach areas in safety and dignity, and permitting the
immediate medical evacuation of sick and wounded
patients to a safe place for treatment. Thirdly, this will
require protecting civilians from any form of violence,
including targeted or indiscriminate attacks, as well
as from the use of explosive weapons or landmines in
populated areas, at all times.

