Mr. van den Berg (Netherlands): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
candidate countries Bulgaria, Romania, Turkey and
Croatia, the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia and Montenegro and
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the
European Free Trade Association countries Iceland,
Liechtenstein and Norway, members of the European
Economic Area, align themselves with this statement.

The European Union is gravely concerned by the
ongoing cycle of retaliatory violence in Israel and the
occupied territories. The European Union condemns
the rocket attack on Sderot of last Wednesday, which
resulted in the death of two Israeli children. The
European Union fully and unconditionally rejects all
forms of terrorism and calls upon the Palestinian
Authority to take firm action against the planners and
perpetrators of these kinds of atrocities.

The European Union deplores the
disproportionate nature of the Israeli military actions in
the Gaza Strip. Those actions have claimed the lives of
innocent civilians, including children, and left many
injured. Though Israel has the right to protect its
citizens from terrorist attacks, the exercise of that right
should take place within the boundaries of international
law. The European Union calls upon Israel to fully
respect the Fourth Geneva Convention.

The European Union calls upon both bodies to
exercise maximum restraint with a view to ending the
spiral of violence. The European Union emphasizes
that the only way to achieve lasting peace in the
Middle East is through the resumption of security
cooperation and direct negotiations between the
parties, as called for in the road map. The European
Union also supports the Secretary-General's statement
of 3 October. In this context, the European Union
reminds Israel of its obligation to ensure full and
secure access for humanitarian organizations, including
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA).

