Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in French): I wish at the outset to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this meeting to
consider and adopt the draft report of the Security
Council to the General Assembly for the period 16
June 2001 to 31 July 2002.

I take this opportunity to express my appreciation
to the delegation of Singapore, which has worked
tirelessly to make the Council's annual report evolve
both in format and in content. The General Assembly's
debate on the report of the Security Council, and the
comments made at that time, are finally before the
Council. We owe that to Ambassador Mahbubani, who
has used all his skill, experience, wisdom and faith to
make it happen. We also owe much to the insight and
commitment of his colleagues. My delegation will have
the privilege of presenting the report to the General
Assembly next month. I can assure Ambassador
Mahbubani that at that time considerable reference will
be made to this morning's discussion. I believe that, as
submitted, the report will finally enable the General
Assembly to assume its own responsibilities and play
its role pursuant to Article 15 ofthe Charter.

The current form of the report will enable the
General Assembly not simply to discuss it in the course
of one morning and to take note of it, but rather truly to
study the accomplishments of the Security Council
over a given period. Having said that, let me say that,
when the report is considered, my delegation will have
the opportunity to express its views on the innovations
contained in the report.

Like other colleagues, such as Ambassador
Kishore Mahbubani, Ambassador Jean-David Levitte
and Ambassador Jagdish Koonjul, I will quickly turn to
the issue of sanctions. We attach great importance to
improving the implementation of sanctions and to
streamlining the functions of the sanctions committees,
which are among our goals. I wish to point out,
regretfully, that the draft report does not do justice to
the rather difficult work of the Working Group on
sanctions. Under my chairmanship, the Working Group
has held a series of meetings focused basically on a
document entitled "Draft conclusion of the Chairman",
of 14 February 2001. That exercise has made it
possible to make some progress. Real progress was
made on procedural issues and issues relating to
humanitarian exemptions. The Working Group has
acknowledged the need for the sanctions committees to
make their decisions known to the entire United
Nations membership, except when this could impede
the implementation of sanctions. The main
disagreement at this time relates to the duration of
sanctions. In that regard, the obstacle relates more to
methodology than to philosophy. Some delegations
advocate time-bound sanctions, while others support
sanctions without a time limit with their lifting
depending on the conduct ofthe targeted State.

The Working Group has finally reached
agreement on an improved monitoring system to
enhance the effectiveness and viability of sanctions and
to limit the undesired effects of sanctions on third
States.

I should like to bring to the attention of Council
members the progress that has been made by the
Working Group on sanctions. It should be understood
that there will shortly be a briefing in greater detail in
order to gather the views of members of the Council on
the best possible way to approach the outstanding
issues.

Those are the comments that I wanted to make
with respect to our consideration of this report. In
concluding, I would like to pay tribute to the Mission
of Bangladesh to the United Nations, which led the
Working Group from 1999 to 2001. They contributed
to the progress made in the Working Group during that
time.

