Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): Allow me to begin
by thanking Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Martin Kobler, Special Envoy Mary Robinson,
Minister Joao Manuel Goncalves Lourenco and Force
Commander Dos Santos Cruz for all their dedicated
work aimed at advancing peace, stability and security
in the Democratic Republic of Congo and the region.

It has been heartening to listen to the briefings
earlier this morning. The recent developments in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo offer a window of
opportunity and a sense of a different future, from
improving economic growth and recovering markets
to progress in tackling armed groups, including the
defeat of the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) and actions
against the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF). It is of
paramount importance that the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, together with regional and international
partners, continue its efforts to tackle the multiple
challenges in a determined manner and that the
momentum of implementing the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region be maintained. Continued
close cooperation among the countries of the Great
Lakes region and an increased sense of national and
regional ownership are key to sustaining progress.

We commend the efforts undertaken by regional
organizations, in particular the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, the Southern
African Development Community (SADC) and the
African Union. Such efforts remain key, as the country
is entering an electoral cycle, leading up to the general
elections of 2016. It is essential to ensure that the
electoral processes are peaceful, transparent and fully
inclusive with a clear calendar and in accordance with
the relevant constitutional provisions. We recognize
the role of the good offices of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) in the preparation
of those elections.

Even as we welcome the encouraging signs of
progress in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we
must bear in mind that the country continues to face
significant challenges. Its security situation continues
to be affected by the operation of some 40 armed
groups, especially in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, with grave consequences for
local populations, including massive displacements.
While the overall number of internally displaced
persons (IDPs) has decreased, we remain concerned
about the man-made humanitarian crisis in Katanga,
where the number of IDPs has seen an alarming
increase. We need to ensure that protection efforts and
humanitarian aid reach those in need in that part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo as well.

We commend the efforts that led to the defeat of
M-23 and the important actions undertaken jointly by
MONUSCO and the Forces armees de la Republique
democratique du Congo (FARDC) over recent
months, including against the Allied Democratic
Forces - National Army for the Liberation of Uganda.
Those advances were achieved at a human cost to the
FARDC itself and offer a window of opportunity for
extending and strengthening State authority in the
areas freed from armed groups.

As other speakers have said, the unconditional and
voluntary disarmament of the Forces democratiques
de liberation du Rwanda (FDLR) remains key. It must
be credible and time-bound, carried out within the
shortest possible time frame, involving the FDLR
leadership, and include the formal handover of all
vacated territories. We stress the importance of the
continued involvement of the countries of the Great
Lakes region and SADC in those processes. As noted
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and others, should the voluntary process of FDLR
disarmament prove unsuccessful, military operations
against it remain an option.

My delegation stresses the importance of
accelerating the implementation of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, as well as security
sector reform. The technical committee for army
reform, established in April this year, should draw up a
work plan and proceed with its implementation without
any delay. Broader reforms aimed at strengthening
public finance management, consolidating State
structure, a presence across the country, respect for
the rule of law, justice and accountability are required
in order to anchor the fragile progress achieved. My
delegation notes the concerns expressed in Secretary-
General's report (S/2014/450) with regard to the slow
implementation of the 100 priority recommendations.

Long-term stability inevitably hinges on addressing
the root causes of the conflict. The ownership and
management of land and natural resources are often at
the core of conflict. Transparency and accountability
for the extraction and management of natural resources
must be ensured. Combating illegal logging, the illegal
extraction of natural resources, poaching and the illicit

ivory trade and disrupting the chains of illegal trade
in such resources must be tackled with resolve and
determination. We welcome the actions undertaken by
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to increase the
transparency of the supply chains of natural resources,
as well as MONUSCO's assistance to that end. We also
welcome the fact that the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is now a full member of the Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative.

Safeguarding peace and security requires
addressing the issues of justice and accountability. The
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo have
suffered badly and continue to suffer from persistent
human rights violations, including abductions, killings,
expulsions, child recruitment, sexual violence and rape.
MONUSCO's determination to enhance the protection
of civilians through a more mobile, flexible and robust
approach and the Mission's eastward reconfiguration
have already yielded results and remain key for ensuring
the effective protection of civilians. We welcome a
reinforced Mission-level presence in Goma and are
convinced that will be an effective deterrent against
would-be perpetrators of human rights abuses and
violations. At the same time, we note that putting an
end to impunity and ensuring accountability constitute
another element of deterrence.

We welcome the recent appointment by President
Kabila Kabange of a special representative on sexual
violence and child recruitment and hope her mandate
will be strong enough to effectively combat these
abhorrent crimes. A lot remains to be done in that
respect. As noted in Secretary-General's report, so far
the military court has delivered two rape convictions.
Rape victims across the country remained countless,
though, and evidence supporting that is ample. We
therefore hope that the pursuit of justice for rape victims
will continue.

We welcome the steps taken by the Congolese
Government to implement the action plan to prevent
child recruitment and tackle other grave violations
against children. As the Secretary-General's report
notes, five FARDC and one Congolese National Police
element were convicted by the Bukavu military court
of raping children. We encourage the Democratic
Republic of the Congo authorities to continue their
efforts in pursuing justice for child recruits and child
victims. We also stress the importance of an expeditious
implementation of the provisions on a children's birth
registration system.

Ensuring accountability for gross human rights
violations, war crimes and crimes against humanity
committed in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is

paramount for restoring confidence in State institutions
and sustaining peace efforts.

