Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Zerrougui for her briefing. The situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is largely stable, but the eastern part of the country remains turbulent, the humanitarian situation is worrisome, and national governance is facing many challenges. I should like to emphasize the following four points. First and foremost, there is a need to maintain political stability. China has been following closely the recent developments in the internal relations of the governing coalition of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We call on all parties in the country to respect the constitutional spirit, prioritize the interests of the country and the people, properly address their differences through dialogue and consultation, and spare no effort to preserve the hard-won political stability and unity. The Democratic Republic of the Congo must not relapse into crisis. The international community should respect the Democratic Republic of the Congo's sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity and make a positive contribution to its political stability. Secondly, we need to improve the security situation. The past three months have witnessed an exacerbation of armed conflicts and intercommunal violence in North and South Kivu, causing heavy civilian casualties, which is very worrying. The United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and its Force Intervention Brigade are playing an indispensable role in stabilizing the situation. The contribution made by troop- and police-contributing countries is truly commendable. China supports the renewal of MONUSCO's mandate for one year. We welcome the engagement of the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the elaboration of the joint strategy on the phased, progressive drawdown of MONUSCO and agree that the Mission's drawdown and exit should be predicated on the security situation in the country and the response capacity of the security institutions. China supports the region-specific arrangements made, taking into account the evolving situation and the conflict dynamics in various provinces. It calls on MONUSCO to coordinate and cooperate with the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United Nations country team and international financial institutions to ensure an orderly, responsible and sustainable implementation of the drawdown strategy, there by averting the creation of a security vacuum. Any plan for the reform of MONUSCO and its Force Intervention Brigade should be adequately communicated to the troop- and police-contributing countries and be carried out at a steady pace. Thirdly, there is a need for an integrated approach that addresses the root causes of conflict. The years of instability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo have been essentially due to the failure to turn its resource advantages into a development strength, resulting in violence and conflict. The legal exploitation and use of natural resources can provide people with more job opportunities and better livelihoods, which offers a key to breaking the vicious circle of conflict. The disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes being developed by the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo envisage more job and training opportunities for ex-combatants in order to facilitate their integration into the community. Kasai and Tanganyika will largely transition into the peacebuilding phase, where the relevant development agencies should focus on improving the local generating capacity and consolidate the foundation for durable peace. The new Great Lakes Regional Strategic Framework just unveiled by the Secretary-General provides an innovative approach to conflict resolution in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. China appreciates this and looks forward to its implementation. Fourthly, due regard should be given to the humanitarian crisis, which has been compounded by the coronavirus disease pandemic and the Ebola virus. The humanitarian situation in the country is becoming increasingly fragile, with more than 5 million people displaced and more than 20 million facing food insecurity. The international community should increase its humanitarian assistance to the Democratic Republic of the Congo in order to help improve the situation for the Congolese people. China was among the first countries to help the Democratic Republic of the Congo fight the pandemic, donating dozens of batches of anti-pandemic supplies and pairing up Chinese hospitals with their local counterparts. China has also donated remote-learning equipment to poorer and remote areas of the country to help more young people access education. We are ready to work alongside the international community to help the Democratic Republic of the Congo in its quest for peace, stability, prosperity and development.
