Mr. Milanovie (Serbia): Let me express my
gratitude to you, Madam President, and the Kingdom
of the Netherlands for organizing today's open debate
on this important issue.

Serbia aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union, but I would like to
make some comments in my national capacity.

The consequences of the increasing number of
conflicts and interconnected crises are often far-
reaching and fraught with social tensions and instability,
resulting in threats and challenges that are ever more
complex, uncertain and disruptive of the future. Peace
has always been at the core of the Organization, but
the complex nature of today's challenges calls for
innovative ways of thinking and adjustments on the part
of mechanisms and systems to find common solutions.
To that end, we must strengthen multilateralism and
the role of the United Nations, including by adapting
its system to the needs of our time. We believe that
peacekeeping operations are one of the key pillars
and instruments for achieving the substantive role of
the United Nations in maintaining international peace
and security.

We believe that it is necessary to reform United
Nations peacekeeping missions, as their mandates are
much more diversified today and, in addition to conflict
prevention and peacekeeping, include also post-conflict
reconstruction and long-term development. After all,
the multidimensional role of the missions - which,
alongside their mandates to safeguard peace and
protect civilians, contribute to political processes, the
bolstering of security, the organization of elections,
the protection and promotion of human rights and the
re-establishment of the rule of law - is of paramount

importance for consolidating and maintaining
lasting stability.

The mobilization of additional and concrete
capacities is needed in order to improve mission
activities in the field. Political and security conditions
being in constant flux, we must make sure that the
existing financial and human resources within the
United Nations system are used in a timely and
optimum way. We also agree that it is necessary to carry
out further institutional reforms in order to improve
missions' effectiveness and operability.

In this regard, the reform of the United Nations
peacekeeping architecture, as proposed by Secretary-
General Guterres, is an important step forward, and we
welcome his comprehensive report on restructuring the
United Nations peace and security pillar (A/72/525).
Furthermore, we also welcome his efforts specifically
in the field of conflict prevention, in the belief that
a coherent approach and the strengthening of the
institutional structure of the United Nations will create
greater efficiency in addressing crises around the world.

Let me take this opportunity to reiterate Serbia's
commitment to the efforts of the United Nations aimed
at promoting and maintaining international peace and
security through active participation in the system
of collective security. In that context, I recall that
we have contributed in a concrete way to furthering
global and regional security, maintaining our long-
lasting tradition of participation in United Nations
peacekeeping missions. Currently, around 330 Serbian
personnel are deployed in five United Nations and
four European Union peacekeeping missions, making
Serbia the leading troop-contributing country in
South-Eastern Europe and the tenth-largest European
contributor. Our peacekeepers proudly fly the United
Nations banner in Lebanon, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Cyprus, the Central African Republic
and the Middle East.

In its commitment to United Nations peacekeeping
operations, Serbia is motivated also by the fact that
it is a host country to the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), deployed
under resolution 1244 (1999). We have reiterated many
times our staunch support for the activities of UNMIK
in order to allow it to respond to all the demands
mandated by the Security Council and to address
ongoing and new challenges. In this regard, we have
stressed the paramount importance of ensuring that
Mission's needs for adequate human and financial
resources are met in order to ensure its effectiveness
and continuous active engagement.

Recent events in Kosovo and Metohija, including
the unjustified arrest ofa senior Serbian official and the
chief negotiator with Pristina, as well as the 26 March
brutal beating of innocent civilians by the so-called
Kosovo Police Force, serve as yet another reminder of
the numerous challenges and the overall very complex
political and security situation in the province. Today's
reality is a clarion call on us to maintain our focus on
the quest for a compromise and sustainable solution to
the issue of Kosovo and Metohija and to fully support
not only preserving but also strengthening UNMIK's
presence and activities on the ground, as it is absolutely
essential to promoting and achieving stability.

In conclusion, we are all aware that the challenges
are numerous, that security situation in many parts
of the world is volatile, and that our continuous
commitment and hard work are needed to address
them, including those pertaining to peacekeeping. For
its part, Serbia stands ready to make a contribution
towards the achievement of these goals.

