Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): At the outset,
allow me to congratulate you, Madam President, and
the Government of Nigeria on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
August and for convening today's important debate.
As we celebrate the seventieth anniversary of the
founding of the United Nations, we also pay tribute
to the visionaries to whom we owe much gratitude for
formulating the Charter of the United Nations with
such wisdom and foresight.

I join others in praising the insights enshrined in
Chapter VIII of the Charter, which foresaw the need
for the United Nations to establish deeper cooperation
with regional organizations. Seventy years later, we are
witnessing a trend whereby regional and subregional
organizations are becoming more prominent features
in the global peace and security landscape. Today the
international community faces a vastly different set of
security challenges and threats. In coping with them,
regional organizations play an increasingly important
role.

We have seen the instrumental role of regional
organizations, especially in the crucial stage of
early response, in situations in Somalia, Mali, the
Central African Republic, South Sudan and Burundi.
Furthermore, the successful response of the African
Union in countering the Ebola epidemic in West Africa
highlights the convening power, political leverage and
outreach of a regional organization. In recognition of
the role that can be played by regional and subregional
organizations, the Republic of Korea was one of the
sponsors of resolution 2167 (2014). We appreciate
the report by the High-level Independent Panel in
Peace Operations (see S/2015/446), which calls for
closer cooperation with regional organizations in
addressing present and future conflicts. As a member
of the Peacebuilding Commission's Organizational
Committee, the Republic of Korea will seek ways to
further develop close consultations with regional and
subregional organizations and arrangements.

Coming from a region where the role of regional
organizations is not as prominent as in Africa or Europe,
the Republic of Korea is nonetheless actively engaged
in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
processes, including ASEAN-B, the ASEAN Regional
Forum and the East Asian Summit. Last December, we
hosted the Commemorative Summit on the occasion of
the twenty-fifth anniversary of the ASEAN-Republic
of Korea dialogue relations. Furthermore, the Republic
of Korea has promoted the Northeast Asia peace and
Cooperation Initiative. Inspired by the experiences
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe in making Europe whole and free in the
aftermath of the Cold War, the Northeast Asia Peace
and Cooperation Initiative seeks to build a consensus
on softer, yet critical, issues such as climate change,
the environment, disaster relief and nuclear safety.
We hope gradually to strengthen cooperation among
regional players with a view to eventually addressing
the region's more difficult issues.

Today, as we speak of how best to implement
regional cooperation, we need to be as imaginative as
the Founding Fathers of the United Nations so that we
can effectively address threats to peace and security of
all kinds around the world.

