Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank the Secretary-
General for his briefing earlier this morning and the
Palestinian observer and the Israeli representative for
their statements.

Like all of us, Australia welcomed the ceasefire
agreement that brought the destructive conflict in
Gaza to an end, but all parties to the agreement must
scrupulously honour its terms. The ceasefire must put
an end to rocket and mortar attacks on Israel and enable
the opening of border crossings for humanitarian aid
and reconstruction materials into Gaza, which should
include an effective United Nations supervision
mechanism. We thank Egypt and Norway for organizing
the Cairo Conference on reconstructing Gaza, and we
are committed to supporting those efforts through our
development programme.

The Gaza conflict was a very stark reminder that
Israel and the Palestinians must renew their efforts
towards finding a two-State solution. Encouraging
and supporting such efforts must be the focus of
the international community and the Council. Both
sides should avoid any unilateral actions that could
undermine the prospects for a return to negotiations,
whether it be expropriating land in the West Bank or
pursuing international initiatives that set conditions
and fail to recognize Israel's right to security.

In Iraq, the atrocities of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) have descended to new depths
of depravity. The organization is neither Islamic nor
a State - a view shared by Muslim religious leaders
around the world. Its barbaric attacks make it impossible
to deny the extreme threat that ISIL represents to the
region and the world at large. It stands in opposition
to the basic values of the international community and
our shared sense of humanity, and my own country,
along with everyone else, condemns its terrorist actions
absolutely.

Australia has committed to playing its part in
helping Iraq and the international coalition in combating
ISIL. With the consent of the Iraqi Government, we
have deployed Australian aircraft and personnel, who
are undertaking missions over Iraq. That is in addition
to our air assets already providing humanitarian and
logistical support to Iraq. Australia will also deploy a
special operations task group on the ground to advise
and assist the Iraqi security forces. Those measures
represent a prudent and proportionate response to the
threat posed by that murderous organization. We urge
other Member States to show their support for the A1
Abadi Government as it rebuilds a stable and cohesive
Iraq, and to join the efforts to combat a common enemy.

There is still more we can do to win this fight. ISIL
is seeking to bolster its ranks by appealing to people
at risk of radicalization in other countries, including
Australia. In that context, the full implementation by
all Member States of resolution 2178 (2014), on foreign
terrorist fighters, which we adopted in September, is
crucial. My own Government is introducing legislative
measures to make it easier to prosecute foreign fighters
and to prevent people from leaving Australia to fight
in foreign conflicts. We are strengthening counter-
terrorism engagement with our partners, including
efforts to address the threat posed by foreign terrorist
fighters, and we encourage other Member States to
consider similar cooperation.

The Al-Assad regime is, in large part, responsible
for the disorder and violence in which ISIL has thrived
and for the conflict that is destabilizing the region.
The Syrian people must have a better choice than that
between the Al-Assad regime and ISIL. More than ever,
a political process is needed that can bring the conflict
to an end and give all Syrians a say in their future.
We welcome the efforts of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, Staffan de Mistura, and
look forward to discussions with him in the Council
shortly. A renewed focus by the Council on a political
solution in Syria is long overdue.
We commend the excellent work being done inside
Syria by United Nations agencies and humanitarian
organizations in the most challenging, difficult and
dangerous circumstances. Resolution 2165 (2014) has
brought about a modest but notable increase in the
numbers being reached by United Nations agencies,
but the humanitarian crisis continues to worsen. Close
attention to coordination with existing cross-border aid
delivery mechanisms will be essential to getting the
most out of improvements in access.

Despite small improvements in access, the parties
to the conflict continue to flout the provisions of
resolution 2139 (2014), which we adopted unanimously
in February, particularly the Al-Assad regime and
extremist groups in Syria. We are appalled at the grave
violations of human rights that continue to take place,
including the targeting of children on a scale never
before seen. The Al-Assad regime continues to use
barrel bombs and to illegally use chlorine as a weapon in
attacks on civilian neighbourhoods, which are targeted
as a deliberate military strategy. The Secretary-General
remarked on that this morning. In resolution 2139
(2014), the Council unamiously demanded that such
attacks and all indiscriminate shelling stop. There must
be accountability for the terrible international crimes
being committed in Syria.

Finally, Australia acknowledges the heightened
security threats faced by Lebanon and commends
the efforts of the Lebanese armed forces to prevent
terrorist attacks, to counter militant groups, including
ISIL and Jabhat Al-Nusra, and to provide security in an
increasingly difficult environment. The Lebanese armed
forces should not be without a commander-in-chief at
such a critical time, and Lebanon's politicians should
elect a President without further delay. Events near
Arsal, including the ongoing detention of Lebanese
personnel, show that the threats to Lebanon's security
are very real. We urge the international community,
and this Council specifically, to continue to support
Lebanon as it faces complex and growing challenges,
including the burden of hosting more than 1.2 million
Syrian refugees.

