Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): We thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today's emergency
meeting, and we thank Jordan for requesting it. We also
thank Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun for his
briefing.

It is vital that the Security Council respond urgently
and effectively to escalating situations such as the one
we are witnessing in Jerusalem and elsewhere. The
British Government is deeply concerned at the terrorist
attacks and violence that we seen so far this month, be
it in Jerusalem, the West Bank, Gaza or Israel, whether
it has been committed by Israelis or Palestinians. The
British Government condemns all acts of terrorism and
all acts of violence.

As others have said, this violence is doing untold
damage to people on both sides. So far this month,
7 Israelis and 32 Palestinians have been killed. Over
4,400 people have been injured, according to the
Palestine Red Crescent Society. These figures should
give us all cause for grave concern. The immediate
priority must be a swift end to the violence and a rapid
de-escalation in tension. I am pleased that Council
members have sent this clear and unambiguous message
today.

The Israeli and Palestinian peoples deserve to live
in peace and security without fear of attack. Those
breaking the law on either side should be subject to
prosecution. Innocent civilians must be protected. Let
us all call on the Israeli and Palestinian leadership
to take immediate steps to de-escalate tensions and
avoid any action that could threaten to exacerbate the
situation.

The current violence began following the
heightened tension we saw last month around Haram
Al-Sharif/Temple Mount. This is a sombre reminder
of the delicate balance in Jerusalem and the need to
respect sensitivities over so holy sites. It is vital that
the long-standing status quo in respect of access to
Haram Al-Sharif - the Temple Mount - and other
historic sites is preserved. The British Government
remains in close touch with the Israeli, Palestinian
and Jordanian authorities on this point, and we value
Jordan's important role as custodian of the holy sites in
Jerusalem. We have stressed that security restrictions
must be lifted immediately. We will continue with these
calls and hope other Council members will join us.

If we are to find a long-term solution to this crisis,
the Israeli and Palestinian people need to believe,
really believe, that there is an alternative to conflict.
The current cycle of violence points to a much deeper
despair at the lack of prospects for a political end to the
conflict, one that sees two States living side by side in
peace and security. The violence takes us further away
from that goal. The political leaders on all sides - and
the Council - must make clear that the two-State
solution is not desirable but essential. There is a urgent
need for practical improvements on the ground if we
are to sustain the viability of the two-State solution and
deliver peace, prosperity and security for all.

As ever, the United Kingdom stands ready to work
closely with the Council and our other international
partners to address the current crisis, through private
diplomacy, statements, resolutions and any other route
that can help achieve a meaningful, lasting solution.
Such a solution is long overdue. Next week marks the
seventieth anniversary of the United Nations. For 68 of
the past 70 years, the United Nations has been trying
to find the answer to the situation in Israel and the
occupied Palestinian territories. We must keep striving
to achieve a two-State solution. The alternative is the
violence and despair that we are addressing today.

