Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important debate on
mediation and peaceful resolution of conflicts.

We recognize the leadership of Secretary-General
Guterres in advancing the United Nations mediation
and conflict prevention work, including the creation
of the High-level Advisory Board on Mediation. We
welcome the Board's engagement in both resolving
and preventing conflict. I would also like to thank the
Chair and Deputy Chair of The Elders, Mary Robinson
and Ban Ki-moon, for their remarks today and for the
vital work they are doing to spearhead mediation and
conflict resolution.

Day after day, the Council bears witness to the
human toll of conflict, from Mali to Myanmar, Syria to
Somalia. This year, the United Nations estimates that
conflicts and disasters have affected over 130 million
people across 42 countries. The affected men, women
and children have an urgent need of assistance - of
our assistance.

The Security Council often debates how to use
this body to resolve crises. From those discussions, we
have established human rights monitoring mechanisms,
imposed sanctions and established peacekeeping
missions. However, we rarely explore mediation as
a tool in resolving conflicts, or how we might better
prevent conflict in the first place and thereby save lives,
as the Secretary-General and Minister Al Sabah noted.

States Members of the United Nations are
contributing $6.7 billion this year for peacekeeping,
and the United States pays a quarter of that cost. But
better prevention and mediation would help prevent
costly peacekeeping missions and help provide an exit
strategy for existing peacekeeping operations.

The United States has a long record of leading
mediation efforts that have provided breakthroughs
in some of the toughest conflicts, such as the Good
Friday Agreement in Northern Ireland and the Dayton
Peace Agreement that ended the war in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. In both of those cases, the United States
brought the right people into the room and served as a
trusted facilitator of the agreements.

Mediation is most successful when the right set of
stakeholders are engaged and the mediator is trusted. In
that light, women's meaningful participation increases
the likelihood of successful negotiations, reconciliation
and transition processes. Collectively, the Secretariat
and Security Council must do more to ensure women
play an integral role in peace processes both as
negotiators and mediators, as President Robinson, the
Secretary-General and the Ambassador of France have
all noted.

Including women in conflict resolution not only
accelerates the process, but it surfaces issues that matter
most to societies as a whole, making agreements more
durable. According to the International Peace Institute,
peace processes in which women are meaningfully
included are 35 per cent more likely to last for at least
15 years.

It is also important to support local and regional
mediation efforts, devolving authority to those on the
ground. Let me offer Senegal as an example where the
United States has worked to bolster local mediation
efforts, coordinating support for a high-level political
negotiation between the Senegalese Government and
the secessionist movement. By providing targeted
political support and funding, we have helped set the
conditions that led to high-level negotiations.

There are unresolved conflicts currently on the
Council's agenda that would benefit from enhanced
mediation activities. In one example, improvements the
Security Council has mandated for the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei, the peacekeeping
operation in Abyei, are stalled due to a lack of progress
in mediation between South Sudan and the Sudan.

Each of us should seek to strengthen the capacity
of regional and subregional organizations, given their
comparative advantage in securing local buy-in. The
Secretary-General has called for greater convergence
and cooperation in the Council as a means to support
mediation, and we agree completely.

We agree that those vital and often underappreciated
tools can have a transformative impact in conflicts.
We urge the United Nations to lead mediation efforts
within current budget parameters. Those efforts can
save billions of dollars that would be spent on conflict
mitigation and, most importantly, again, can save lives
by preventing or ending conflict.

The United States stands ready to continue the
dialogue on doing more to effectively support the United
Nations conflict resolution and mediation efforts.

