Mr. Sinirlioglu (Turkey): I would like to express
our appreciation to Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
for his briefing, and Ambassador Mahmoud Saikal,
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, for his
statement. We also thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/20l8/824).

Today we are meeting at yet another critical
juncture for Afghanistan. As we approach the midpoint
of the transformation decade, significant progress in the
country has been achieved on multiple fronts, including
in the political, economic and security fields. However,
complex challenges remain to be addressed for the
establishment and consolidation of peace, security
and prosperity in Afghanistan. We look forward to
the holding of the Geneva Ministerial Conference
on Afghanistan later this year, which will provide an
important opportunity for the international community
to reaffirm its commitment to assisting Afghanistan in
its efforts to secure a better future. This afternoon, I
will focus on three key issues in this regard.

First, with regard to the upcoming elections in the
country, we are about one month away from the holding
of parliamentary elections in Afghanistan, which are
scheduled for 20 October. The successful holding of
these elections is important for all of our efforts aimed
at helping Afghanistan achieve stability, security and
prosperity. However, severe and frequent criticism of
the election process is becoming a source of concern,
as this may lead to circumstances that could result in
the disenfranchisement ofa large number of voters. The
deteriorating security situation might also give way to
similar results. We still hope that effective and swift
measures will be taken to rectify this situation.

The fragmented political environment in
Afghanistan continues to be another point of concern.
We call upon all members of the National Unity
Government, as well as other prominent political
actors, to act together andjoin efforts aimed at holding
credible elections and advancing the peace process.

That brings me to my second point, on the efforts
for establishing sustained peace and reconciliation. An
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation
process remains central to achieving long-lasting peace
in the country. We welcome the encouraging steps
that were recently taken by the Afghan Government
to this effect. In this regard, we were pleased that the
temporary ceasefire during Eid al-Fitr was respected.
This unprecedented development vividly displayed the
sincere aspiration of the Afghan people for peace. It is
regrettable that a similar ceasefire could not be repeated
during Eid al-Adha. I would like to reiterate that Turkey
continues to stand ready to contribute to the Afghan-
led and Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation efforts.
The security, stability and prosperity of Afghanistan
are of key importance for neighbouring countries and
the region, as well as for the maintenance of global
peace and security.

My third and last point is on the need to strengthen
regional cooperation efforts. We believe that the need
to address the challenges that Afghanistan continues
to face remains an important priority for countries of
the region and the international community as a whole.
Building and consolidatingagenuine atmosphere oftrust
and cooperation remains essential for strengthening
regional collaboration efforts in a mutually beneficial
manner. Our vision for Afghanistan continues to be a
peaceful, secure and stable country that enjoys good and
cooperative relations with its neighbours while being
at the centre of major regional cooperation projects in
infrastructure, trade and transportation.

With this understanding, Turkey continues
to contribute to regional cooperation efforts for
Afghanistan. We are pleased to co-chair the Heart
of Asia-Istanbul Process this year, together with
Afghanistan, in line with our continued support. The
second senior officials meeting of the Process will take
place here in New York on 28 September, at the margins
of the high-level week of the General Assembly. Review
of the implementation of the confidence-building
measures within the framework of the Process will be
one of the agenda items. We look forward to a fruitful
discussion at this meeting.

Before concluding, I would like to take this
opportunity to commend the work that the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan is carrying
out under the leadership of Special Representative
Yamamoto in assisting the Afghan Government and
people in their endeavours to achieve a stable, peaceful
and prosperous Afghanistan. I would also like to
reiterate Turkey's commitment to continuing to stand
by the Government of Afghanistan and our Afghan
brothers and sisters as long as our help is needed.

