Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, I would like to thank you and the
Permanent Representatives of Croatia and Costa Rica
for your detailed briefings on the activities carried out
by the three Security Council Committees, as well as
for the joint briefing on cooperation among them.

The progress that has been made in the area of
coordination and cooperation among the three
Committees since May is well known, especially with
respect to their expert groups. However, Mexico
believes that there is still much that we can do to
improve cooperation among the three Committees
themselves, respecting of course the scope of their
respective mandates. On the 1373 Committee - the
Counter-Terrorism Committee - we would like to
express our satisfaction at the progress that has been
seen in the stocktaking exercise, more specifically the
joint efforts of the Executive Directorate and
Committee members with respect to the Preliminary
Implementation Assessments. We reaffirm our support
with a view to a successful conclusion in 2010 of the
process under way.

We also thank the Executive Directorate for the
global survey on the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001) by Member States, which was recently
submitted to the Committee. We are certain that its
consideration by the Security Council will contribute
significantly to identifying the progress achieved and
the challenges that remain in moving towards the full
and consistent implementation of the 1373 regime.

Mexico is especially pleased at the thematic
debates being held within the Committee, and we
commend the Committee Chairman for the impetus he
has given to these debates. In our view, dialogue
between members of the Committee and the experts of
the Executive Directorate is necessary to foster better
understanding of the various aspects of the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). Given the
multifaceted nature of international terrorism, the
struggle against this scourge must be strengthened in
an integrated manner. Thematic debates will, without a
doubt, contribute to that goal.

Mexico should like to reiterate that the
facilitation of the assistance that the Committee
provides to all States through its Executive Directorate
should always include an aspect related to the
strengthening of the rule of law. Ensuring that those
responsible for implementing the obligations contained
in resolution 1373 (2001) do so in a manner which
pays due attention to the law, and in particular to
human rights, will lead to the strengthening of the
international counter-terrorism regime. Legitimacy and
effectiveness are not mutually exclusive; on the
contrary, they go hand in hand.

With respect to the 1267 Committee on Al-Qaida
and the Taliban, Mexico too wishes to express its
gratitude for the work carried out by the Chairman of
the Committee and his team. We also express our
appreciation of the efforts of the Analytical Support
and Sanctions Monitoring Team. Progress made in the
review process established under resolution 1822
(2008), as well as the updating and publication of the
narrative summaries, are significant achievements. The
efforts to transform the consolidated list into a dynamic
instrument have started to yield very satisfactory
results.

There are still, without a doubt, a number of
obstacles yet to be overcome, many of which are
discussed in the briefing we have just heard. However,
we are convinced that the genuine progress we have
made should serve as an impetus for us to continue our
efforts towards a more transparent regime that pays
more attention to the fundamental principles of
legality, including due process. The upcoming review
of resolution 1822 (2008) offers us a fine opportunity
which we cannot miss.

With regard to the activities of the 1540
Committee, Mexico welcomes the open debate which
took place from 30 September and 2 October, in the
context of the comprehensive review on the
implementation of that resolution. The debate
presented a welcome opportunity for greater interaction
between members of the Committee and the rest of the
membership - in itself a praiseworthy event. The
number of delegations that participated in that debate
and the quality of their statements demonstrated the
importance that they attach to the fulfilment of the
complex obligations derived from resolution 1540
(2004). During the comprehensive review process, not
only did we identify the progress achieved and the
challenges that remain, but we also began to address
new themes. For example, the Committee dealt with
the impact of the measures adopted for the
implementation of the resolution on individuals and
due process. This is of fundamental importance for
guaranteeing that measures adopted in this context are
in keeping with the obligations of States to fully
respect human rights.

Mexico believes that the 1540 Committee should
now begin to study proposals that were made during
the open debate so that it can present a set of specific
recommendations to the Security Council which would
help to promote better implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). In particular, Mexico believes that there
are important opportunities for improving the
Committee's tasks in the area of assistance to States in
order to help build their national capacity to implement
resolution 1540 (2004).

In a more general sense, I should like to
acknowledge once again the excellent efforts shown in
the promotion activities carried out by the 1540
Committee jointly with the Office for Disarmament
Affairs, in particular through the holding of regional
workshops. Mexico had the opportunity to participate
in the workshop held in Costa Rica mentioned by the
Chairman of the 1540 Committee. These workshops
are a very useful tool for promoting better
understanding of the obligations under resolution 1540
(2004). There is no doubt that this cooperative
approach taken by the Committee in its work should
continue.

World public opinion is aware of the grave threat
posed by terrorism to international peace and security.
Fighting it while maintaining full respect for
international law, in particular for human rights, is not
only a legal and moral imperative, but is also key to
ensuring the future success and full effectiveness of the
counter-terrorism regime, in which the Security
Council plays a crucially important role.

