Mr. Hahn Choonghee (Republic of Korea):
We thank the delegation of the United Kingdom for
convening this timely open debate on the theme of
security, development and the root causes of conflict.
Indeed, the search for the root causes of conflict
seems extremely relevant today, in the aftermath of
the 13 November terrorist attack in Paris. I would like
to take this opportunity to express my delegation's
deep sympathy and condolences to the families of the
victims, as well as to the people of France.

Today, it is more clear than ever that we are in need
of new and stronger ways to address the evolving threats
to peace. The United Nations must reinvent itself so
as to be fit for purpose and find a way to respond to
conflicts in an agile, coherent, coordinated way, while
staying mindful of the root causes of conflicts. In that
vein, my delegation welcomes the Security Council's
recognition of the need to revisit the fundamental
challenge of identifying the linkage between security
and development. We echo the sentiments of the
Secretary-General, who stated that peacebuilding must
be a thread that runs through all our actions across the
life cycle of conflicts.

The Republic of Korea knows at first hand the
importance of the link between peace and security and
development. In the aftermath of the Korean War in
the 1950s, the United Nations Korean Reconstruction
Agency helped stabilize our war-torn country and
provided much-needed relief. Today, the Republic of
Korea is both a troop-contributor and a provider of
assessed contributions to United Nations peacekeeping.
This year alone, we have dedicated $7.5 million to post-
conflict reconstruction, providing assistance to fragile
post-conflict States in need of rehabilitation.

My delegation would like to highlight the following
three points in an effort to contribute to today's
discussion on security and development. First, more
emphasis should be placed on peacebuilding, as it
lies at the nexus of security and development. United
Nations peacebuilding, when established back in 2005,
was founded specifically to address the challenge of
bridging the gap between security and development.
What we recognize today - perhaps more clearly than
10 years ago - is that the notion of peacebuilding
should be understood as encompassing not only efforts
to prevent relapses into conflict, but also efforts to
prevent the lapse into conflict in the first place.

The growing emphasis on prevention - before,
during and after a conflict - requires the Security
Council to have a better grasp of the reconstruction
and institution-building efforts necessary for recovery
from conflict and to support strategies for sustainable
development. That is exactly what the Peacebuilding
Commission, an advisory body to the Council, was
created to do. The Security Council must actively and
more frequently seek the Commission's advice in both
its formal and its informal deliberations. In that regard,
we welcome the recent trend of inviting the Commission
to present its views to the Security Council.

Secondly, we feel that the key to a successful
mission is a well-defined mandate. Mandates need to be
better crafted by the Security Council so that mission
goals are more clearly articulated and integrated with
existing local realities and stakeholders. A solution
may lie in better integration among the various United
Nation bodies whose goals intersect. Breaking down
silos can help conflict-prevention efforts by tapping
into expertise so as to better understand the scope of
problems while seeking enhanced coordination with
various stakeholders. More frequent open debates and
Arria Formula meetings could be useful in that regard.

The Council should also aim to improve its working
methods so as to promote a more inclusive, effective and
transparent approach. On thatpoint, we urge the Security
Council to seriously consider the recommendations of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(see S/2015/446), especially those addressing the need
to establish the practice of a sequenced mandate that
would allow the Council to respond in a more tailored
and context-sensitive manner.

Thirdly, the Security Council and the United
Nations as a whole, should strive for better cooperation
with regional organizations, in particular the African
Union (AU). Close consultations with regional
stakeholders can provide early warning, conflict
analysis and insight into the specific dynamics of a
particular region. Strengthening partnerships with
regional organizations, such as the African Union,
was one of the issues emphasized during the recent
seminar on the implementation of the High-level
Panel's recommendations in Seoul. Participants pointed
out that the current ad hoc cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union should evolve
into a more strategic and institutionalized relationship,
with the possibility of providing contributions to AU
missions approved by the Security Council. It is with
that in mind that the Republic of Korea renewed its
pledge in September to strengthen our partnership with
the African Union so as to enhance its peacekeeping
capacity.

Finally, we believe that there is no better time
than the present to address the root causes of conflict,
as there are three parallel reviews being conducted
simultaneously - those on the peacebuilding
architecture, on United Nations peace operations, and
on Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women
and peace and security. If done correctly, they should
yield synergies that could revamp the way in which
the United Nations carries out its mandate on the
maintenance of peace and security. In that regard, my
delegation welcomes the high-level debate on United
Nations and peace and security to be convened in May
next year aimed at building support among Member
States.

