Mr. Kolby (Norway): Norway welcomes the
initiative of the Tunisian presidency for this debate on
the concept ofpeace-building.

Peace-building is a theme of concern both for the
United Nations and for regional organizations. We
therefore welcome the fact that cooperation for peace-
building is the main issue on the agenda for the high-
level meeting between the Secretary-General and
regional organizations tomorrow and the day after.
Regional organizations can often be key instruments
for identifying what could be done to build peace and
to prevent conflicts and for implementing the steps
agreed upon. We would welcome strengthened peace-
building cooperation between the United Nations and
regional bodies, both in developing mutually
supporting mechanisms and in addressing concrete
conflict situations.

Peace-building is an important part of the
comprehensive approach to United Nations peace
operations set forth in the Brahimi report. We look
forward to the follow-up reports on peace-building and
conflict prevention now in preparation. We trust that all
bodies of the United Nations system will give their full
support to the establishment of steps needed to move
forward. We are convinced that the reports, when they
are presented, will provide a foundation for a more
comprehensive discussion of the challenges before us
when the Council resumes its discussion of this
important issue. Norway will come back with a more
extensive list of Views and ideas when these reports are
on the table.

The concept of peace-building is a relative
newcomer in the more comprehensive approach to
peace operations adopted by the United Nations in the
1990s. Valuable conceptual work has already been
done to better understand how peace-building should
relate to the other elements in a comprehensive
approach to conflict prevention, peace-making,
peacekeeping and long-term development. There is a
lot of material to draw upon - lessons learned within
the United Nations system, the experiences of other
international organizations and in more independent
evaluations and studies.

Norway supports the view that peace-building has
a fundamental political character. It is important to
address long-term root causes to prevent both the
outbreak and the recurrence of conflict. But in political
situations that threaten to deteriorate into armed
conflicts, political initiatives are needed. The Security
Council has been seized of a number of conflicts that,
at some point, have threatened to escalate from bad to
worse. Successive Secretaries-General, through the use
of their good offices and through the Secretariat, have
accumulated a lot of experience in trying to prevent
such escalations or relapses into conflicts.

The need to address root causes must never be
forgotten. Political efforts for peace-building will have
much less of a chance to succeed in situations of mass
poverty and despair. Norway believes strongly that the
falling trend in international official development
assistance transfers not only undermines our efforts to
reach the international development goals, it also
jeopardizes peace-building efforts. We have seen too
often - even in this body - when the red lights of
early warning have started flashing, when there are
identifiable steps that could be taken to avert disaster,
that the resources have simply not been there to take
the steps needed early enough.

Norway believes that women can have a
particularly important role in peace-building efforts.
The Security Council recently had a discussion on
women, peace and security. An effective follow-up of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) will be
important to ensure that the underutilized resource that
women represent is better integrated into the
comprehensive peace-building efforts needed. This will
enhance the chance of creating lasting peace solutions.

Voluntary organizations can play a very important
role in peace-building. Norway's involvement in the
peace processes in the Middle East, Central America
and some African conflicts has been based on close
collaboration with non-governmental organizations,
whose presence on the ground have earned them the
respect and confidence of all sides. We therefore
strongly support the call by the Panel on United
Nations Peace Operations to take heed of the
Secretary-General's initiatives to reach out to civil
society and strengthen relations with non-governmental
organizations, academic institutions and the media.

Norway has for many years supported
strengthening the capabilities of the Secretary-General
in preventing conflict and building peace. We have
supported the proposals in the Brahimi report to this
effect. We think that such measures need to be
integrated into and coordinated closely with the work
of the United Nations on development issues, to which
our commitment is equally great.

The key challenge is now implementation. There
is a general need to strengthen the institutional
capability of the United Nations to deal more
effectively with these important issues in order to
implement the decisions of the Security Council. This
includes a need for coherence, coordination and the
ability to translate early warning into early action.

Coherence is important, as is coordination, not
only within the United Nations system, but also with
other international organizations and other actors
involved in complex operations. Those involved should
review priorities and redirect activities and
programmes in order to support United Nations peace
operations and contribute to a coherent peace-building
environment. We should perhaps consider how we can
move towards a more systematic structure of
consultation among a wider range of actors in the
context of Security Council mandates and resolutions.

Capacity on the ground, knowledge and shared
analysis are the keys to enhanced coherence and to
dealing with the security concerns of the parties
involved. Disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration; security sector reform; how to
incorporate conflicting factions in an army, an
administration and political bodies; and the role of
development partners in training and competence-
building: these are only some of the peace-building
elements that may be involved in a given conflict.

The deepening and widening of the scope of
peace-building also underlines the crucial need for
coherence over time. We must work to break the
vicious circle in which declining media attention often
results in dwindling international financial support.

The findings of truth commissions in El Salvador,
South Africa and elsewhere, as well as of the
International Criminal Tribunals, have demonstrated
that an atmosphere of impunity can be a major
hindrance to true peace-building. We welcome the
major strides that have been taken over the past few
years in strengthening international criminal justice.
We believe that the early establishment of the
permanent International Criminal Court will be an
important contribution to international peace-building
efforts.

The real test of peace-building is in the results on
the ground. The Security Council is now embarked on
several peace operations with important peace-building
mandates which will determine the success or failure
of our approach. In East Timor, the ingredients of
success are present, thanks to the performance of the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor and its partnership with local leaders. We must
not let this opportunity slip away from us by
abandoning the effort too early. In other situations,
peace-building efforts are still at an early stage. Here
again, the test will be whether we back up our words
with resources.

