Mr. Fadaifard (Islamic Republic of Iran): I wish
to begin by thanking you, Sir, for holding this open
debate on an important development in the Security
Council, which is of great importance to the general
membership of the United Nations.

The United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) has thus far been a stabilizing
factor for Bosnia and Herzegovina and the whole
Balkan region. It has played a very important role in
implementing the peace agreement in that country by
helping its Government train and equip a professional
police force. However, given the fact that the peace
process is still fragile and the new Bosnian institutions
continue to be under pressure from some nationalist
forces, it is important that the Mission continue its
work and wind down in an orderly way at an
appropriate time. There is no doubt that the premature
termination of UNMIBH's mandate will leave its
programmes uncompleted and jeopardize the previous
achievements of the international community in
Bosnia. Such a prospect may also hurt the ongoing
efforts in the wider region.

It is unfortunate that the disagreement on the
International Criminal Court is not only casting a
shadow on the existence of UNMIBH but is also
jeopardizing United Nations peacekeeping operations
in other parts of the world. Therefore, we believe that
the potential implication of the current impasse for the
whole of United Nations peacekeeping should also be
taken into account. United Nations peacekeeping is a
very important and effective tool for the international
community to promote peace and security across the
world.

My delegation regrets that a one-sided approach
adopted by one member of the Security Council, which
frequently resorts to the veto to serve its own national
interests, is, inter alia, putting in jeopardy the future of
United Nations peacekeeping. The threat to do the
same with regard to other peacekeeping mandates that
come up for renewal is most troubling. Undoubtedly,
such an approach runs counter to the spirit and letter of
the Charter, especially Article 24, which maintains that
the Council acts on behalf of the general membership.

My delegation does not see any logic whatsoever
in the attempts over the past few weeks to disrupt the
work of a successful United Nations mission, which
includes, among other things, combating organized
crime and terrorism.

As far as the Statute of the International Criminal
Court is concerned, we expect that all members of the
Security Council take note of and accept the fact that
the Council is not authorized to interpret or amend
treaties concluded among States in accordance with the
law of treaties - a law that recognizes that only parties
to a treaty are competent to interpret or amend it.

The Islamic Republic of Iran has signed the
Statute of the International Criminal Court, and studies
are under way in my country with a view to presenting
it to the parliament for ratification. We believe that the
principles and values laid down in the Statute will
enable the Court to become an effective organ for the
international community to combat the most serious
crimes and render justice to victims of war crimes.

We hope that the ongoing consultations in the
Council do not result in undermining the International
Criminal Court.

