Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to thank Mr. Koenigs for his briefing.
I should like to take this opportunity also to wish him
every success in the very important mission he will be
undertaking. On a personal note, let me say that we are
particularly pleased that a United Nations official from
Germany is following in the footsteps of a United
Nations official from France.

I shall not present an analysis of the situation,
which was very clearly set out by the new Special
Representative. However, I would like to say that the
situation is marked by a dual paradox. The first is that,
while there has been considerable progress in
Afghanistan on all fronts, there continues to exist, as
previous speakers have underscored, a risk of
destabilization that cannot be discounted given an
upsurge in the level of insecurity. That has both
internal and external causes and is manifested in acts
of terrorism. But it is also fuelled by and rooted in
other disturbing trends: the presence of armed groups,
the drug-trafficking networks and, admittedly, to a
certain extent, the weakness of the administration. The
first paradox therefore entails not only the risk of
destabilization, but also a risk that international
assistance will be impeded.
As for the second paradox, I believe that a sign of
our collective success - and, in particular, the success
of the people and the Government of Afghanistan - is
that matters are now in the hands of representative,
freely elected and, I might add, capable Afghan
institutions. However, we must continue to shoulder
the responsibility of a presence in and assistance to
Afghanistan. As we all know, the merit and success of
the London Conference was the definition of a new
contract between the international community and
Afghanistan, adapted to the new context in which the
Afghans are now managing their affairs.

For my part, I would recall that a major focus of
the Afghanistan Compact is the development of the
country's institutions, including local institutions. That
is, we must strengthen the institutions and ensure
robust decentralization. That is an enormous challenge,
and we believe that the United Nations has a role to
play in this area.

That brings me to the Secretary-General's
proposals. I believe that, among the proposals before
us and the tasks that the Special Representative has set
for himself, there are a certain number that are of
particular importance for us.

The first is the coordination of international
efforts. I know that that has already been done. But,
given the new context, we must find formulas that
permit greater effectiveness in the coordination of
international efforts, and only the Special
Representative can do that. I am aware that, in that
respect he is working on the establishment of the
mechanism set out at the London Conference.

Secondly, I believe that the United Nations must
intensify the efforts whose added value has been
obvious in recent years. That is true, for example, with
the disarmament of illegal armed groups. It is true with
the preparation of future elections - an area in which
the Special Representative has unique experience.

Thirdly, my delegation agrees that the role of the
United Nations Mission must be extended to the
provinces. Clearly, conditions must permit that; it must
be done cautiously. But, at the same time, we believe
that it is an inevitable operational consequence of the
focus, set out in London, on institution-building,
including in the provinces.

Fourthly, I am almost embarrassed to recall this,
but I must: the regional dimension remains key. We
have all recently seen, on television, very disturbing
elements concerning the relations between Afghan
authorities and certain neighbouring countries. We
must all make a collective effort to help restore normal
cooperation. Here also, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan clearly has a particular role to
play to establish an atmosphere of trust between
Afghanistan and its neighbours.

Like previous speakers, I am obliged to say a few

words about our contribution at the national level. With
regard to civilian assistance, we have taken decisions
to significantly increase our commitments for the years
ahead. For example, we will devote €33 million to
rural development and to support for developing the
private sector. In particular, as I already had the
opportunity to say to my colleagues, we will increase
our security contribution. We will take over the
command of Kabul province within the International
Security Assistance Force for an eight-month period,
beginning this summer. At that time, we will increase
our contingent to more than 1,000 men. We will also
continue to step up our support for the training of the
Afghan National Army, particularly by deploying 100
officers in National Army training teams.

Indeed, within the framework of the new
Compact, the relationship between Afghanistan and the
international community should not involve only
international institutions; there must be a strong
presence of international institutions, but that does not
relieve us of our responsibilities at the national level. I
wish to assure members that France will be present to
meet the challenge.

