Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
organized this debate and for giving us the opportunity
to take up an issue that is both vast and important.

As is obvious from the statements that have
previously been made, the international community has
already accomplished a great deal with regard to justice
and the rule of law. We would like for the United
Nations, and especially the Security Council, to
continue to take an active interest in these questions,
and especially in the protection of civilians in armed
conflict and the role of women in peace and security.
As our colleague from New Zealand and others have
indicated, justice and the rule of law are integral parts
of the reconstruction of a country during the post-
conflict period.

(spoke in English)

In the light of the time pressures that face us,
however, I will focus my comments on two issues of
particular concern to the Government of Canada.

The Council has shown commendable leadership
in creating the ad hoc Tribunals for the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda. Those Tribunals, with their
successes and their ongoing challenges, have both
brought perpetrators to justice and strengthened
international resolve to end impunity. The Tribunals are
welcome advances on the status quo ante. But
experience has revealed the problems inherent in an ad
hoc approach, including uncertainty, selectivity, delay,
duplication and cost.

A standing institution such as the International
Criminal Court (ICC) can be both more efficient and
more effective in deterring and prosecuting mass
crimes. Of course, national investigations and
prosecutions are the preferred course of action. We
believe that the ICC will promote national action
through the principle of complementarity. States will
know that, if they do not act, the ICC will act; and they
will also know, conversely, that if they do act, the ICC
will not act. Certain States that may be unwilling or
unable to act will also know that the ICC stands ready
to help with extensive checks and balances to prevent
abuse.

We are aware of the very strong concerns in some
quarters about the theoretical possibility of the ICC's
investigation of nationals of certain non-State parties.
We do not think those concerns are warranted, but I
would like to set aside those differences for a moment
to focus on an area where I presume we all do agree.

In cases where the jurisdiction of the ICC is
clearly accepted by the State affected, and where that
State is unwilling or unable to respond to massive
crimes, we assume that the Security Council will
support the ICC in bringing justice for victims. The
situation in Ituri, the Democratic Republic of Congo,
may be one such situation.

Secondly, we are worried about the Special Court
for Sierra Leone. The Council will recall that the Court
is a hybrid United Nations-Sierra Leone tribunal and
that it is financed entirely by voluntary funding.
Despite the Court's successes over the past year, its
future is threatened by a severe budgetary shortfall.
The Court will be simply unable to complete its task
without receiving additional funds in the very near
future. Some States have pledged resources, and their
money is of course welcomed; but much more is in fact
needed. We therefore appeal to the international
community to contribute additional funds to the Special
Court without delay.

