Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are extremely concerned about Israel's
declared plan to build thousands of new settlement
units in East Jerusalem and the general exacerbation
of the situation in the occupied Palestinian territories,
where renewed flare ups of violence have been noted.
We regret that there have civilians casualties on both
sides.

We have repeatedly stressed that unilateral actions
damage the prospects for a peaceful settlement of
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and undermine the
universally recognized international legal foundations.
The Israeli construction of settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territories on the West Bank and in East
Jerusalem is illegal and cannot be considered by
anyone as prejudging the outcome of negotiations.
It must be frozen without any exceptions. It must be
noted that such a requirement is also set out in the road
map of the Middle East Quartet. All Security Council
members agree with that - even, as we understand
it, the delegation that three years ago vetoed the
anti-settlement resolution (see S/PV.6484), which,
however did not really contribute to restraining Israel's
settlement activities.

A dangerous turn of events has arisen as a result of
recent developments around the holy Al-Aqsa Mosque
in the Old City of Jerusalem. We urge all parties to
exercise maximum restraint and to refrain from any
unilateral actions aimed altering the status of holy
sites. This problem is one that impacts and touches the
feelings of millions of believers throughout the world,
and it must be resolved within the framework of the
cluster of issues related to the definitive status of the
Palestinian territories. It is one thing to remember that
resolution 478 (1980) states that measures aimed at
altering the make-up of Jerusalem are null and void and
must be rescinded. Attempts to impose a fait accompli
through facts on the ground, along with the imposition
of unilateral decisions, undermine the prospects for a
settlement on the basis of the two-State concept.
The occupation of Palestinian territories must
cease. The Quartet road map set out a time frame of
two years to achieve that, providing for a definitive
settlement of the conflict by 2005. We stand now on
the threshold of the year 2015. The situation on the
ground continues to deteriorate, and obstacles on that
path remain just as numerous. Attempts at discrete
negotiations on the sidelines with American mediations
repeatedly fail. Against that backdrop, the Security
Council could play a much more substantive role
in terms of assisting the sides and implementing its
previous decisions. There are a great many options in
this situation. We have the Security Council mission
to the Middle East, something that the Palestinian and
other Arab delegations asked us to do three years ago.
The same applies to the adoption of a draft resolution
that would spell out the parametres for a cessation of
the occupation and a timeline, proposed by Palestine.
We also hope that the Council will be able to break out
of the impasse. Its attempts to more actively involve
itself in resolving the Palestinian problem to a large
extent are very important for the region, but are blocked
as a result of the actions of a single delegation.

It behooves us to recognize that the pooling of
efforts goes beyond even the Middle East Quartet itself.
Therefore, we have long urged involvement in this work
by the League of Arab States. At the current stage, we
champion the continuation in Cairo of indirect contacts
between Israeli and Palestinian representatives, with
an active role being played by Egypt, to achieve
agreements on the long-term settlement of the situation
concerning Gaza. A necessary precondition for success
in achieving that is strengthening the authority of a
unified Palestinian leadership structure, one which
controls the whole territory of a Palestinian State,
including the Gaza Strip. We also hold out the hope
for a rapid resumption of full-fledged Palestinian-
Israeli negotiations on a final status for the Palestinian
territories.

We stand ready to work actively with the
protagonists, both in bilateral and multilateral formats,
to advance the cause of achieving a fair and long-term
peace in the region.

