Let me begin by thanking Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, for her briefing. The use of chemical weapons undermines the international norms against the production, use and stockpiling of such weapons, established under the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC). The alleged use of chemical weapons by a State party to the CWC, is a very serious matter. If proven, it would constitute a material breach of obligations under the Convention. South Africa remains committed to its international obligations as a State party to the CWC and as a member of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). In that regard, South Africa reiterates its long-standing position against the use of chemical weapons. No cause can ever justify the use of any weapon of mass destruction by any actor under any circumstances. In order to ensure that States Parties adhere to their obligations, it is imperative that they have full faith and confidence in the work and processes of the OPCW. As the only technically competent international authority in this area, external interference or manipulation of its work should not be tolerated. South Africa strongly supports multilateralism and the international rule of law, which includes the non-discriminatory and consistent application of the provisions of relevant multilateral instruments and the preservation of the international norms against weapons of mass destruction, including chemical weapons. As indicated on a number of occasions, South Africa will continue to work for the depoliticization of the relevant management and decision-making structures established under the Chemical Weapons Convention, and also towards ensuring that States parties are held accountable for any violation of their obligations on the basis of credible, impartial and incontrovertible evidence. States parties to the CWC should therefore unite in preserving the international norms against chemical weapons and the provisions of the Convention, along with its consistent and non-discriminatory implementation. We encourage the Government of Syria to cooperate with the OPCW in resolving all outstanding issues in order to enable the international community to have confidence in the peaceful nature of Syria's chemical activities. The only sustainable solution to the Syrian question remains the achievement of a political solution through an inclusive Syrian-led dialogue aimed at achieving a political transition reflective of the will of the Syrian people, with guaranteed protections for all groups within Syrian society. As long as there is no progress on the political front, the already precarious humanitarian catastrophe in Syria will further deteriorate and there will be further loss of life and destruction. All parties to the conflict owe it to the people of Syria to find an alternative to the ongoing conflict.
