Mr. Majoor: Thank you very much, Madam
President, for inviting me to participate in the
consultations in my capacity as the chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission's country-specific meetings
on Sierra Leone. My last statement in this capacity
before the Security Council dates back to 14 December
2007 (see S/PV.5804). On that occasion I briefed the
Council on the adoption of the Peacebuilding
Cooperation Framework by the Government of Sierra
Leone and the Peacebuilding Commission. Today I
would like to brief the Council on a number of key
developments since then, in particular the advocacy
and resource-mobilization efforts of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the findings of my recent visit to
Sierra Leone.

With the successful adoption of the Peacebuilding
Cooperation Framework, the engagement of the
Commission with Sierra Leone has focused on three
primary objectives: generating support for the
implementation of the commitments contained in the
Framework, broadening of the donor base in Sierra
Leone, and triggering new activities or up-scaling
existing activities in peacebuilding priority areas. To
that end, the Commission agreed on a work plan
outlining a focused resource-mobilization, outreach
and advocacy strategy. The Framework was transmitted
to all relevant stakeholders through a joint letter from
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sierra Leone and
the Minister for Development Cooperation of the
Netherlands.

As the chair of the Sierra Leone country-specific
meetings, I undertook ambassadorial-level bilateral
meetings and visited key capitals - Washington,
London, Brussels, Berlin and The Hague - to raise
awareness about the Framework and to garner political
and financial support for its implementation. The
Government of Sierra Leone did the same and
approached various bilateral, regional and multilateral
stakeholders for support for the implementation of the
Framework. Those advocacy and resource-mobilization
efforts will culminate in a high-level stakeholders
consultation on the implementation of the Framework
in New York on 19 May, in which, I hope, the members
of the Security Council will participate actively.

In preparation for that meeting and in order to
obtain first-hand information on the status of
Framework implementation, I visited Sierra Leone
from 21 to 25 April. The programme for the visit
included meetings with the President, the Vice-
President, other senior representatives of the
Government and the majority and minority leaders in
parliament, as well as with representatives of the
international community and civil society and the
private sector. The visit reinforced the commitment of
the stakeholders on the ground to the implementation
of the Framework and identified some concrete
challenges requiring immediate attention from the
Government of Sierra Leone and the international
community.

Over the last three months, the Government of
Sierra Leone, with the support of the United Nations
and other partners, has made significant progress in
implementing several commitments contained in the
Peacebuilding Framework. Impressive developments
have taken place in the areas of justice and security
sector reform, anti-corruption and energy sector
development and in the preparation for local council
elections. However, there are also a number of
challenges that must be addressed in the next few
months. I would like to highlight five challenges here
today.

First, the overall economic situation in Sierra
Leone remains fragile, especially in light of the rising
prices of rice and fuel. President Koroma has stressed
that from June 2008 agricultural development and food
security will become a new top priority of the
Government. The United Nations and other
international partners would need to support the
Government in ensuring that food security issues do
not destabilize the country, especially in the lead-up to
the local council elections. The Government has set up
a task force on food security.

On the issue of economic recovery, I would also
like to note that much of the international assistance to
the country continues to be provided through projects,
in the absence of sector-wide strategies, programmes
and funding mechanisms. The Peacebuilding
Commission's high-level stakeholders consultation on
Sierra Leone on 19 May will explore specific
opportunities for sector-wide support through multi-
donor funding mechanisms. In that context I would
underline the importance of continued budget support
by those donors in a position to provide that to the
Government of Sierra Leone.

Secondly, the preparations for the local council
elections scheduled for 5 July have been marked by
some inter-party and intra-party political tensions.
Sierra Leone remains divided along ethnic and
geographic lines, requiring intensified efforts for
national reconciliation and unity. Isolated episodes
have also been recorded, especially in the southern and
eastern parts of the country. Those developments
underline the importance of continued political
engagement by the Peacebuilding Commission with
the country. Also - and Mr. Titov referred to this as
well - the timely procurement by the United Nations
of supplies necessary for holding the local elections
needs urgent attention and action.
Thirdly, in the area of youth employment -
which is a critical peacebuilding priority area -
differences persist on how to best address this
challenge. Currently, there is no coherent overall
policy framework on youth employment and
empowerment, nor is there yet a clear focal point in the
Government of Sierra Leone addressing the issue, and
the international actors are divided in their approaches.
The Government has the intention to establish a
national youth commission to address the employment
and empowerment of young people. The United
Nations system, in particular the United Nations
Development Programme, is also - and necessarily -
in the process of reviewing its capacity and available
technical expertise in this area. The 19 May high-level
consultation represents a good opportunity to further
explore various proposals and to arrive at a common
approach.

Fourthly, although Security Council resolution
1793 (2007) mandated the United Nations Integrated
Office in Sierra Leone (UNIOSIL) to actively support
the work of the Peacebuilding Commission and the
implementation of the Framework, that has sometimes
been difficult, due to lack of capacity and a temporary
absence of leadership at the highest level. The post of
the Executive Representative of the Secretary-General
for UNIOSIL has not been filled since December of
2007. According to many stakeholders, that has limited
the ability of the United Nations to take its leadership
role and to be the main interlocutor with the
Government of Sierra Leone at this critical juncture.
The absence of an Executive Representative has
limited the capacity of the United Nations to convene
international partners in support of the Framework and,
more generally, its coordinating role on the ground.

The fifth challenge is the need for an informal
coordination forum on issues related to the
Peacebuilding Commission, which a number of
stakeholders in Sierra Leone have recognized. This
should build on the existing coordination mechanisms
such as the Development Partnership Committee and
the Peacebuilding Fund steering committee. Both the
Government of Sierra Leone and the international
donors on the ground are determined to improve and
strengthen coordination mechanisms in Freetown,
6
including on Peacebuilding Commission and
Peacebuilding Fund matters, also in informal settings.

The challenges outlined above require our
collective and timely action. I am confident that, given
the commitment and the leadership of the Government
of Sierra Leone and the continued support of the
international community, we will be able to address
them. In addition, the 19 May high-level stakeholders
consultation and the 19 June biannual review of the
Framework will offer opportunities for individual and
collective action in response to some of these
challenges.

In that regard, I would welcome continued
support from the Security Council in ensuring the
constructive engagement of all stakeholders in the
work of the Peacebuilding Commission, in particular
their active participation in the high-level consultation.
I would also like to request that, in considering the
mandate and the structure of the follow-on integrated
peacebuilding mission in Sierra Leone, the Security
Council ensure that the office has the dedicated staff
capacity to actively support the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission and the implementation of
the Peacebuilding Cooperation Framework. The
follow-on mission must also have adequate operational
capacity and logistical support to effectively carry out
its mandate.

Finally, the apparently imminent nomination of a
new Executive Representative of the Secretary-General
will ensure the necessary steering in the transition
process from UNIOSIL to the follow-on mission and
will provide the high-level political support needed in
the lead-up to the local council elections and in our
collective peacebuilding efforts in support of the
Government of Sierra Leone.

