Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): We would
first like to congratulate Chad on its assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month and to thank
the delegation of Chad for holding this important open
debate on combating terrorism and on the relationship
between terrorism and cross-border organized crime.
I would also like to thank Australia for its successful
conduct of the business of the Council last month. We
also congratulate the delegation of Chad on today's
adoption of resolution 2195 (2014).
Today's meeting focuses on the threatening
phenomenon of the mushrooming spread of terrorism,
which cooperates with organized criminal networks,
which themselves thrive in direct proportion to
increased terrorist activities. They are interdependent.
There has been a change in the nature of terrorism and
its connection to organized crime. Both are conducted
across borders, and both constitute threats to the security
and stability of peoples. Both undermine economic
and social development. Both help to deplete States'
resources. Both undermine democratic governance.
They have brought about many humanitarian crises and
made it difficult to deliver humanitarian assistance to
thousands of internally displaced persons and refugees.
Iraq is a case in point; we are a country that is suffering
deeply from the effects of those scourges.

The report of the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team of the Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities (S/2014/815) indicates that, according to media
reports, the Islamic State in Syria and the Levant (ISIL)
is the wealthiest terrorist organization in the world. Its
strength and funding are derived from criminal means
and activities that intimidate and terrorize people
through kidnapping, extortion, robbery, the smuggling
of valuable historical artefacts and trafficking in women
and children, as well as the control of oilfields in Iraq
and Syria. The smuggling of oil and Iraqi artefacts, along
with the trafficking in persons and human organs, are
ISIL's most important sources of funding. ISIS benefits
from existing smuggling networks in the region. Weak
border controls, owing to the Syrian crisis, and ISIL's
control of Iraqi cities and territories close to the Syrian
border have both contributed to establishing increasing
numbers of such organized criminal networks, which
move freely across the territories concerned and traffic
in archaeological artefacts. We urge States Members of
the United Nations to remain committed to complying
with resolution 1483 (2003), particularly paragraph 7,
which states that

"all Member States shall take appropriate steps to
facilitate the safe return to Iraqi institutions of Iraqi
cultural property and other items of archaeological,
historical, cultural, rare scientific, and religious
importance illegally removed".

The ISIL terrorist organization exploits areas under
its control in Iraq and Syria by looting, smuggling and
trading in valuable artefacts in order to fund its terrorist
activities. It relies on a network of Iraqi intermediaries,
both Arab and Kurdish, as well as networks in the
neighbouring countries of Syria, Lebanon and Turkey,
to transfer oil, gas and artefacts to countries in Europe
and other regions.

The terrorist organizations, intermediaries and
States that make up this complicated web and illegally
and illegitimately purchase the Iraqi property that I
just referred to are not bound under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations, and thus they threatens
international peace and security. The Security Council
should take decisive action to end such activities. It
should blacklist the companies and individuals that
deal with such partisan entities. There should be
accountability in accordance with international law and
international legal frameworks.

Implementation of resolutions 2170 (2014) and
2178 (2014) would limit the spread of terrorism
and transnational organized crime. Transnational
organized crime supports a lifeline of financial
resources for terrorist organizations. International
and regional cooperation and implementation of those
two resolutions are crucial, especially in the areas of
security, intelligence, border control and capacity-
building. Iraq is a glaring example of a country
suffering from trafficking of its cultural and religious
patrimony. We therefore support the adoption of a bold
and firm resolution under Chapter VII of the Charter.
We agree that there is a connection between terrorism
and transnational organized crime, particularly since
we suffer from both phenomena.

