Mr. Leao Monteiro (Cape Verde)(interpretation from French): May I extend our congratulations to you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We are confident that the Council will
benefit greatly from your recognized skill and experience.
We also thank your predecessor, Ambassador Elaraby, for
the excellent work and the dedication that he showed in
guiding the work of the Council last month.

As shown in the report of the Secretary-General issued
two weeks ago, there has been some movement over the
last two months in the process of implementing the agreed
framework to advance the final settlement of the Angolan
conflict. We welcome this and congratulate the parties on
their many achievements.

It is particularly gratifying to note that the military
situation is now calm, despite some isolated difficulties, and
that political dialogue is being consolidated, reinforcing a
climate of peace. The draft resolution before the Council
will go far towards crowning United Nations efforts in
conducting the peace process to a successful conclusion in
Angola. We hope that these recommendations will have a
positive fruitful impact upon all involved, including the
international community. This is necessary because the
positive developments so far have been insufficient and are
still slow. Persistent delays may unfortunately have
consequences that would go beyond a mere waste of time.
Precious though time may be, they could contribute to
eroding the most essential factor of the peace process,
namely mutual trust. Without going into details, we should
note that some failings brought to light in the Secretary-
General's report and in the draft resolution, are raising
questions that need to be promptly answered, lest serious
fears arise as to the future.

If, despite everything, the implementation of the
agreements is pursued and the light at the end of the
tunnel can be seen by the Angolans, we should still have
no illusions about any rapid achievement of happiness for
this fraternal people. The time can be considerably
shortened, however, if the international community does
provide persistent and consistent aid to the national efforts
of the Angolan people. Here too, time is of the essence.
We believe that inadequacies and slowness in the keeping
of promises must be quickly overcome. Support must
precede and catalyze the process, and must not come
forward a posteriori. Useful and beneficial social activity
that can reintegrate combatants into a new national fabric
is of an importance and urgency that must not ever be
underestimated.

We thank the Council for this opportunity to join in
the many expressions of solidarity towards the Angolan
people and to offer encouragement and support to the
parties in the peace process in that African country with
a View to its successful conclusion in the shortest possible
time. The tireless efforts of the Secretary-General, of his
Special Representative, of UNAVEM. III and of the three
observer countries are deeply deserving of praise. The
success of the mission will undoubtedly be realized
thanks to those efforts. We also state our support for the
extension of the mandate of UNAVEM. III, as
recommended by the Secretary-General.

