Mr. Holkeri: I first wish to join you,
Mr. President, in your expression of condolences to the
people ofIndia and Pakistan.

I am honoured to be able to participate in this
open debate of the Security Council on East Timor. I
would like to thank you in particular, Mr. President, for
your efforts in making it possible for me to address the
Council. My participation in this debate is part of the
efforts to foster closer cooperation and coordination
between the main United Nations bodies and actors.

I made a week-long visit to the South-East Asian
region from 10 to 17 January 2001, visiting Singapore,
East Timor and Indonesia. My visit was at the
invitation of the Singaporean and Indonesian
Governments and of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET). In East
Timor, I had a series of meetings in Dili, during which
I was briefed extensively about the activities of
UNTAET by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and by other officials of UNTAET. I
also met with local political leaders, including Xanana
Gusmao, as well as with the Force Commander of the
United Nations peacekeeping force and the
Commissioner of the civil police. Finally, I had the
opportunity to meet with the heads of United Nations
agencies and with representatives of the local
diplomatic community.

In addition to my programme in Dili, I paid a
half-day visit to Suai, the site of a massacre in 1999,
where I was given a briefing on the various aspects of
the operation of the district administration and of the
Sector West peacekeeping force. In Suai, I had
discussions with the members of the District Advisory
Council and other local representatives.

The detailed account of my visit, including a list
of all meetings, can be found on my Web site.

At the outset, I wish to pay tribute to the women
and men, civilian and military, who serve the United
Nations in East Timor, and to commend the leadership
of Mr. Vieira de Mello. The working conditions -
both in the physical and in the political sense - in the
Mission area are very difficult. It is crucial that the
Mission get all necessary support from Headquarters in
order to overcome these difficulties. In addition, close
cooperation between all United Nations agencies
working in this comprehensive United Nations mission
is vital for a successful outcome.

The main purpose of my visit to East Timor was
to observe, in the light of our recent discussions on the
Brahimi report, how a comprehensive and complex
peace operation works at the field level. The visit
allowed me to assess at first hand the situation in East
Timor.

In East Timor there is a clear gap between the
expectations of the local population and what may be
expected to be a painstakingly slow process of nation-
building. This is a gap common in post-conflict
situations. It exists both at the grass-roots level, as
echoed by the everyday concerns of the people I met in
Suai, and at the political level, as reflected by growing
calls among the local political leadership for moves
towards immediate independence.

In a country that has never in its recorded history
enjoyed self-determination and democratic rule, this
desire for an immediate solution is understandable. But
it should be tempered by a realization that building
democratic institutions is, even under the best of
circumstances, a complex and delicate task. However, I
am sure that the people in East Timor, who have
ultimate responsibility for the future of their country,
will remember this during the coming months, as the
political calendar brings them closer to independence.
Furthermore, I trust that the Council will bear this in
mind in its deliberations on the issue.

East Timorese society faces the fundamental
question ofjustice versus reconciliation. There seems
to be a genuine and commendable readiness among the
political leadership to move towards national
reconciliation, with maximum inclusiveness of former
pro-autonomy elements now it West Timor. At the
same time, there is a strong body of opinion, especially
at the grass-roots level, calling for justice as the
precondition for any true reconciliation. In my View,
these views are not mutually exclusive. The pursuit of
justice is fundamental to nation-building and to any
United Nations peace operation. Those responsible for
human rights violations and crimes against humanity
must be brought to justice. At the same time,
reconciliation at all levels should be actively promoted.

Despite the commendable progress achieved, East
Timor will need the assistance and presence of the
international community for a long time to come, both
to continue to maintain peace and to support
reconstruction and nation-building. We cannot afford to
exit East Timor prematurely or without a well-prepared
strategy. The Timorization of the local administration
is crucial and should be pursued vigorously. But it
cannot wholly substitute for international presence in
the near future.

United Nations peacekeeping is still needed to
ensure the safety and security of the population and the
overall stability of the country. It would be unrealistic
and even irresponsible to expect or plan a quick pull-
out. I also wish to emphasize that the operation must be
given the resources commensurate with its mandate
and that these resources must be provided from
assessed contributions. In this connection, I also wish
to express my support for the Council's request for
increased flexibility in the use of assessed resources
allocated to complex peacekeeping operations such as
UNTAET. I will once again draw the attention of the
relevant General Assembly bodies to this request.

The situation along the border areas between
West Timor and East Timor is of grave concern. Even
though I did not have the opportunity to visit West
Timor, it became clear to me that much more needs to
be done to disarm and disband the militias. This is
essential so as to allow the United Nations to return to
West Timor to deal with the refugee problem. It is also
indispensable in order to stop the violence against the
civilian population, including women.

I should point out that during my discussions in
Jakarta with the President, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and other high-level officials, I was given
assurances of their cooperation and determination to
facilitate refugee return. They expressed their hope that
the United Nations, especially the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),
would soon be able to return to West Timor. As for my
part, I underscored the need strictly to implement
Security Council resolution 1319 (2000). I also
expressed the hope that the relationship between
Indonesia and UNTAET would continue to be based on
the joint communique of 29 February 2000 and the
Memorandum of Understanding of April 2000. Again,
my interlocutors expressed their commitment to good-
neighbourly relations with East Timor. As with any
United Nations peace operation, the success of
UNTAET depends on the full cooperation of all parties.

In conclusion, I would like, in recognition of
UNTAET's performance, to stress the urgency of the
need to strengthen United Nations peace operations
through implementing the recommendations of the
Brahimi report. Moreover, I would like to stress one
important commitment that the Council made when
adopting its recommendations on the Brahimi report
that is relevant to our discussions today. The Council
undertook to ensure that the mandated tasks of
peacekeeping operations are appropriate to the
situation on the ground, including such factors as the
prospects for success, the potential need to protect
civilians and the possibility that some parties may seek
to undermine peace through violence.

