Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Given the hour, I shall make a brief statement. My
complete statement will be circulated in the Chamber
and posted on the website of the Spanish Mission.

I would like to begin my statement by congratulating
you, Madam President, on your presidency of the
Security Council, which you assumed just one month
after becoming a member of the Council. I also
commend the focus you have chosen for your presidency
in choosing the issues of the relationship between
the Council and regional bodies, the rule of law and
the protection of civilians. Indeed, today's debate on
the protection of civilians is good proof of that. My
delegation believes that protection of civilians should
be integrated in the Council's agenda, as today's debate
clearly demonstrates.

We welcome the adoption, this morning, of
presidential statement S/PRST/2014/3.

The Spanish delegation fully associates itself with
the statement made on behalf of the European Union.

The President's excellent concept note (S/2014/74, annex) calls on us to clearly focus in this debate on the
implementation of protection-of-civilians mandates,
and that is what I shall do.

In the view of the delegation of Spain, it is crucial
to have clear and achievable mandates in order
subsequently to carry out an objective analysis of the
situation on the ground. My delegation believes that
peacekeeping operations must have sufficient and
adequate resources, bearing in mind that such resources
may often have to be adapted in the face of unforeseen
situations.

In addition, we must be fully aware of people's
expectations occasioned by peacekeeping mandates. In
that context, I cannot fail to recall here in the Chamber
the situation taking place in South Sudan.

Moreover, we should decisively reinvigorate and
strengthen the follow-up and assessment mechanisms
of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. It is
crucial that we glean the lessons learned so that future
operations can be more effective.

In today's debate, my delegation would like to call
attention to three very special situations concerning the
protection of civilians: first, the use of cluster bombs
and explosives in urban centres; secondly, the severe
impact of conflicts on the elderly, women and persons
with disabilities, but especially children; and, thirdly,
attacks against medical facilities and personnel and
humanitarian personnel.

That brings me to the situation in Syria, which I
cannot fail to mention. I share much of what has been
said today in the Chamber about the conflict in Syria,
particularly when it comes to the Council assuming its
responsibility and taking the measures necessary to
ensure that presidential statement S/PRST/2013/15, of
2 October 2013, is truly implemented. 1 also take this
opportunity to call upon all parties to conflict to end
attacks directly targeting humanitarian personnel.

My country fully supports the recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/689). Nevertheless, I wish to highlight
two - first, the importance of unimpeded access to
humanitarian assistance. That is essential in ensuring
adequate protection for civilians. The second is the
need for genuine accountability. That is one of the true
pillars of an effective legal system, and the only way to
effectively fight against impunity.

Appropriate training for armed forces is another
fundamental aspect in the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. In that context, I would highlight that
Spain warmly welcomed the adoption of resolution 2106
(2013), which underscores the importance of training
regarding gender-based violence and the deployment of
protection advisers.

In our opinion, another important element of
this debate is mediation and preventive diplomacy.
Spain is an active member of the Group of Friends of
Mediation, with an important mediation initiative in
the Mediterranean region on which we would like to
collaborate with the Council.

In conclusion, Spain's experience in the protection
of civilians is based on our country's extensive
participation in peacekeeping operations. It has taught
us that we must place the protection of civilians at the
centre of our efforts in matters of peace and security
and make concerted progress on mechanisms and
concrete actions for the effective implementation of
such protection.

Rest assured that my country will continue to
actively participate in all efforts of the international
community to improve the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.

