Mr. Miliband (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes this debate and the prospect of a
new Security Council resolution on this matter, the first
since 2004. The violence, intensity and grievances of
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict have global
ramifications. Their resolution is the proper business of
the Council.

The Security Council does not lack consistent
policy on the Middle East. Although our resolutions
have been sporadic, they have gained significance and
status from their scarcity. Resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003) ring out as the
rallying points for peace. It is right that, after a year of
intensive activity, we take stock, add a new number to
the line of previous resolutions and, most important,
resolve to use 2009 with determination to make
progress within the framework of the draft resolution
now before the Council.

The starting point for the United Kingdom is the
concerns of the people of Israel and the occupied
Palestinian territories. They are tired and fearful -
tired of conflict but also of false promises; fearful of
each other but more fearful of the future. One year
after Annapolis, the bilateral discussions have been
detailed and serious, and the Syrian track has been
launched. But cynicism and pessimism have grown.
Rockets from Gaza land further into Israel. The Israeli
restrictions, in particular on food and medicine, cause
acute suffering in Gaza.

There are plenty of people ready to say that there
can be no two-State solution. I applaud the
determination of Secretary Rice not to join them. The
Annapolis process has not delivered a Palestinian State
but the absence of an Annapolis process would have
left us much worse off. Secretary Rice has spoken
plainly and powerfully of the stakes, the vision and the
necessary steps. Now we have to follow her and help
the parties to take these steps.

The draft resolution before us is significant for its
espousal of a comprehensive, just and lasting peace. It
emphasizes the importance of the Arab Peace
Initiative. The United Kingdom welcomes this
emphasis. The responsibility for a resolution of the
Middle East conflict does not fall just to Israel and the
Palestinians, though they must lead the process. It falls
to every State in the region, for the only sustainable
peace must be a 23-State solution, not just a two-State
solution: 22 Arab States and Israel living side by side
in security. We welcome the recent reiteration by the
Arab League on behalf of its member States that the
Arab world wants formally to end the conflict and
establish normal relations with Israel. We believe that
the outlines of that peace are clear and can command
consensus: recognition and respect from Arab States
for Israel and a Palestinian State based on 1967 borders
with a just settlement for refugees and Jerusalem the
capital of both States, Israel and Palestine.

There will need to be brave decisions on all sides,
above all by the bilateral partners in the negotiations.
For Israel, this means fulfilling its Road Map
commitments, notably on illegal settlement, and
improving conditions for Palestinians on the West
Bank and in Gaza. For Palestinians, this means finding
a way to reunite around negotiations and non-violence.
And those who would torpedo the process must know
that we are determined not to allow them to succeed.
Hamas must end its rocket attacks on Israeli civilians,
abandon violence and demonstrate their commitment to
the political process by moving towards the Quartet
principles.

The United Kingdom welcomes operative
paragraph 4 of the draft resolution on the development
of Palestinian capacity and the development of the
institutions of a Palestinian State. We believe this is
vital. The political process and the situation on the
ground are inseparable. They need to be mutually
reinforcing. Better security forces for the Palestinians
does not just mean better lives for them - it means
more security for Israel. We applaud the efforts of
President Abbas and Prime Minister F ayad to make this
a reality and we are determined to play our part in
supporting them.

Our role here today is not just to adopt a
resolution; it is to challenge all those with an interest in

the region to join us in 2009. The perils of inertia are
clear; inactivity and confrontation are the recruiting
sergeants for extremism from Mogadishu to
Manchester. The gains of effective action are the
opposite: the reversal of four decades in which the
Middle East has been destabilized and the world made
less safe. That is why the United Kingdom pledges to
do all in its power not just to support this draft
resolution, but to progress its implementation.

