Mr. D'Awol (South Sudan): Allow me, at the
outset, to thank you and your country, Mr. President,
for the good work done during your presidency of the
Security Council this month. I wish you success in
discharging your responsibilities. Similarly, we would
like to extend our profound gratitude to His Excellency
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and his Special
Representative, Ms. Hilde Johnson, for their continued
support and commitment to the Government and the
people of the South Sudan through the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS). We also welcome
this opportunity to share our views with the members
of the Security Council and to thank the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2013/140). We also thank all
the States Members of the United Nations, including
members of the Council, for the contribution of troops,
civilian personnel and equipment to the Mission.

As the Secretary-General underlines in his report,
South Sudan has continued to build its national
institutions and to make meaningful progress on several
fronts, despite experiencing a considerable number of
internal and external challenges.

The extension of the mandate of the National
Constitutional Review Commission will allow for
meaningful participation by the largest number of our
citizens in the constitutional review process. That is a
critical ingredient for effective peacebuilding. We would
also like to inform the Council that the Government
has begun the necessary planning for the 2014 census
and the 2015 elections. We welcome the logistical and
technical support that UNMISS will provide for those
endeavours.

The Secretary-General also makes reference in his
report to President Kiir's recent decisions with regard
to the leadership of the Sudan People's Liberation Army
(SPLA) and the South Sudan National Police Service.
Those changes are part of our Government's efforts to
engage in serious security sector reform. We welcome

the continued support of the international community
for that process.

The Government maintains its policy of seeking
peace with rebel militias, as a result of which many
groups have over the years been successfully absorbed
into the SPLA. The Government still faces a threat
from a group loyal to David Yau Yau, who, as noted in
the Secretary-General's report, has attacked civilians
in Jonglei, as well as SPLA positions. An amnesty offer
nonetheless remains on the table. Through its support to
Murle leaders for their engagement with Murle youths,
the Government has invested tremendous energy in
pursuit of peace in Jonglei. We would like to express
our appreciation to UNMISS for its extensive support
for those efforts. There are no easy or immediate
solutions in Jonglei. Disarmament alone will not resolve
the underlying issues of traditional perceptions and
practices among the various traditional communities in
those areas.

We recognize that an inclusive, long-term
national reconciliation process is sorely needed,
and the Government has committed resources to
it. The Government welcomes and encourages
the continued support of the humanitarian and
non-governmental-organization community, both for
peacebuilding efforts and for new initiatives aimed at
addressing those underlying issues.

With regard to the regrettable incidents of
inter-communal violence in Western Bahr el-Ghazal
state, the Government of the Republic of South
Sudan is completely committed to a process of full
accountability. As the Secretary-General notes in his
report, steps have been taken to ensure due process for
all detainees. UNMISS has also been granted access to
detainees in Wau county.

My Government once again expresses its
profound regret for the shooting down of an UNMISS
helicopter in December 2012. President Kiir reiterates
the Government's apologies and condolences to the
Government and people of the Russian Federation, as
well as to the families of those killed. We expect to
complete our investigations into the matter in a timely
fashion, and will fully cooperate with the United
Nations Secretariat Board of Inquiry. The Republic of
South Sudan remains fully committed to guaranteeing
the safety, security and unrestricted freedom of
movement of United Nations personnel in the country.

We welcome the proposal of UNMISS to engage in the
sensitization and training of all security organs on the
UNMISS mandate, the status of forces agreement, the
privileges and immunities of United Nations personnel
and South Sudan's obligations under international law.

It is no secret that the relations between South
Sudan and the Sudan have not been satisfactory, despite
the fact that the Government of South Sudan has shown
flexibility in the post-independence negotiations in
Addis Ababa. On 12 March, however, the two countries
adopted the implementation matrix in Addis Ababa
under the auspices of the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel for Sudan and South Sudan. The
matrix contains a clear road map for the implementation
of the previous agreements signed. Importantly, a
measurable breakthrough with regard to security
arrangements has been taken place. The two parties
agreed to withdraw their troops unconditionally to
their respective sides of the Safe Demilitarized Border
Zone. The President ofthe Republic of South Sudan has
already issued an order instructing the army's general
chief of staff to immediately draw troops away from the
buffer zone. Indeed, as I speak now, our armed forces
have started moving to the designated areas away from
the buffer zone.

On the issue of the determination of the final status
of Abyei and the consideration of establishing the
Abyei Referendum Commission, the two parties agreed
that the matter should be dealt with at the level of the

Presidents of the two countries, South Sudan and the
Sudan. It is our sincere hope that the long-suffering
people of Abyei will at last have their problems resolved
and promptly be able to exercise their right of self-
determination.

As the world's youngest nation, South Sudan
still faces many challenges. The first 18 months of
independence have not always been easy. Developing
the structures of Government, establishing State
authority and enforcing the rule of law is not the work of
one year or even of five years; it is a long-term process.
Since the independence of the Republic of South Sudan
from the Sudan, our nascent State has confronted
enormous tasks of nation-building and development.
We concur with the Secretary-General's calls that urge
our development partners to provide the prerequisite
peacebuilding support for the efforts being undertaken
to stabilize the conflict-prone tri-state area of Unity,
Warrap and Lakes states. Significant investment by
other parties and continued support by UNMISS are
required in assisting the Government to project its
authority and to develop its capacity to govern those
volatile areas.

