Mr. Harrison (United Kingdom): May I begin by
saying that my delegation is very grateful to the
Governments of Germany and of Switzerland for their
leadership and their initiative in taking forward the
Bonn-Berlin and the Interlaken processes, and we are
also grateful for what the Swedish Government is
doing in taking forward the process from now on.

We think that these processes have enabled
experts and others, working in a very wide forum, to
produce some very valuable results. We particularly
welcome the guidance that has been produced on best
practice in drafting United Nations sanctions
resolutions and on drafting legislation to implement
sanctions at the national level. What we will need to do
now is to build on the valuable work that has already
been done.

We believe that the focus of that work should
now shift to national implementation and enforcement
of sanctions. In this context, we think that there may be
useful lessons to be learned from the Group of Eight's
Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering
(FATF). This Task Force has produced guidelines on
the actions that countries should take to trace funds and
to scrutinize clients, and other ways to counteract
money laundering.

We wonder whether perhaps the next step in the
Interlaken process could be to draw up similar
guidelines for enforcing financial sanctions and for
benchmarking the steps that countries have taken to
enforce sanctions against those guidelines.

The next logical step after that is the enforcement
of sanctions. We agree that one way to improve
enforcement would be to improve the United Nations
capacity by creating a small, permanent monitoring
unit, complemented by a roster of experts and by the
Secretariat, which would be charged by the Security
Council with monitoring and reporting on the
effectiveness of sanctions regimes. My delegation
looks forward to early progress on this idea.

Finally, and speaking on behalf of the Chairman
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, I can say that my
delegation will study what positive lessons can be
drawn from the Bonn-Berlin and the Interlaken
processes for the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee established under resolution 1373 (2001).
In particular f and this was a point that Assistant
Secretary-General Fall made in our first discussion last
Monday - there may be some relevance for the
establishment of models for legislative and executive
action for States to follow when they identify gaps in
the structures they have established to implement
resolution 1373 (2001).

