Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (interpretation from Arabic):
At the outset, allow me, Mr. President, to express to you
and to the other members of the Security Council our
deepest gratitude and appreciation for the heartfelt
condolences and sympathy extended to us in our loss -
a loss not only for Bahrain but for all the Arab and
Islamic nations - of His Highness Shaikh Isa Bin
Salman Al-Khalifa, may he rest in peace. We pray to God
Almighty to give us strength and comfort in our loss and
pray also that the deceased will be accepted into God's
compassionate embrace.

Under his rule, Bahrain moved into an age of
modernization, but, according to his wishes, never at the
expense of our social mores and traditions. He thus
maintained a wise balance, preserving the country's
characteristics while keeping up with the pace of
modernization.

Despite the improvement in the security situation in
Sierra Leone, the country continues to face difficult and
complex challenges. Many threats lie ahead, and therefore
the international community must continue to provide
logistical support to the group of military observers.
In this context, my delegation wishes to pay tribute
to the donor countries, especially the United States of
America, the United Kingdom, the Netherlands and
Canada, for the assistance they have provided, and
continue to provide, to the military observers. My
delegation wishes to express its support for all the efforts
being made, in particular by member States of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), aimed at finding a peaceful solution to the
conflict and achieve security and stability in Sierra Leone.

We also attach great importance to the role of the
United Nations in this respect, particularly in terms of

 

humanitarian emergency assistance, and support the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to extend the
mandate of the United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra
Leone. We will thus vote in favour of the draft resolution
that is before the Council today.

