Mr. Owada (Japan): At the outset, my delegation
wishes to offer to Mr. Irakli Menagarishvili, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Georgia, a cordial welcome to this
meeting of the Security Council.

My delegation wishes to express, in the name of the
Government of Japan, its appreciation to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Liviu Bota,
and to all the men and women working for the United
Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) for their
efforts to promote the peace process in Abkhazia, Georgia.
My delegation also commends the various efforts to assist
in the peace process made by the Russian Federation in its
capacity as facilitator, by the group of Friends of the
Secretary-General and by the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe.

Despite those many valuable efforts, the current state
of the peace process is far from satisfactory. My delegation
is especially concerned about the resumption of hostilities
in May of this year, which again created a large number of
refugees. My delegation calls upon both the Georgian side
and the Abkhaz side to take a constructive attitude and
demonstrate the political will to rapidly promote the peace
process and facilitate the return of refugees. In this regard,
my delegation stresses the importance of the meeting of the
parties held in Geneva last week. Although at that meeting
the parties were unable to achieve a breakthrough, my
delegation hopes that both parties will remain actively
engaged in this negotiation machinery and that a
comprehensive political settlement will be reached.

In his recent report, the Secretary-General has
condemned the attacks against the peacekeepers of the
United Nations and of the Commonwealth of Independent
States in Georgia. Japan, as a country which recently
suffered a serious loss in the tragic death of a political
officer of Japanese nationality working in the United
Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan, fully shares and
strongly supports this position of the Secretary-General and
unequivocally condemns such attacks. Japan wishes to
stress emphatically that the security and safety of
international personnel, including humanitarian aid
workers on the ground, is a problem of utmost urgency
that requires the most serious attention of this Council
and of the United Nations as a whole. If parties wish the
presence of such international personnel to be maintained,
the parties themselves must first of all take all necessary
measures in order to ensure their security and safety. So
far as the security of UNOMIG is concerned, my
delegation welcomes the intention of the Secretary-
General to keep this issue under constant review. The
establishment of a self-protection unit, which has
previously been suggested by the Secretary-General, is
most welcome in this respect and should be realized with
the consent of both parties as soon as possible.

The situation surrounding UN OMIG is fraught with
numerous difficulties. Nevertheless, my delegation fully
shares the View of the Secretary-General that the presence
of UNOMIG continues to be a stabilizing factor in the
area. It is providing support for the peace process, which,
it is hoped, will engender confidence for the future and a
sense of security among the local population, especially
in the Gali district, to which most of the refugees must
return once peace is restored. My delegation will
therefore vote in favour of the draft resolution now before
us, which purports to extend the mandate of UNOMIG
for another six months.

