Ms. Morrison Gonzalez (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Francois Lounceny
Fall for his very detailed briefing.

We commend the progress achieved with respect
to the holding of legislative elections in Chad, the
peaceful transfer of power in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the signing of the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic. We hope that the pending political transitions
will be carried out peacefully. We congratulate all
actors that made possible the rapprochement between
the parties in these conflicts. We hope that these
peaceful processes will have a multiplier effect in
the search for resolutions to the various conflicts in
the region. In that regard, we urge all stakeholders to
honour their commitments to the full implementation
of the agreements, with a view to bringing peace to
their countries and the region.

The political situation in Central Africa nevertheless
continues to be characterized by instability and tensions
caused by electoral processes, as well as by security
and human rights issues. We regret that the security
situation in some parts of the region remains precarious
due to the activity of armed groups, ethnic conflicts
and intercommunal violence between pastoralists and
farmers. Boko Haram continues to bring instability,
pain and death to civilians and members of the military
in Chad and in Cameroon.

The Dominican Republic condemns the violation
of human rights, kidnappings and attacks against
civilians perpetrated by the Lord's Resistance Army,
and welcomes the decision of the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union to maintain the Regional
Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of the
Lord's Resistance Army. We cannot imagine stability
and development in the Central African region until
the armed groups are deprived of their means of
subsistence. A multidimensional stability plan must
be supplemented with national and regional plans
in the short and long terms. Those initiatives must
enjoy the support of the international community and
should be focused on an open process of dialogue and
a strengthened regional cooperation strategy within the
framework ofthe Peacebuilding Fund and the resources
that are crucial to disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes. Those activities should
be aimed at enabling combatants who are willing
to abandon arms to find a means of subsistence and
have an opportunity to be reintegrated into society,
while protecting civilians and pursuing sustainable
development in the region.

It is necessary to expand the presence of the State
and to provide the assistance necessary for the improved
training and equipping of the security forces. In that
regard, we welcome the signing of the memorandum
of understanding between the United Nations Regional
Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa and the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA) with the secretariat of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) to
jointly support the implementation of the Central
African Convention for the Control of Small Arms and
Light Weapons, their Ammunitions and Components.
We also welcome the willingness of States to cooperate
in efforts to regulate transhumance at the subregional
level, in particular through the elaboration of a
regulatory framework on pastoralism under ECCAS.

The effects of climate change, which have taken
the form of more frequent and larger-scale droughts
and floods, are a challenge for Central Africa and
a continued source of great concern. Coupled with
food insecurity caused largely by adverse weather
conditions and the loss of crops and livestock, they
cause high levels of hunger and malnutrition, thereby
subjecting millions of people to extreme hardship. That
is why we believe that UNOCA could play a key role in
building regional climate resilience aimed at mitigating
the adverse effects of climate change. Those effects,
together with the humanitarian consequences of many
years of conflict and the prevalence of armed groups
and their terrible impact on the civilian population,
have undermined institutional, social and economic
development in Central Africa. Given the alarming
number of people whose sole means of survival is
humanitarian assistance, we must restate the need to
guarantee safe, timely and unhindered access to much-
needed assistance to the most vulnerable populations,
including millions of internally displaced persons, in
particular women.

Withregardto Cameroon andregional organizations,
mediation and dialogue between the parties, including
civil society, should be intensified in order to build the
confidence and the political will necessary to build a
sustainable peace. The active participation of such
organizations as the African Union is a vital tool for
reaching an inclusive peaceful solution to the conflict.
Their leadership is essential for generating trust and
the willingness of the parties to engage in a substantial
dialogue for peace.

In conclusion, we commend the work done by
Mr. Francois Fall in his efforts aimed at promoting a
peaceful solution to the crisis in the region through
political dialogue, as well as UNOCA and the Economic
Community of Central African States for adopting a
joint action plan for 2019. We urge all Central African
countries to expand the democratic space and take
concrete steps to improve the processes of dialogue with
the various political and civil society actors, with a view
to addressing the common problems that will allow a
greater use of their human, social and natural resources
and providing greater opportunities for socioeconomic
development to each country in the region.

