Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We are pleased to take part in this debate under your
presidency, Sir, on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. This issue is of extreme importance not only
for the Security Council but for the United Nations
system as a whole. My delegation welcomes the
valuable report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/277),
as well as the briefing by Mr. John Holmes, Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, containing
information and concrete proposals to enhance the
United Nations collective capacity to protect civilians
in armed conflict, a vulnerable group that merits our
immediate attention.

While noting the conclusions and key proposals
identified in the report of the Secretary-General, my
delegation wishes to comment on their eventual
application and importance. Ten years have passed
since the first debate in the Security Council on the
protection of civilians. While there is no doubt as to
the importance of all the reports, resolutions and
actions of the past decade, the report of the Secretary-
General reveals that the situation confronting civilians
in current conflicts is depressingly similar to that
which prevailed in 1999. Civilians still account for the
vast majority of casualties and continue to be targeted
and subject to indiscriminate attacks and other
violations by parties to conflicts. Any progress will
therefore remain relative if it is not accompanied by
substantial improvement in the protection of civilians
on the ground.

With regard to the five core challenges outlined
by the Secretary-General, given the need for
determined action within and beyond the United
Nations to enhance the protection of civilians, we wish
to be a part of the proposed culture of protection. In
that regard, we offer our firm support for the
reinvigorated commitment noted by the Secretary-
General and wish to make the following specific
observations.

First, regarding compliance with international
law, our efforts should not be limited to ensuring
respect for existing norms, but should also be aimed at
strengthening them. The inability of the parties to a
conflict to respect international law applicable to
armed conflict exposes civilians to the harshest effects
of hostilities.

Secondly, in order to promote compliance by
non-State armed groups, we must engage in outreach
aimed at sensitizing such groups, as well as civil
society, to the importance of maintaining the strictest
respect for civilians, international humanitarian law,
human rights and refugees.

Thirdly, enhanced protection of civilians will
depend on a broad scope of action by the Security
Council. We support a multidimensional approach,
addressing all aspects of the protection of civilians
through thematic and country-specific and group-
specific considerations. The effectiveness of protection
will also depend on other external factors, some of
which we have the power to affect, such as the
allocation of adequate resources, the number of
personnel on the ground, and the logistical and tactical
capacity-building.

Fourthly, access to humanitarian assistance, while
not recognized as an obligation under international law,
is undoubtedly a fundamental prerequisite for
humanitarian action. We are concerned by the reversals
experienced in this area in recent years. We welcome
the annex to the report of the Secretary-General, which
contains an analysis of the restrictions to access, and
hope that its recommendations will soon become
concrete measures.

Fifthly, with regard to accountability for
violations, we must remember that the Security
Council is not a legal, but a political body, entrusted
with the maintenance of international peace and
security. Therefore, we must turn to international
cooperation and mutual assistance in criminal matters,
as the report proposes, through measures directed at
States.

To conclude, in view of what I have said, allow
me to mention one subject that cannot be omitted from
our debate today and is of particular relevance in
meeting the previously mentioned challenges. Our
delegation is among those that consider paragraphs 138
and 139 of the 2005 World Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1) to be one of the most
important achievements of that meeting. The
development of the doctrine of humanitarian law in the
past years marks, in our opinion, an important step
forward. The primary responsibility to protect civilians
falls on States, and they, in turn, are obliged to seek
international help when they cannot provide it. In the
coming years, both the General Assembly and the
Security Council will have a very prominent role to
play to make that concept operational; this offers an
opportunity to continue improving the United Nations
assistance framework.

We must collectively ensure that populations at
risk have access to the best possible protection at all
times. The Security Council and the entire international
community will be judged by their capacity to protect
the most vulnerable. That is a challenge to which we
must immediately respond.

