Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Like my other colleagues, I too would like to
welcome Prime Minister Aznar of Spain to the Council
Chamber. I also wish to thank him for his important
statement. We are confident that, as chair of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), Spain and
Ambassador Arias will further implement the
Committee's mandate under resolution 1373 (2001)
and will ensure the continuity of the work already done
by building upon the traditions established by the
United Kingdom during Ambassador Greenstock's
chairmanship of the Committee.

Time has proven the strategic validity of building
a global counter-terrorism system, specifically under
the auspices of the United Nations. Global anti-terrorist
solidarity is growing, and the coalition of States
committed to it is expanding. The global community is
employing new methods to counter the current threat of
terrorism.

The Security Council has played the primary role
in safeguarding international peace and security from
terrorism. The Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
was established in the wake of the tragic events of
11 September 2001, and it remains the leading element
in the global anti-terrorist architecture. The powerful
policy and legal impetus provided by resolution 1373
(2001), as well as ministerial statements and Council
decisions on countering terrorism, are producing
tangible results. A majority of countries are actively
enhancing their anti-terrorist legislation. There are
more than 250 accession to the universal anti-terrorist
conventions since the adoption of resolution 1373
(2001). Bilateral cooperation is growing. It is
becoming increasingly difficult for terrorists to find a
safe haven in which to hide from justice.
The mobilization of regional efforts is an
important new element in the global anti-terrorist
system. It is heartening to note not only the
strengthening of existing structures at this level, but
also the establishment of new ones. There was
deservedly broad approval of the special CTC meeting
of 6 March, in which representatives of regional and
subregional organizations and of the Commonwealth of
Independent States and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization took part. We welcome the idea of
holding another such meeting in October this year, to
be convened by the Organization of American States.
Such interaction with regional organizations must
become as regular and substantive as possible so that
the CTC can increasingly rely on the growing practical
engagement of regional organizations in carrying out
specific counter-terrorism tasks. An equally important
role in countering terrorism is also to be played by a
number of United Nations bodies, under the overall
leadership of the Security Council.

Terrorism is a mortal danger. It can be dealt with
only by finding ways to end other destructive
manifestations of our time - transnational organized
crime, drug trafficking, the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and other social and economic ills.
Such a holistic and systemic approach, based on the
principles of universality and multilateralism, will be
advanced by General Assembly resolution 57/145 -
adopted as a result of a Russian initiative - on
responding to global threats and challenges.

With regard to the international legal basis for
countering terrorism, we must express our
disappointment at the stagnation in work on the draft
comprehensive convention against terrorism and the
draft convention against nuclear terrorism. The lack of
progress on those issues stems from political, not legal,
causes, and will only play into the hands of terrorists.
We call upon all States to demonstrate the will and
wisdom to reach agreement on those two draft
conventions as soon as possible. For its part, Russia
will continue to do everything it can in order to
maintain and strengthen international cooperation to
counter terrorism.

