Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the Lithuanian initiative to convene this
meeting on cooperation between the United Nations
and the European Union in maintaining international
peace and security. China welcomes Foreign Minister
Linkevicius presiding over today's meeting. We thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and Baroness Ashton,
High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy of the European Union, for their presence. We
have listened attentively to the briefings of Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon and Baroness Ashton.

The United Nations lies at the core of international
collective security. The Security Council bears the
primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security. Meanwhile, regional and subregional
organizations are playing an increasingly significant
role in maintaining peace and security and promoting
the economic development of their respective regions,
which represents a useful addition to United Nations
efforts.

At present, global and regional challenges are
steadily growing, and nations' security interests are
interlocked. Further strengthening the cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations is conducive to the promotion
of multilateralism and to the consolidation and
strengthening of the international collective security
machinery.

China supports the efforts of the United Nations and
the Security Council, in accordance with the provisions
of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
to deepen their cooperation with the European Union
and other regional and subregional organizations.
We believe that the cooperation between the United
Nations and such organizations needs to be focused on
the maintenance of the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and the norms governing
international relations. Attention needs to be paid to
coordination and harmonization so as to give full play
to each others comparative advantages in a joint effort
to maintain international and regional peace, security,
stability and development.

In recent years, the European Union has maintained
collaboration with the United Nations and the Security
Council, having participated and played a significant
role in the settlement of regional hotspot issues, such as
the Iranian nuclear programme, as well as situations in
the Middle East, Somalia, Mali and the Central African
Republic. In his briefing earlier this morning, Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon mentioned the situation in the
Central African Republic. Recently, the humanitarian
and security situation in the Central African Republic
has been steadily deteriorating. In particular, violent
conflict between different religious groups continues
to grow. China finds that deeply troubling and hopes
that the international community will scale up its
efforts and take action as soon as possible to help the
new transitional Government of the Central African
Republic to stop the violence and restore normal social
order.

China encourages and supports the European
Union in its continued efforts to play a positive and
constructive role in maintaining international and
regional peace and security. It is our hope that, in its
cooperation with the United Nations and the Security
Council, the European Union will adhere to the basic
principles set out in the Charter of the United Nations,
such as sovereign equality and the peaceful settlement
of disputes, and remain committed to the settlement of
various regional hotspot issues through good offices,
mediation and other peaceful means. China also hopes
that the European Union will make use of its own
resources and comparative advantage to provide the
affected countries with development aid to build up
their own development capacity, thereby rooting out the
sources of conflict.

As pointed out by President Xi Jinping, China,
as the largest developing country, and the European
Union, as the largest union of developed States, are
two major forces for maintaining world peace. As the
two major economies, China and the European Union
are two major markets for the promotion of common
development, and as important birthplaces of Eastern
and Western cultures, respectively. China and the
European Union represent the two major civilizations
that promote human progress.

Towards the end of 2013, the sixteenth China-EU
summit was successfully convened in Beijing and issued
the China-EU 2020 Strategic Agenda for Cooperation,
charting the course for future China-EU cooperation.

China is ready to work with the European Union
to scale up its efforts to implement the consensus
reached by the leaders of the two sides to steadily
deepen the strategic mutual trust between China and
the EU, strengthen cooperation in the United Nations
and other multilateral forums, and jointly make further
contributions to the promotion of world peace, stability
and prosperity.

