The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Argentina,
Algeria, Armenia, Australia, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh,
Belarus, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia, Georgia,
Germany, Guatemala, Hungary, India, Indonesia, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kenya,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mexico, Morocco, Myanmar, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Paraguay, the Philippines, Portugal, Qatar,
the Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Singapore, Slovenia,
South Africa, Spain, Switzerland, Tunisia, Turkey,
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Viet Nam and
Zambia to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Her Excellency
Ms. Alya Ahmed Saif Al-Thani, Permanent
Representative of Qatar, on behalf of the President of
the General Assembly; Her Excellency Ms. Inga Rhonda
King, President of the Economic and Social Council;
and Judge Abdulqawi Ahmed Yusuf, President of the
International Court of Justice.

Judge Yusuf is joining today's meeting via video-
teleconference from The Hague.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
to participate in this meeting: His Excellency Mr. Joao
Vale de Almeida, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations; Her Excellency Ms. Fatima
Kyari Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations; and Mr. Robert Mardini,
Head of Delegation and Permanent Observer of the
International Committee of the Red Cross to the United
Nations.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
participate in this meeting, in accordance with the
provisional rules of procedure and the previous practice
in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/982, which contains the text of
a letter dated 1 November 2018 from the Permanent
Representative ofChina to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper
on the item under consideration.

I wish to warmly welcome His Excellency
Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, to whom I now
give the floor.

