Ms. Theofili (Greece): I would first like to thank
the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba, for her excellent
work. I would also like to express my appreciation
to the French presidency of the Security Council for
organizing today's open debate. France has contributed
significantly to the international community's efforts
to prevent the recruitment and use of children in
armed conflict, especially through the Principles and
Commitments adopted at the International Conferences
held in Paris in February 2007 and 2017.

Children, who are unable to protect themselves,
are the main victims of armed conflict. Besides the
terrible threats to a life of freedom and dignity that they
face, children in conflict-affected areas are completely
vulnerable to unlawful recruitment or use by armed
forces or groups, a practice that merits the full attention
and immediate response ofthe international community
if any real progress is to be achieved in that direction. It
is imperative that all States immediately halt weapons
sales and exports to parties that have been identified on
the Secretary-General's list of shame. At the same time,
we need to focus on reintegrating child soldiers through
programmes that provide the necessary psychosocial
support to them and their communities.

In the same context, the numerous violations of
international norms and standards for the protection of
children, as indicated in the Secretary-General's latest
report (S/2017/821), include attacks on educational
facilities. Following the recent Arria Formula meeting
of the Security Council on attacks on schools, and
listening to the testimony of Joy Bishara, one of the
schoolgirls abducted in Nigeria back in 2014, we feel
we must do everything in our power to address the root
causes of such attacks and bring to justice all who are
depriving children of the right to an education and a
normal and fulfilling life.

Violations of international human law - in other
words, atrocities against children - must not be
tolerated in any form. For that reason, Greece, having
already endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration, aligns
itself with the joint statement of States that have also
endorsed it, underlining that the Declaration is a very
important initiative that needs our full support. Having
also participated at both the Safe Schools Conferences
in Oslo in May 2015 and Buenos Aires in March 2017,
we call on all States to sign and implement the Safe
Schools Declaration with a view to protecting schools
in conflict-affected areas around the world from
violence in any form. Children are the future of our
societies. We must all do everything in our power to
protect that future.

