Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, my delegation would like
to thank Mr. Matias Bertino Matondo, African Union
Special Representative and Head of the African Union
Office in the Central African Republic, Mr. Koen
Vervaeke, Managing Director for Africa ofthe European
External Action Service, and Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for the
information they have provided on the current situation
in the Central African Republic. I am also glad to see
the Permanent Representative of the Central African
Republic, Ambassador Kpongo, here today.

Equatorial Guinea is very pleased that during
the period covered by the Secretary-General's report
(S/2019/498) not only did the signatories commit to
the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic, signed on 6 February
in Bangui between the Government of the Central
African Republic and 14 armed groups, but progress
was also made in implementing the agreement. An
inclusive Government was created in which leaders of
armed groups were appointed to key advisory positions
that are crucial to the presidency, the Prime Minister's
Cabinet and prefectures and sub-prefectures.

In Equatorial Guinea we feel the problems that are
affecting our Central African brothers as if they were
our own, which is why we particularly welcome the
recent positive and promising advances in the country
following the signing of the agreement. Equatorial
Guinea is ready to assist the Central African Republic
during this process. While there are reasons to be
optimistic that this agreement will be different, it is still
important to consolidate it with secure governmental
measures that focus on peace, security, justice,
economic recovery, good governance, social cohesion
and humanitarian action.

Where our brother people of Central Africa are
concerned, one thing is certain, that justice is an
essential component of the peace process. That is why
we commend the Government, which, with the support
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA), has promoted the creation of 26 peace and
reconciliation committees in various cities around the
country, such as Bangassou, Bouar and Bria, to name only
a few. Their objective is to promote peace processes at
the local level and to support the national reconciliation
campaign, as provided for in the agreement, since it is
important to ensure that the population is a legitimate
actor in the full implementation of the peace process
rather than continuing to be merely a witness to it.

We welcome the efforts of the Economic Community
of Central African States (ECCAS) to improve bilateral
relations between the Central African Republic and its
neighbours, including my own country, and we call on
all the countries of the region to further strengthen and
support their brother country by helping it to launch
commercial strategies that will promote its development
in various areas. However, we regret that advances
such as these are being diminished by the arbitrary
violence being inflicted by some armed groups,
such as the incident of 21 May in which combatants
from Retour, reclamation et rehabilitation killed 42
people, mostly civilians, in several villages near the
city of Paoua. Equatorial Guinea firmly condemns
those attacks and hopes that the perpetrators will not
go unpunished. We therefore commend the launch
of inclusive consultations on establishing the truth,
justice, reparations and reconciliation commission, in
accordance with the requests of the Bangui Forum on
National Reconciliation. The humanitarian situation
remains fragile, owing to general insecurity, a weak
Government presence and poor infrastructure, which
make it difficult for civilians and humanitarian workers
to carry out their normal activities.

Before I conclude, I would like to express Equatorial
Guinea's congratulations to President Faustin Touadera
of the Central African Republic on his leadership
and firm commitment to the peace agreement. We
continue to urge the armed groups to comply with
their commitments. Lastly, we welcome the important
contribution made by the African Union and ECCAS
as the guarantors of the political agreement, as well
as the support of MINUSCA and the other United
Nations agencies and other international actors that are
contributing to the Central African process.

