Mr. Bennouna (Morocco) (spoke in French):
Allow me at the outset to say how grateful we are to
you, Madam, and to Ambassador Greenstock for
having organized this workshop - this laboratory of
ideas, which has been quite lively. I am a little
uncomfortable speaking just after Ambassador Kishore
Mahbubani, who is well known for being thought-
provoking in the Council. In any case, it is an excellent
and very useful idea.

I would also to pay tribute to the United Kingdom
for the role that it has played in the restoration of peace
in the region. I do not want to speak about leadership,
because that could have other connotations, but it is a
very positive role, and one that is greatly appreciated
by the international community.

I would like finally to welcome the Foreign
Minister of Sierra Leone and our former colleague, the
Foreign Minister of Guinea, our friend Francois Fall. I
told him before he left that he would often come back
to New York, because, in the end, ministers for foreign
affairs prefer coming to New York and doing the work
themselves here rather than sending instructions from
their capitals. In any case, it is always a pleasure to see
him here.

One may wonder why Morocco is here. First of
all, it is because we are African, and we have always
been very interested and involved in the history and
future of Africa. But we are here also because we are
particularly involved in West Africa. Traditionally,
Morocco has always had very close economic and
cultural relations with West Africa. But we are also a
cultural and geographic link between Europe and North
Africa, including the Arab world, as well as between
Europe and West Africa. This is a very important role,
including from a religious point of view.

The second reason, it has turned out - and
perhaps this is the result of the first reason - is that
the heads of State of the three fraternal countries of the
Mano River region, who are all aware of the regional
dimension of the problem of the maintenance of peace
and security in their respective countries, naturally
turned towards Morocco, and in particular towards His
Majesty King Mohammed VI, because they felt that it
was with that head of State and that country that they
could advance their regional relationships. Naturally,
we welcomed this, because, as I said, we have always
had a special relationship with West Africa.

We have to add that Secretary-General Kofi
Annan strongly encouraged the regional dimension and
the convening of the first Rabat summit. Along with
my colleagues, including Francois Fall, I recall that the
Secretary-General greatly helped and encouraged that
initiative and urged that the Rabat summit should take
place, and that we begin the dialogue. The dialogue
began, not easily, on 27 February, in Rabat, at the
invitation of His Majesty King Mohammed VI. As the
King said to the Secretary-General, "We have broken
the ice."

Well, we did break the ice, and it is very
important to break the ice. This means that the three
heads of State spoke with each other. They lunched.
They dined. They had exchanges. But I believe that
they went beyond breaking the ice. They acknowledged
the 1986 treaty on non-aggression and cooperation.
They acknowledged that they should engage in
dialogue to settle their differences. They also
recognized that they had to revitalize all the security
protocols. They recognized that they had to undertake a
certain number of concrete measures. And they placed
these on the table. They asked their Foreign Ministers
to follow up. I believe that this was recalled this
morning, and I need not come back to it now. As noted,
there were four ministerial follow-up meetings.

We succeeded in some areas, and we failed in
others. For example, the "caravan" project to restore
confidence was a good idea. It has not yet materialized,
but it is still on the table; we have not given it up. I
think we have also done things to make the borders
more secure. We have improved the possibility of
border patrols at some point.

Now, I think, we have reached a stage where we
have to go further. As Mr. Prendergast recalled, we are
preparing a second summit. It has been delayed for
both logistical and substantive reasons. The King of
Morocco does not want a second summit that would be
purely a matter of protocol. Let me say it clearly: he
wants the second summit to be productive, where we
would take a decisive step towards a settlement and
towards bringing the countries closer together in order
to keep the peace.

As we said, diplomats are working today to put in
place the elements of fresh progress in peacekeeping,
before we convene the summit. That proves that we
take this very seriously and that this will not simply be
a meeting for a photo opportunity or to appear on
television. Even though some people find it rather
pleasant to appear on television, that is not enough.

The other substantive matter on which I can
speak briefly is the recent developments in Liberia,
about which Mr. Prendergast and other participants
have spoken. These events are a matter of concern for
all who wish for peace in the region, and who are
working for peace in the region. Of course, these
developments are worrisome; they have once again
destabilized the borders, if only because of the flow of
refugees into Guinea and Sierra Leone. This once again
has created or exacerbated a pocket ofinstability.

Everything that has been done has been
complementary. The United Nations, of course, must
probably strengthen its presence in Liberia in a way
that it decides; it may require additional resources. The
representative of the subregional organization has just
spoken here: the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) has a very important
complementary role to play in bringing together the
stakeholders in the conflict in Liberia. I think that this
relates to the Rabat summit. The effort to convene a
meeting of the stakeholders, centred perhaps on
President Wade, to begin the process of restoring civil
peace in Liberia, is also linked a Rabat summit.

There should be an agreement on some principles
of good governance, especially for Liberia. Otherwise,
there will be no peace in Liberia, and there will be no
peace anywhere in the Mano River region. I believe
that this is the main issue on which the international
community should probably exert pressure. We in
Morocco believe that if we let things progress on their
own, nothing will happen from within Liberia, and that
pressure has to come from outside. That is the role of
the international community, and it is also the role of
ECOWAS in coordination with the United Nations.

With all modesty, His Majesty the King of
Morocco is always ready to help his African brothers in
Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea, to bring them closer
together, to restore peace in that region, which is very
dear to us. This peace, which must be established by
the leaders, should benefit the generations ofthe region
who have already greatly suffered as a result of war.
And the young people of this region have probably
experienced the most appalling suffering in the world.

Perhaps this is a model on which we should
reflect. Perhaps this is not the place to do so, but we
have to draw certain conclusions about the need for
complementarity among all the efforts that I have
mentioned.

