Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I wish to take this
opportunity to congratulate India on its presidency of
the Council for the month of November. I wish also
to align Malaysia with the statement just delivered by
the Permanent Representative of Iran on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

Malaysia is of the view that this debate is timely
indeed, as it allows all Member States the opportunity
to address an issue that has plagued most of them. In
that connection, I wish to reiterate Malaysia's support
for the Council's efforts in addressing piracy as a global
threat. In this debate, my delegation would like to
highlight some of our concerns on the threat of piracy,
in particular in the context of the situation off the Coast
of Somalia and the Gulf of Guinea.

On the problem of piracy off the coast of Somalia,
Malaysia welcomes the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2012/783). We are heartened to note that there has
been a sharp decline in the number of pirate attacks and
hijackings so far this year as compared with 2011. The
sharp reduction in the number of attacks and hijackings
confirms that the international community is certainly
on the right path in our common goal to effectively
overcome that threat.

Nevertheless, we could not agree more that piracy
continues to pose a serious threat not only to seafarers,
but also to international trade. In that regard, Malaysia
believes that we need to be cautious so as not to be
complacent in the success that we have enjoyed in
combating piracy. We must continue to have mechanisms
for naval enforcement, an improved implementation
of the International Maritime Organization guidance
and industry-developed best management practices
for Protection against Somali-based Piracy, better
application of self-protection measures, the prosecution
of suspected pirates and the imprisonment of convicted
pirates.

For its part, Malaysia has been involved in the
global effort to combat piracy off the coast of Somalia.
Since 3 September 2008, the Royal Malaysian Navy has
sent five warships to the Gulf of Aden, in stages, to
provide a precautionary escort to Malaysian ships while
traversing the Gulf of Aden. In the course of escorting
Malaysian ships, the Royal Malaysian Navy has also
assisted foreign flagged ships by providing safe passage
for seafarers and those vessels. In that connection, we
commend the role of the Contact Group on Piracy off
the Coast of Somalia in facilitating discussions and
the coordination of actions among Member States
and organizations to suppress piracy off the coast of
Somalia. As a trading nation, Malaysia will continue to
follow the work of the Contact Group closely.

As members may be aware, two ships
belonging to the Malaysian International Shipping
Corporation - the MT Bunga Melati Dua and the MT
Bunga Melati Lima - one Malaysian-flagged tugboat
and one Malaysian-flagged cargo ship, the MVAlbedo,
were captured by pirates off the coast of Somalia
and in the Gulf of Aden from 2008 to 2010. The MV
Albedo is still under the control of the pirates. Malaysia
also arrested six Somali pirates who tried to hijack a
Malaysian vessel in the Gulf of Aden in January 2011.
Those six pirates have been dealt with within the
framework of the Malaysian legal system.

Malaysia has been actively ensuring that our
maritime zones, which include the Straits of Malacca,
are safe and secure for international navigation. The
relevant authorities and enforcement agencies, which
include the Royal Malaysian Navy, the Malaysian
Maritime Enforcement Agency, the Royal Malaysian
Police and the Marine Department, are constantly
undertaking enforcement of the relevant regulations,
direct protection and surveillance of Malaysia's
maritime areas.

It is evident that the overall improvement of
maritime security in the Straits of Malacca is a
reflection of close cooperation among the littoral
States. A comprehensive arrangement for maritime
security in the Straits of Malacca was achieved through
the Malacca Straits Coordinated Patrols in 2004 among
Malaysia, Indonesia and Singapore. In that connection,
I am happy to inform the Council that the incidents of
armed robbery in the Straits of Malacca have dropped
drastically, from a high of nine in 2011 to only one so
far in 2012.

Malaysia will continue to support the call for
strengthened international efforts against piracy in the
concerned areas. It is our hope to see a more vigilant
and forward-looking mechanism in place to address
such security threats. Having said that, we believe
that regional and international cooperation should not
impinge on the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
affected States in any aspect. Malaysia also welcomes
capacity-building cooperation, as well as the exchange
and sharing of information and intelligence on the issue
of piracy. For Malaysia, such regional cooperation
takes place in the frameworks of the Malacca Straits
Sea Patrol and the Eyes in the Sky air patrols.

I would like to assure the Council that Malaysia
will continue to support any effort to ensure the safety
and security of international maritime waters. We look
forward to enhanced efforts to be called for by the
Council in strengthening the international mechanism
to combat piracy at the regional and global levels.

Before concluding, I also wish to call on the
Security Council to act on the urgent issue of Israel's
attack on Gaza and to take appropriate action as
soon as possible. In that regard, I wish to inform the
Council that the Malaysian Parliament is going to
adopt a motion to condemn the attacks and to request
the Security Council to intervene in order to prevent
further civilian casualties and provide necessary
humanitarian assistance. The motion will be submitted
to the President of the Council and the Secretary-
General in due course.

