Mr. Kpatamango (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me the opportunity to address
the Security Council in the place of my Ambassador.

On behalf of the Government and the people of
the Central African Republic, I would like to express
my sincere thanks and renewed gratitude for the
Council's sense of its responsibility in unanimously
adopting resolution 2387 (2017), renewing the mandate
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA).

As the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of MINUSCA stated during his
briefing on 6 November (S/PV.8084), the situation
in the Central African Republic remains worrying.
The increasing areas of tension and worsening armed
violence over much of the Central African Republic's
immense territory highlight the limits of MINUSCA's
force. Adopting the resolution is a wise decision that
should give the Mission and its Head more impetus
to accomplish their difficult task in a continually
evolving situation.

As the Secretary-General outlines in his report
on the situation in the Central African Republic
(S/2017/865), our country is facing huge challenges.
Only by strengthening MINUSCA's operational
capacities will the force be able to deploy effectively.
In that regard, I would like to take this opportunity
to once again thank the Secretary-General who, in
his customary wisdom, has called for an increase in
MINUSCA's military personnel that the members of the
Council have all agreed to. The recent surge in violence
against civilians and United Nations troops has been
a salutory reminder that only a policy of long-term
development can break the current cycle of fragility.

Finally, I would like to thank all the delegations
that contributed to drafting today's resolution, which
will bring a new lease of life not only for MINUSCA
and its Head but also for the Government and the people
of the Central African Republic. Above all, I commend
the Council for its commitment. The Central African
Republic deserves a better future, and it will have it,
thanks to the Security Council. As we seek to rebuild
and restore peace with the help of our partners, the
Council's support is more essential than ever.

The meeting rose at 10.50 am.
