Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): Sri Lanka commends
you, Madam President, for having convened this
timely debate. We have been following with deep
concern the events that have been unfolding in Iraq
and neighbouring countries throughout the past two
months and the atrocities being perpetrated by the
so-called Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
and associated groups with a supply chain of foreign
fighters.

Sri Lanka deplores in the strongest terms the
terrorist acts committed by such groups. including
against unarmed civilians. The shocking acts ofviolence
unleashed on people and the destruction of monuments,
places of religious worship and sites of archaeological
and cultural value are deeply disturbing. While our
thoughts and sympathies go out to the many thousands
who continue to suffer as a result of the ruthless acts of
terror, we emphasize the need to take appropriate steps
to protect civilians, minorities, civilian facilities and
places of worship and of historic significance.

As the Council is aware, Sri Lanka suffered for
almost three decades at the hands of separatist terrorists,
described by the Federal Bureau of Investigation as
the world's most ruthless. The people of Sri Lanka
have therefore experienced first-hand the devastating
impact of terrorism on societies, communities and the
very foundations of a nation. Our own institutions,
long cherished, including our democracy, were under
serious threat. The Sri Lankan Government has time
and time again unequivocally stressed the need for the
world to take action against terrorist acts committed by
non-State actors that have little or no respect for human
life. Terrorism in all its forms ad manifestations must
be condemned.

It is evident that ISIL is now taking on a transnational
form and poses a threat to the wider region. Sri Lanka
would like to reiterate that it is in the best interests of
the international community to ensure that no space be
allowed for any terrorist groups or their sympathizers
to raise funds and logistical support of any form
anywhere. We express our solidarity with the people of
the countries of the region in such difficult times and
stand ready to support timely measures to help victims
on the ground.

