Mr. Sonoura (Japan) (spoke in Japanese; interpretation provided by the delegation): At the outset,
I would like to express my sincere appreciation for this
opportunity to set forth the position of the Government
of Japan at this very important meeting. Today, the
international community once again forms a united
front to counter the threat of the Islamic State of Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL), while also supporting the efforts
made by the Iraqi Government.

ISIL has unilaterally declared the establishment
of its self-proclaimed State across existing national
borders. The brutalities of ISIL pose a serious threat
not only to the Middle East region but also to the very
order of the international community. We fully share
the sense of urgency that an immediate and united
response is necessary. The Government of Japan firmly
denounces any form of terrorism and strongly supports
the fight against terrorism conducted by the Iraqi
Government and other States.

In order to effectively counter the threat of ISIL,
it is imperative first and foremost to achieve political
stability in Iraq. In that regard, I should like to welcome
the recent establishment of the inclusive Government in
Iraq. I hope that efforts towards national reconciliation
and unity will make further strides under the able
leadership of Prime Minister Al-Abadi.

Japan has long contributed to the nation-building
of Iraq in various areas, such as energy, infrastructure
and health. We will continue to support the new Iraqi
Government through such efforts. Although it is
difficult for Japan to make a military contribution,
we will actively engage in humanitarian assistance
and counter-terrorism measures. As part of our effort
to address the challenges posed by ISIL, I would like
to announce that Japan will provide $25.5 million in
assistance, in addition to the $7.8 million that we have
already disbursed.

Providing emergency humanitarian assistance will
not be sufficient when we try to prevent extremists
from taking root in the region and to ensure the region's
lasting stability. It is important to firmly assist Iraq and
other neighbouring countries so that they can exercise
effective governance, which needs to be underpinned
by a stable economy and society. Efforts to strengthen
governance take various forms, such as capacity-
building in the public sector and the development of
a domestic legal system. Those matters are exactly
what Japan is good at. As a responsible member of the
international community, Japan will continue to make
active contributions to this great cause.

It is essential to counter-terrorism off the flow
of funds, weapons and personnel to the terrorist
organizations in order to degrade their strength when
we strive to effectively address the threat. The issue of
foreign terrorist fighters is a serious challenge that could
potentially spread the threat of terrorism worldwide.
Japan will steadily implement relevant Security Council
resolutions, in close coordination with other countries.
We will also take various measures in other areas, such
as countering violent extremism, countering terrorism
financing and exercising appropriate immigration
control, and we will pursue our strenuous efforts to
contain the threat of terrorism.

Let me conclude by saying that, at the end of today's
meeting, we hope that the commitments and efforts of
individual countries will be united in support of the
new Iraqi Government, and that we will be able to send
the strongest possible message to the world that we are
absolutely determined to roll back ISIL.

