The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now proceed to the election of five
members of the International Court of Justice, in
accordance with Article 13 of the Statute of the
International Court of Justice, to fill the five seats
which will become vacant on 6 February 2003 on the
expiry of the terms of office of the following Judges:
Mr. Shi Jiuyong (China), Mr. Shigeru Oda (Japan),
Mr. Geza Herczegh (Hungary), Mr. Carl-August
Fleischhauer (Germany), and Mr. Abdul G. Koroma
(Sierra Leone).

The list of candidates nominated by national
groups is contained in document S/2002/926, which
reflects all the information concerning notifications
received regarding such nominations in order to
facilitate the election of all representatives.

I should like to draw the attention of the Council
to the fact that the Secretary-General informed me this
morning that Mr. Kamba and Mr. Manase of Zimbabwe
have decided that they no longer wish to be considered
as candidates for election to the International Court of
Justice. Their names, therefore, do not appear on the
ballot papers.

The Security Council also has before it a
memorandum by the Secretary-General, contained in
document S/2002/925, describing the present
composition of the Court and setting out the procedure
to be followed in the conduct of the election.

I should like to remind the Council that, under
Article 10, paragraph 1, of the Statute of the
International Court of Justice,

"Those candidates who obtain an absolute
majority of votes in the General Assembly and in
the Security Council shall be considered as
elected."

The required majority in the Security Council is eight
votes.

If more than five candidates obtain the required
majority, according to the procedure which has been
followed in the past and which is set forth in paragraph
14 of the Secretary-General's memorandum, a new
vote will be held on all the candidates.

This rule will also apply to any subsequent
ballots, if the number of candidates obtaining the
absolute majority is greater than the number of
vacancies remaining. If, on the other hand, in the first
ballot the number of candidates obtaining the absolute
majority is less than five, the Council will proceed to a
second ballot on the remaining vacancies, and balloting
will continue in the same manner until five of the
candidates have obtained the required majority of
votes.

The voting will be held by secret ballot. When we
proceed to the vote, members of the Council will
receive a ballot paper containing the names of all the
candidates. No withdrawal will be accepted once the
ballot papers have been distributed. However, it would
be possible to withdraw between ballots. Members of
the Council will be requested to place an "X" in the
boxes next to the names of the candidates for whom
they wish to vote. Only those candidates whose names
appear on the ballot paper are eligible for election.

I should like to remind members of paragraph 11
of the Secretary-General's memorandum (S/2002/925),
which specifies that "Each elector may vote for not
more than five candidates on the first ballot". Any
ballot paper containing votes for more than five names
will be considered invalid. When five candidates have
obtained the required majority of votes, I shall
communicate the result of the election to the President
of the General Assembly, and I shall request the
Council to remain in session, pending the receipt from
the President of the General Assembly of the result of
the voting in the Assembly.

The Council will now proceed to draw lots to
select two delegations to serve as tellers.

>l<>l<>l<

The President (spoke in French): The names of
the delegations of Ireland and Mexico have been
drawn. I request them to appoint one of their members
to serve as tellers.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Barcroft
(Ireland) and Mr. Asencio (Mexico) acted as
tellers.


The President (spoke in French): May I take it
that the Council is now ready to proceed with the
election of five members for the International Court of
Justice?

It is so decided.
I request the Conference Officer to distribute the
ballot papers.

Members of the Council should place an "X" in
the boxes next to the names of the five candidates for
whom they wish to vote.

*>l<*


The President (spoke in French): I take it that all
the members of the Council have now voted, and I ask
the Conference Officer to collect the ballot papers.

>l<*>l<


The President (spoke in French): All the ballot
papers have been collected. I should like to remind the
Council that, as we agreed during our consultations, the
ballots will not be counted until it has been verified
that the ballot papers in the General Assembly have
been collected. The Council will remain in session
pending the receipt of that information.

>l<>l<>l<


The President (spoke in French): I have now
been informed that the ballot papers have been
collected in the General Assembly.

The counting of the ballots in the Security
Council will now begin. The tellers will now count the
ballots. As agreed in our consultations, there will be
two independent countings of the ballots, one by each
teller.

The Council will remain in session.

>l<>l<>l<


The President (spoke in French): The result of
the voting is as follows:

Number of ballot papers: 15
Number of invalid ballots: 0
Number of valid ballots: 15
Required majority: 8
Number of votes obtained:
Mr. Hisashi Owada 15
Mr. Shi Jiuyong 15
Mr. Abdul G. Koroma 13
Mr. Peter Tomka 12
Mr. Bruno Simma 9
Mr. Hans Corell 7
Mr. John Dugard 3
Mr. Vojin Dimitrij evie 1

Accordingly, the following candidates have
obtained the required majority of votes in the Security
Council: Mr. Hisashi Owada, Mr. Shi Jiuyong,
Mr. Abdul G. Koroma, Mr. Peter Tomka and Mr. Bruno
Simma.

I shall communicate the result of the vote to the
President of the General Assembly in writing.

I request the Council to remain in session while
we wait for the President of the General Assembly to
inform the Council of the result of the voting in the
Assembly.

>l<>l=>l<


The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the members of the Council that I have just
received from the President of the General Assembly
the following letter:

"I have the honour to inform you that, at the
35th plenary meeting of the General Assembly,
held today for the purpose of electing five
members of the International Court of Justice, the
following candidates obtained an absolute
majority of votes in the General Assembly:
Mr. Abdul G. Koroma, Mr. Hisashi Owada, Mr.
Shi Jiuyong, Mr. Bruno Simma and Mr. Peter
Tomka."

As both the Security Council and the General
Assembly have agreed on the same candidates, the
distinguished jurists Mr. Abdul G. Koroma, Mr. Hisashi
Owada, Mr. Shi Jiuyong, Mr. Bruno Simma and Mr. Peter
Tomka have been elected as members of the International
Court of Justice for a term of office of nine years,
beginning on 6 February 2003.

I should like to congratulate them and wish them
every success in the high office to which they have
been elected.

I should also like to thank the tellers for their
assistance.

The Security Council has thus concluded its
business for this meeting.

The meeting rose at 11.40 am.

