Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my deep thanks to the
Secretary-General for being present with us at today's
important meeting and for his comprehensive briefing.

We meet this afternoon to discuss the repercussions
of the Rohingya crisis in Myanmar, which, with all its
religious, ethnic, political and historic complications,
is a humanitarian emergency that has imposed itself
on the international community. During this crisis,
hundreds of thousands of innocent people have been
killed, persecuted and ethnically cleansed. Almost
half a million people since 25 August have been forced
to flee and become displaced from their towns and
villages out of fear for their lives. Regional security in
the crisis area has been dangerously threatened, which
has created tensions and imposed a heavy burden on the
neighbouring countries, in particular Bangladesh.

Egypt believes that the international position on the
crisis must be based on a set of principles that remain
vital in the way we view the crisis, its root causes
and the means to contain it. These principles include
the following.

First, the issue is humanitarian at heart and is
based on the principle of the acceptance of others and
on coexistence among religions without discrimination
based on race or religion. Any belief that the forced
displacement of a part of Myanmar's population to
neighbouring countries could end the crisis is absurd.
It does not take into account any of the legal or
humanitarian principles that govern our modern world,
as reflected in the Charter of the United Nations and the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.

Secondly, hate speech, violence or the threat of the
use of violence cannot be accepted by any party. We
reject them totally, whether they are perpetrated by a
party or a Government institution that bears the main
responsibility for protecting individuals and ending
violence by all possible means.

Thirdly, the message we are sending to the
Government of Myanmar today is a message from the
entire international community, urging it to shoulder its
responsibility and take immediate actions to end violence
and allow for humanitarian access. It must embark on a
dialogue with the relevant United Nations entities and
neighbouring countries so as to ensure the return of
refugees and displaced persons to their place of origin
within Myanmar in line with the recommendations of
Kofi Annan's Advisory Committee.
Fourthly, our unconditional solidarity with the
Rohingyas as human beings who have the right to live
their lives in safety and security does not mean in any
way that we support any organization or militia that
chooses terrorism under the pretext of protecting the
residents of Rakhine state. However, at the same time,
we must ask ourselves what choice we are leaving to
those innocent people other than to take up arms to
defend themselves.

The SecurityCouncilmustshoulderits responsibility
with respect to this dangerous crisis. Egypt has taken
urgent international steps in that regard. Moreover, the
Grand Imam of Al-Azhar Al-Sharif has condemned the
crimes against the Rohingyas and called for the need
to end the humanitarian tragedy as soon as possible.
Those are the principles that we must adopt in order to
address the crisis and its negative repercussions. Today,
in view of the current situation, Egypt stresses the need
to act along the following lines.

First, it is urgent for the Myanmar Government
to shoulder its moral and humanitarian responsibility
and to swiftly address the crisis by ending all military
actions by the Myanmar Army and by allowing
refugees to return to their territories within Rakhine
state, having fled the ongoing exacerbated crisis.

Secondly, through United Nations mechanisms,
especially those providing relief and refugee protection,
we must provide assistance to those affected on the
borders between Myanmar and Bangladesh. In that
regard, I would like to commend the people and the
Government of Bangladesh for their patience and
their efforts to overcome the repercussions of this
humanitarian crisis.

Thirdly, we once again call upon the Government
of Myanmar to positively interact with the international
community, to allow for a high-level United Nations
delegation to visit Rakhine state and to consider ways
to provide field humanitarian support. It must work
to provide the Muslim Rohingyas with the right to a
nationality and the right to return to their territories
and their homes.

F ourthly, we express to the Government of Myanmar
our readiness to host any national dialogue in an official
governmental or non-governmental framework such as
the umbrella of the Muslim Council of Elders under the
leadership of the Grand Imam of Al-Azhar, which is the
forum that already hosted a dialogue among Myanmar
youth from different sects in January.

In conclusion, I stress the need for an implementable
United Nations road map and the need to speak in one
unified voice so as to make the necessary impact. The
refugee tragedy could go on for a long time, until calm
returns and a fair and final settlement is explicitly
reached that provides the right to citizenship to the
Rohingyas. Until that moment, we call upon the Council
and the international community to take swift action to
offer help and alleviate the suffering of those refugees
and to protect their souls and their humanitarian rights.

