President Vueic': I am profoundly grateful to the
Council for convening this meeting at such short notice.
We think that it was very important and very right to
do so, owing to the terribly difficult situation on the
ground that has led to us face more and more difficulties
in the area of Kosovo and Metohija. I have to say that
I am very worried, concerned about and even a bit
afraid of and for the future not only of my people and
our country, Serbia, but of the entire region. I listened
very carefully to Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and
I would like to say something different than what he
said, although I agree with many of the things that he
expressed.

First of all, I would like to tell the Council that
Serbia has invested huge efforts and great endeavour
in maintaining the peace, tranquillity and stability
of the entire region of the Western Balkans. We have
done everything that we could have done, refraining
from responding to different types of provocation
from Pristina. We have always been very restrained
and we do not accept the kind of phrase that has
become customary when two sides are called upon to
do something or not to do something. Serbia has done
almost everything in its power to implement everything
that has been agreed so far.

As the Council members knows, we signed the First
Agreement of Principles Governing the Normalization
of Relations between Belgrade and Pristina in April
2013. Serbia has fulfilled all of its obligations under
the Agreement. We made a lot of concessions and it
was very difficult for our people to accept them, but
we signed it and we have fulfilled it. On the other
hand, the only obligation that had to be delivered by
Pristina - the only one, and the first 6 of the 15 items
in the Brussels Agreement are all related to that one
obligation - was the formation of a Serb community. It
does not matter whether it is called a community or an
association. That was its one and only obligation, and
yet today, almost 2,070 days later, Kosovo has failed to
put that into action and has no intention to do so in the
future.

Serbia, on the other hand, has fulfilled everything,
including the police arrangement, the justice and
judiciary arrangement, the telecoms arrangement and
participation in municipal elections under the Kosovo
law - absolutely everything that we signed. But that
was not enough. We warned Pristina and the European
Union (EU), because we have an ongoing negotiating
process under the auspices of the EU, as the Council is
aware. We proposed that we should resolve all of our
problems within the framework of our dialogue process.
We asked that they not force us into difficult situations
that would create a terrible atmosphere between us
when Kosovo wishes to join different international
organizations, which we consider to be a provocation,
because Serbia is the only sovereign and independent
State under resolution 1244 (1999), unless something
has changed that we have not been informed about.

We begged Kosovo not to apply for full-fledged
membership of INTERPOL, UNESCO, the European
Network of Transmission System Operators for
Electricity and other organizations and international
bodies. But Kosovo wanted to do so because it was
counting on the support of the United States and several
EU countries in the belief that it would win - and it
lost. With regard to INTERPOL, in the first round of
voting it obtained less than 50 per cent of votes - 76
votes in favour against 78. They then started to blame
Serbia, as it were our fault, as if we had to support
them, as if that were our obligation. Of course, it was
not. Many countries, important countries in various
parts of the world, voted against their membership. But
all of a sudden, they imposed tariffs, in contravention
of the Central European Free Trade Agreement and
the Stabilization and Association Agreement, against
Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. First, it was 10 per
cent. When they saw that their Albanian public audience
reacted well to that measure, they increased the tariffs
up to 100 per cent.

In effect, they killed any kind of trade between
central Serbia and Kosovo. What is more, they
jeopardized the entire Serb community in Kosovo,
because that is the only way for those people to earn the
money to survive, to obtain medications, to go to Serb-
run hospitals and health-care centres; that has always
been the only way for them to live.

Not to mention the fact that they violated and
breached all those agreements, a fact to which even the
European Union (EU) made reference. They put it all
aside. But can you imagine someone in the twenty-first
century in effect banning and forbidding the free flow
of goods, capital and people just because they did not
like a political decision from the other side?

Even that was not enough. Now I must say
something regarding resolution 1244 (1999). Not only
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) but the Kosovo Force (KFOR)
derive all their competencies and authorities from that
document. It was not NATO's decision; it was a decision
by the Security Council to provide these competencies
to KFOR in Kosovo. What happened? Since 2014 they
had been announcing their strong wish to form their
own military.
Let me remind the Council that Serbia, in a letter
by its Minister for Foreign Affairs, Ivan Mrkic, dated
March 2014, warned Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
of the possibility of creating a very dangerous situation
in the region through the creation of the so-called
Kosovo armed forces. Here is Mr. Ban Ki-moon's reply:

"Let me also stress that Security Council 1244
(1999) remains the legal framework for the
continuing international security presence in
Kosovo and clearly outlines its mandate, which is
to provide for a secure environment for all. To this
effect, UNMIK will continue to work very closely
with the international security force in Kosovo in
the fulfilment of these responsibilities."

Let me remind the Council of something else.
Paragraph 4 of annex 2 to resolution 1244 (1999) reads
as follows:

"The international security presence, with
substantial North Atlantic Treaty Organization
participation, must be deployed under unified
command and control and authorized to establish
a safe environment for all people in Kosovo and
to facilitate the safe return to their homes of all
displaced persons and refugees."

In addition, paragraph 9(b) of the resolution
clearly envisages not only the demilitarization of the
Kosovo Liberation Army but of all other armed Kosovo
Albanian groups; this is absolutely clear.

Aside from that, there is another question: from
which document - and that is my open question to
all present - do they derive their so-called sovereign
right to form their own military? Where is that
written? In which document? It is not even written
in that form in their own Constitution, because their
own Constitution - which we admit we do not
recognize - states in its article 144, paragraph 2:

"Any amendment shall require for its adoption
the approval of two thirds (2/3) of all deputies of the
Assembly including two thirds (2/3) of all deputies
of the Assembly holding reserved or guaranteed
seats for representatives of communities that are
not in the majority in the Republic of Kosovo."

Of course, they could not find seven Serbs to vote
for that, and then, who cares? Who cares about the law?
Who cares about the facts? They made a decision, and
they formed the so-called Kosovo armed forces.

Unexpectedly, even surprisingly, they received
tremendous support for that from various Western
countries. Here I wish to quote a statement by the
EU-8 - the five EU members of the Security Council,
that is, France, the Netherlands, Poland, Sweden and
the United Kingdom, as well as Italy, Belgium and
Germany - that I received only five minutes before
I entered this Chamber: "The initiation of the process
of transition of the Kosovo Security Force is Kosovo's
sovereign right."

My question to all present is: from which
document, from which article, paragraph or rule did
they derive that right? Where is it written? I can tell the
Council the answer in advance: nowhere. It is just an
interpretation - a very bad interpretation - by some
countries because it is in their own political interests.

I havejust mentioned the safe return of all returnees
to their homes. I must inform the Council that Kosovo
and Metohija is officially the territory with the lowest
rate of returnees in the world. Imagine - only 1.5 per
cent of people have gone back to what are the mainly
charred remnants oftheir homes. Only 1.5 per cent. The
Council has dealt with many different issues here in
this Chamber, but there is no similar issue in the entire
world. They created an army and started to threaten to
violate and breach even more of the arrangements that
we had signed with various organizations, arrangements
we had with those organizations, including their
presence in the northern part of Kosovo. Regarding
arrangements with NATO, the only possibility for
them to go with their armed forces to the north is to
get consent from NATO, first, and also from the Serb
local community. They have already breached that rule
several times, even beating the Serbian chief negotiator
just because he was sitting at a round table in north
Mitrovica discussing an issue related to our dialogue
with Pristina.

I will give one important example that best depicts
what is happening in Kosovo and Metohija: that of
Bogdan Mitrovic, a Serb expelled from Musutiste
village. He had wanted to go to what I referred to earlier
as the charred remnants of his village, together with his

wife and their three daughters and 6-year-old grandson.
Instead of being able to visit their devastated house,
he was arrested, viciously treated in the presence
of his daughters and grandson and then taken into
custody, where he remained for months. There were no
indictments or further investigations. That is not the
only such case. It is just one example of what they do to
Serbs who, not daring to go back to the homes they left
behind, go only to visit them.

Mr. Lacroix said that people from Pristina were
angry with us because of an issue related to Kosovo's
bid to join INTERPOL. We begged them not to go there
without finalizing their dialogue with Serbia, but they
wanted to go there. We were just defending ourselves.
We were just defending the sovereign and independent
State of Serbia in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations - nothing more than that. Some people
claim that Kosovo reacted that way because we started
a campaign to revoke its independence. I want to
inform the Council that since we started our dialogue in
2012 - which resumed in 2013 - Kosovo has received
an additional 19 recognitions from all over the world
and we have not said a single word. We have not been
angry. We have not caused any problems in the field.
We have not attacked anyone. We have not threatened
anyone. However, when reversal process started, all of
a sudden it was our fault.

I just want to tell the Council that Serbia has
always done everything it could to maintain stability,
tranquillity and peace in the entire region. We will
refrain from taking the wrong steps in the future as
well, because we have suffered a lot in the past and
we cannot allow any more of our children to be killed
in different types of wars, hostilities and clashes. But
we beg all members of the Council - and this is my
biggest plea tonight - for someone to curb and tame
those people because, to put it very lightly, the measures
that they have taken recently are not coherent with the
twenty-first century.

Ultimately, they do have one sovereign right. They
have formed another negotiating team that includes
former members of the Kosovo Liberation Army who
are under investigation for committing terrible crimes
against Serbian civilians. But that does not matter - I
will set that aside. There is something more important.
They have articulated all of their prerequisites for the
future dialogue, which include our recognition of the
independence of Kosovo and our understanding that
Kosovo gets to determine its own borders. And they are
not even going to change their State's form, which is
unitary. As a result, Serbs are not going to get anything.

My question for everyone here is: What should that
future dialogue be about? Should it be about coloured
marbles that kids play with in the schoolyard, or what?
Despite everything that I have said, Serbia is always
ready to resume the process of dialogue. We would
like to call on the United Nations to play a bigger role
in the future. We have nothing against the European
Union-sponsored dialogue, but we need the United
Nations to become more involved in the entire process.
We need to see some steps taken by Pristina. It needs to
withdraw those terrible tariffs and take other actions.
That will enable us to ensure the safety of our people.
In conclusion, let me speak just two sentences in the
Serbian language with regard to the people who are
living in Kosovo and Metohija.

(spoke in Serbian; English interpretation provided by the delegation)

I want to commend my Serbian brothers and sisters
for everything they have lived through and the torture
they continue to face. I want them to know that Serbia
will always stand by them.

