The Secretary-General: Thank you, Minister
Okada, for taking part in person in this very important
Security Council debate and for focusing the attention
of the Council on this important subject. I congratulate
the delegation of Japan for its success in presiding over
the work of the Security Council this month.

In our previous debates, a consensus has emerged
on some of the factors leading to success in post-
conflict peacebuilding. The report on peacebuilding in
the immediate aftermath of conflict that I presented to
this Council last July laid them out in some detail
(S/2009/304). We must seize the crucial opportunity
that is presented at the end of a major conflict. We
must respond early and robustly. And we must then
stay engaged over the long term. We have also agreed
that our collective efforts must be tailored to the needs
of each country.

Today I would like to emphasize three points in
order to situate our discussion in a larger context.

First, we build peace in the minds and hearts of
people. This means delivering concrete peace
dividends. Peace will not last unless people see real
benefits in their daily lives: safety, justice, jobs and
prospects for a better future. In this regard, our work
must always be guided by the principle of national
ownership.

Secondly, peace will not endure unless
Governments in post-conflict countries are able to
perform the basic functions of the State and to ensure
sustainable security. These functions include policing
the streets, upholding the rule of law, establishing a
functioning justice and corrections system and
delivering basic services. Governments should also be
capable of demobilizing and reintegrating
ex-combatants, developing a professional security
sector and protecting civilians from death and injuries
caused by landmines.

Thirdly, we must take a comprehensive approach.
That means addressing the security, political, economic
and social dimensions. It means engaging national,
bilateral, regional and international actors, and it
means coherence, coordination and common Vision.

The United Nation continues to sharpen its work.
We are building partnerships and synergies across the
United Nations system and with regional and
international actors, with an emphasis on early
engagement. This includes a stronger partnership with
the World Bank and other international financial
institutions.
10-31721

We are bolstering our capacity to support viable

peace processes that produce durable agreements. We

are improving our tools for deploying and supporting

peacekeeping operations, integrated peacebuilding

offices and other field operations that take on
peacebuilding tasks.

We are paying more attention to the nexus
between peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
Peacekeepers themselves are, in an important sense,
early peacebuilders. They seize the window of
opportunity in the immediate aftermath of conflict.
They are the first to set priorities. We must take
advantage of their unique yet temporary presence while
remaining aware that peacekeepers do not have the
resources for long-term development.

The Secretariat is working on a strategy to ensure
that critical early peacebuilding tasks, carried out by
peacekeepers and others, contribute to longer-term
peacebuilding and development. In doing this, we want
to draw on the assets of all partners, in particular those
from the South.

To this end and following through on one of the
recommendations contained in last year's report
(S/2009/304), I have asked the Peacebuilding Support
Office to conduct a review of civilian capacities for
peacebuilding. I have also appointed a Senior Advisory
Group, chaired by the former Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Affairs, Mr. Guehenno. I understand
that the Peacebuilding Commission will also provide
input to this review, thus ensuring that we capture the
Views of a broad and unique segment of the
membership.

Timely funding is essential. It is vital to have
adequate and timely resources for early peacebuilding
tasks, including, if necessary, the rapid deployment of
standing police and other civilian capacities.

Last year, the Peacebuilding Fund revised its
terms of reference so that it would be better positioned
to provide the kind of flexible, rapid and predictable
resources envisaged in my 2009 report. Since its
inception in late 2006, the Fund has provided resources
to 16 countries. Eighty-eight per cent of this funding
has gone to countries with either peacekeeping
missions or political and peacebuilding missions.

The Peacebuilding Fund also serves as a pillar of
support for the Peacebuilding Commission, with
approximately $106 million allocated to the four
countries on the Commission's agenda. I am pleased to
announce that this month the Fund will reach $200
million in allocations. With 48 donors and nearly $350
million in deposits and pledges, the Fund continues to
make progress, including through the guidance
provided by its Advisory Group.

However, the Peacebuilding Fund's value is in
identifying priority areas and helping to channel
resources to them. By itself, it can not meet the
financial needs of countries emerging from conflict.

I therefore urge donor countries to increase their
support as bilateral donors, through direct
contributions to countries emerging from conflict and
as multilateral donors, through the international
financial institutions or United Nations agencies on the
ground.

The ongoing review of the peacebuilding
arrangements agreed to in 2005 is an opportunity to
strengthen our work in important ways. Peacebuilding
is a complex and multifaceted undertaking. It requires
significant amounts of human, financial and
institutional resources. But the most important tool we
can deploy is the political commitment of national and
international actors.

The Security Council has a central role to play.
As peacekeeping mandates increasingly include
peacebuilding responsibilities, I urge Council members
to ensure that the resources provided are commensurate
with the tasks assigned, and I urge them to use their
great influence and experience to help peacebuilding
achieve its potential.

