Ms. Banks (New Zealand): I would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his report on Timor-Leste
and for his recommendations on the future involvement
of the United Nations. I would like to commend in
particular the work of Special Envoy Ian Martin and
his assessment team, who have produced a thorough
and comprehensive analysis of the challenges facing
Timor-Leste today. While there are some elements of
the report that do concern us, on the whole we believe
it provides a very sound blueprint for United Nations
engagement with Timor-Leste in the coming years.

Given the lateness of the hour, my statement will
be a shortened version of the statement that is being
circulated.

The security situation in Timor-Leste has begun
to stabilize. It remains clear, however, that outbreaks of
violence are still possible and that international
assistance will be required for some time to guarantee
the safety of the Timorese people. The stability that has
been achieved has allowed initial steps to be taken
towards political and social reconciliation, a process
that must be protected and encouraged.

The Secretary-General's report highlights the
multitude of difficulties that the new United Nations
mission in Timor-Leste will face. Against that
background, New Zealand wholeheartedly endorses the
report's emphasis on a sustained commitment and a
coordinated approach. We believe that we should
articulate that commitment by giving the new United
Nations mission an extended initial mandate and
strongly affirming that that mandate must be renewed.
Our long-term commitment to Timor-Leste is likely to
be counted in years, not months.

We support the call for a compact between Timor-
Leste and the international community to ensure
coordination between the mission and Timorese
Government priorities, plans and budgeting processes.
The building of the new mission in Timor-Leste must
be done in a carefully coordinated way with the United
Nations funds and programmes, multilateral donors and
bilateral partners.

It is clear that the new mission must have strong
and dynamic leadership. The new special
representative will need flexibility in his use of
resources and must convey a sense of vision and
authority to the Government and people of Timor-
Leste.

As the report notes, the failures of the Timorese
defence and police forces are interconnected. We
welcome, therefore, the call for a holistic review of the
security sector encompassing reform of both defence
and police. That should involve "first principles"
discussions with the Timorese Government and civil
society on the nation's real security needs and the
structures that are best suited to meeting those needs.

In terms of military support for the new United
Nations mission, New Zealand is comfortable with the
recommendations contained in the report. We realize,
however, that consensus has not yet emerged around
those arrangements, and we look forward to working
closely with all interested stakeholders to find a
solution that meets all of our concerns. From New
Zealand's perspective as one of the contributors to the
current stabilization force, it is important that the
military presence in Timor-Leste, however it evolves,
enjoy broad-based support and clearly recognized
international legitimacy.

The report proposes a substantial United Nations
policing component. New Zealand remains concerned
that the number of police being sought may be too
great. The United Nations police will have a short-term
role in front-line policing, but we hope they will be
able to move quickly to working with the National
Police Force of Timor-Leste (PNTL), aiding in its
reform and recovery.

We note that the placing of United Nations police
in front-line policing positions and the subsequent
gradual increase in the numbers of PNTL patrolling
alongside them will not of itself lead to the creation of
a new and robust PNTL. That process has been relied
on in the past and has failed. The rebuilding of the
PNTL must be a deliberate process based on one
training model and led by police trainers from a single
bilateral partner.

The recommendations in the report relating to
justice and human rights are of crucial importance.
New Zealand has consistently supported the work of
the Serious Crimes Unit, and we are pleased that its
investigations will resume.

We also consider it vital to address the problems
confronting the day-to-day functioning of the criminal
justice system. To be effective and durable, all the
institutions of government must connect with all
Timorese. We hope that, as part of its work on
institutional capacity-building and governance, the
mission will encourage the full functioning of
government, including the justice sector, in both
official languages - Portuguese and Tetun.
Finally, we continue to urge the Timorese
leadership to work together to regain the confidence of
its people. Now is the time for strong and united
leadership. In that context, may I congratulate Foreign
Minister Guterres on his appointment and thank him
for his update and for his words of determined
commitment.

We are relying on Timor's political leaders to
take responsibility for the future of their nation and to
rebuild respect for the political process. We are
encouraged by the first steps; they must continue, and
we must do all we can to provide sustained support.

