Mr. Yoo (Republic of Korea): The Republic of Korea
welcomes and supports the initiative taken by the United
States as President of the Security Council for the month of
September in convening this special ministerial session of
the Security Council on Africa.

During this decade, Africa has made great strides
towards stability, democracy and prosperity. However,
armed conflicts persist in some quarters of the continent,
threatening regional peace and security. These conflicts are
inflicting enormous suffering on innocent civilians by
causing massive dislocations of people, humanitarian
distress and serious violations of human rights.
Furthermore, they are destroying the very resources that are
essential for social and economic development.

To meet these challenges, the international community
has applied a vast amount of energy and resources, both
through the Security Council and through other United
Nations organs and agencies, often in cooperation with
regional organizations. The overall trend in the Council's
response to conflicts in Africa is clearly towards greater
engagement in the region. The Republic of Korea welcomes
this trend and firmly believes that the Council can do more,
with greater consistency and effectiveness. The Secretary-
General plays an important bridging role in the coordination
of the efforts of the international community for the
prevention, management and resolution of conflicts, as well
as humanitarian and development activities, in Africa. In
this context, we particularly appreciate the undertaking of
the Secretary-General to hold frequent consultations with
the members of the Security Council on issues requiring the
Council's urgent action.

The Republic of Korea believes that conflict resolution
in Africa requires a comprehensive approach that takes into
account the complex range of causes and consequences of
conflict in that region. In this regard, I would like to make
a few suggestions.

First, further efforts should be made to enhance
coordination between the United Nations and the
Organization of African Unity, as well as coordination with
subregional organizations and arrangements. We are
encouraged by the increasing cooperation between the
Security Council and the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management
and Resolution; the recent success of the joint undertaking
of the United Nations and the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) in regional peacekeeping;
and the appointment of a joint United Nations-OAU Special
Representative for the Great Lakes region. Such
cooperation, we believe, enables the Council to draw on
the regional organizations' local expertise and resources.
In its deliberations, we believe the Council should duly
take into account the Views of the regional organizations
regarding situations in which they have a clear and direct
interest.

The United Nations and regional arrangements
should also concentrate more on crisis prevention. As we
know, it is always less costly to prevent crises than to
react to them. The international community also needs to
continue helping regional organizations to strengthen their
capacity for peacekeeping. Capacity building is important
because it not only enables a swifter response to conflict;
it also ultimately empowers African countries to resolve
regional problems by themselves.

My second point concerns humanitarian suffering: an
immediate outcome of conflict. It is virtually impossible
to provide effective relief and protection to refugees and
internally displaced persons in an environment where the
parties to a conflict refuse to respect basic norms of
international humanitarian law. In this context, we wish
to emphasize the importance of the ongoing efforts to
establish an international criminal court. We look forward
to the study by the Secretary-General on how we can
better protect humanitarian assistance to refugees in
conflict situations, as requested in the presidential
statement adopted by the Council last June.

Thirdly, the international community should make a
more resolute effort to staunch arms flows into conflict
areas which increase humanitarian suffering and hinder
conflict resolution. In particular, we need to ensure
stricter compliance with the arms embargoes imposed by
the Security Council vis-a-vis conflict areas in Africa.
Even if resources are scarce, we should seriously explore
the possibility of creating a concrete mechanism to
encourage the cooperation of neighbouring countries in
the implementation of embargoes and the passage of
domestic legislation to that end.

Finally, we believe high priority needs to be attached
to the consolidation of peace after conflicts have been
resolved. Failure to do so leaves the fragile peace
vulnerable to collapse and risks wasting all the resources
that went into achieving it in the first place. Furthermore,
we should emphatically voice our support for democracy
whenever it is established and highlight the importance of
channelling ethnic and other differences into the
democratic process.
 

We also believe that regional efforts in the socio-
economic fields, such as the African Economic Community
and the African Commission on Human and Peoples'
Rights, are Vital for ensuring the continent's long-term
peace and prosperity and breaking the vicious circle of
poverty and war. They therefore deserve our full support.
To help maintain the encouraging pace of economic reform
in Africa, we need to create an enabling external
environment by enhancing trade opportunities through
improved market access, fostering greater domestic and
foreign investment, and alleviating the debt burden. The
Bretton Woods institutions can facilitate this effort by
encouraging sound economic policy management and the
construction of basic infrastructure.

Before closing, let me stress how important it is that
every Member State continue their commitment to the
cause of peace and prosperity in Africa. The Republic of
Korea has consistently and earnestly worked for this cause,
both through its participation in United Nations
peacekeeping operations in the region, such as the United
Nations Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM), the United
Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM) and the
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara (MINURSO), and through its contributions to
humanitarian and development programmes. We will
continue to do so. And we hope to see today's welcome
initiative followed up by concrete action. We have full
confidence in the Secretary-General, and look forward to
his report, which will lay the basis for more concerted
action towards a brighter future for the African people.

