Mr. Voto-Bernales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, Mr. President, I would like to thank you for
convening this open debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. I would also like to express
my gratitude for the briefing given by the Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. John
Holmes, and to acknowledge the work that is being
done by his Office to improve the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.

Peru welcomes the sixth report of the Secretary-
General on this matter (S/2007/643); it is a report of
high quality. It offers a view of the positive
developments, as well as of new and continuing
problems that affect civilians in situations of armed
conflict, and it offers to the Security Council important
recommendations for their protection.

In this context, we are concerned by the overview
that the report presents on the situation of civilians in

armed conflict. Even though there has been an
encouraging decline in the number of conflicts, in
today's armed conflicts human rights violations and
violations of international humanitarian law have
increased, and the civilian population, particularly
women and children, are still the main victims. In
many cases, it is precisely women and children who are
even direct targets of the attacks, and victims of
gender-based sexual violence in a climate of almost
total impunity. The dangers that are faced by the
civilian population in conflicts in places such as the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Somalia, Gaza,
Iraq, Darfur, Chad and Afghanistan, to mention only a
few, show that, despite the good intentions of the
international community, of the Security Council and
even of the respective Governments, the civilian
population still lacks significant protection. In this
respect, Peru believes that the Security Council should
continue to promote effective and feasible actions to
guarantee the protection of civilians who find
themselves immersed in armed conflicts, as well as of
displaced persons and refugees.

I would like to make a few comments on the
report's recommendations. First of all, we agree with
the Secretary-General that ensuring humanitarian
access to the civilian population affected by conflict is
a fundamental requirement for their protection. In
accordance with international humanitarian law, the
parties to a conflict must allow and facilitate
unhindered access by all humanitarian assistance
providers to civilians in need. Regrettably, the reality
on the ground shows us that access is still far from
being safe, timely and free from obstacles. This means
that millions of people are deprived of assistance that
is crucial for their survival.

As a result, we support what is said in action
three, "Access", in particular in reference to having the
Emergency Relief Coordinator systematically bring to
the Council's attention situations where serious access
concerns exist, including through the biannual
briefings and as an annex to the Secretary-General's
reports on this matter.

Secondly, the report of the Secretary-General is
enlightening in pointing out that women and children
are still the main victims of acts of violence in armed
conflict, and that increasingly sexual abuse and rape of
women and girls are used intentionally as a weapon of
war by the parties to armed conflict.
Peru joins in rejecting sexual violence in conflict
situations and agrees that we must act firmly, both
nationally and internationally, in order to bring an end
to these practices through policies and programmes
that promote the prevention of violence. We also
believe it is important for the international community
to support the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and that the Secretary-General report on the
progress of mainstreaming a gender perspective in
peacekeeping missions. We also support what is said in
action two, "Sexual violence", in particular with
respect to referring grave incidents of rape and other
forms of sexual violence to the International Criminal
Court. Furthermore, States, as a matter of priority, must
assume their responsibility to bring to justice and
punish those responsible for crimes, as a
comprehensive approach to peace, justice, truth and
national reconciliation.

Thirdly, action four, "Housing, land and property
rights" is very relevant, in particular the systematic
inclusion in resolutions of references to the rights of
displaced persons and refugees to return to their homes
and places of origin safely and to the non-acceptance
of the results of ethnic cleansing or sectarian violence,
as well as mandating United Nations peacekeeping and
other relevant missions to prevent the illegal
appropriation or confiscation of land and property
abandoned by refugees and displaced persons and to
support the issuance of ownership documentation when
this has been lost or destroyed.

Fourthly, we agree with the Secretary-General
that the Security Council should call upon parties to
conflict, and upon multinational forces that it has
authorized, to uphold their obligations under
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
In this respect, we support action one, "Conduct of
hostilities"; we believe it is important for peacekeeping
and other relevant United Nations missions to report on
the measures adopted to guarantee the protection of
civilians during hostilities.

Fifthly, we agree that we must bring an end to the
terrible humanitarian consequences of cluster
munitions. Cases such as Cambodia, Kosovo, southern
Lebanon and the Lao People's Democratic Republic
mentioned in the report speak volumes about the
damage caused by these weapons, which continue to
mutilate civilians after a conflict is over and which
prevent the return of displaced persons and refugees to
their homes, as well as the socio-economic
development of the affected areas.

We are encouraged by the fact that the response
of the international community has been positive,
reflecting a clear political will to move towards a
solution. We must adopt a binding instrument that bans
cluster munitions that cause unacceptable damage to
the civilian population.

In the light of the situations described in the
report, it is necessary to reaffirm the responsibility of
the United Nations to defend human rights throughout
the world and to continue to place priority on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. It is important
to seek full implementation of resolution 1674 (2006),
which contains crucial provisions for improving the
international system to protect civilians in armed
conflict, including the responsibility to protect
populations from war crimes, genocide, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity.

The proposal of the Secretary-General, contained
in action five of the report, on the establishment of a
dedicated, expert-level working group of the Council
on the protection of civilians is an idea that should be
carefully studied. However, we believe that for the
present, it is important that reports on armed conflicts
that are on the agenda of the Council should contain
information on the protection of civilians. Likewise,
warning mechanisms for the Council, including that of
the Secretary-General, should be activated in order to
protect civilian populations.

Lastly, we must acknowledge that, in order to
strengthen the protection of civilians after the cessation
of conflict, decisive action must be undertaken to build
sustainable institutions in the affected countries in
order to fight impunity, strengthen stability and
generate conditions of governance that would make it
possible to reduce poverty and create opportunities for
well-being and development.

