President Duda: The current security situation is not
encouraging. Tensions at the global and regional levels
threaten the existing international order, including the
non-proliferation and arms control regimes. In fact, we
have been witnessing their progressive decomposition.
They have been regularly challenged by non-State
actors, but what is of even greater concern is that they
are also being undermined by individual States.

Before I address the problem of nuclear weapons,
I would like to first draw attention to another type of
weapon of mass destruction that has made its way back
to the top ofthe global agenda. I am referring to chemical
weapons. Let me be clear - every use of a chemical
weapon is a crime. It does not matter whether it is used
on a mass scale by undemocratic regimes against their
own people to secure their power or whether it is used
in a State-terrorist manner against individuals abroad
on whom a certain State wants to take revenge. And if
it is a crime, it means that the principal obligation ofthe
international community is defined by the rules-based
order. Criminals must be brought to justice.

No single use of chemical weapons can be left
unanswered since it not only undermines the basic
sense of justice, but also leads to the erosion of the
non-proliferation and disarmament regimes and, in
consequence, threatens the security of us all. Brutal
attacks, directed mostly against civilians, all have the
same aim - to intimidate the international community.
The community of the United Nations cannot accept
such methods. Our inaction will only encourage
perpetrators. I hope that the finalization of the new
European Union sanctions mechanism, completed in
the framework of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons, will allow us to bring appropriate
pressure to bear on current and future perpetrators, as
well as deter them from those unacceptable actions.

We had all hoped to have chemical weapons
effectively banned by the Chemical Weapons
Convention. We must stand firmly behind our own rules
and norms, which are the pillars of the international
order. In that context, let me mention that, as in previous
years, Poland will introduce to the General Assembly a
draft resolution on the implementation of the Chemical
Weapons Convention. It is of great importance to
preserve the integrity of this regime. Therefore, we
call on all Member States to ensure a strong, clear and
united message of support of the whole international
community for the integrity of the Chemical Weapons
Convention and the efforts of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.

The second issue I would like to highlight is the
proliferation of nuclear weapons. Permit me to make
three points regarding this matter.

First, we all know that nuclear weapons cannot
be bought on the free market. Therefore, every act of
proliferation of these weapons is a failure of both the
international community and the rules-based world
order. And we must remember that it always involves
not only the State that develops a nuclear capacity, but
also those who provide it with the means to achieve it,
namely, technology, materials and resources.

It is of the utmost importance for every agreement
that aims to control nuclear programmes to guarantee
that such programmes are used solely for peaceful
purposes. We have an obligation to evaluate such
agreements against their stated purposes and to act
accordingly. We should not turn a blind eye to those
who contravene the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) by providing the
means or assisting in other ways to develop nuclear
weapon capacities.

Good and effective export control mechanisms
should be upheld by all countries involved in nuclear,
chemical and biological trade for peaceful purposes
in order to maintain the appropriate control level
of dual-use goods and to make non-proliferation
efforts more effective. In that regard, we welcome
the International Atomic Energy Agency's efforts to
strictly monitor and verify Iran's commitments. Let me
also take this opportunity to commend the vital role
the Agency plays in non-proliferation. The Agency's
system of safeguards is a fundamental component
of the nuclear non-proliferation regime and plays an
indispensable role in the implementation of the NPT.

Secondly, I would like to welcome the prospect
of the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. We
have seen some encouraging developments, such as
the inter-Korean summits and the meeting of Kim
Jong Un with President Donald Trump. This led to
the stopping of the missile and nuclear tests. I would
like to stress, Mr. President, that this is, in great
measure, your and President Moon's great achievement
and merit, for which I thank you. However, decisive
steps have yet to be taken. Lasting peace will not be
achieved without the denuclearization of North Korea
in a complete, verifiable and irreversible manner. Until
then, the international community must remain united
in maintaining real and consistent pressure on North
Korea, including by upholding the United Nations
sanctions regime.

Thirdly, for the sake of the credibility of the
international community, it is vital to stand firmly
behind the duties and obligations we have taken upon
our shoulders. In that context, I am saddened by the
concerning developments in the security situation in
our region of Central and Eastern Europe.

Injust the past few years, we have witnessed a clear
breach of the Budapest Memorandum that guaranteed
the territorial integrity of Ukraine in exchange for
its peaceful and voluntary denuclearization. We
have also heard about the use of nuclear weapons
to end conventional conflicts. Equally alarming
was the deployment of a dual-capable means of
delivery close to our borders. All these actions have
significantly contributed to the deterioration of the
security environment.

What should our response to the challenges I
have just listed be? It requires, first, the full and
firm implementation of the well-established and
widely recognized treaties and norms of international
law; secondly, support for and full confidence in the
work of the international mechanisms responsible for
preventing the use of weapons of mass destruction;
finally, proactive and constructive engagement in
initiatives that aim at fighting proliferation efforts and
promoting transparency and verification.

In 2018, my country assumed the chairmanship
of the second session of the Preparatory Committee
for the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
and chaired the seventeenth annual Regular Meeting of
the Subscribing States to The Hague Code of Conduct
against Ballistic Missile Proliferation. Our efforts
have been focused on strengthening these regimes,
their universalization, securing their widespread and
credible verification mechanisms, implementing good
practices, and tightening international cooperation.
These actions constitute long-term objectives of the
Polish security policy.

In conclusion, let me stress once again that
non-proliferation is a collective effort. To uphold the
security architecture that we have built for decades
and to prevent the nightmares of the recurring use
of weapons of mass destruction, we need the full
commitment of everyone, without any exception, to
observing all norms and obligations in this field.

