Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his briefing.
I also appreciate his active consultation and extensive
mediation activities since assuming office.

The Syrian conflict has entered its ninth year and
brought unprecedented suffering to the entire country.
The Chinese side deeply sympathizes with the Syrian
people for such suffering. The international community
should continue to intensify its efforts to promote
the political process in Syria, strive to achieve peace
as soon as possible, help the Syrian people return to
and rebuild their homeland and resume their lives in
peace. The Special Envoy has for some time been in
close contact with the various parties regarding the
formation of a Syrian constitutional committee. A few
days ago, the twelfth round of the Astana diaolgue
was successfully held in Astana, now called Nur-
Sultan. Russia, Turkey and Iran issued ajoint statement
expressing their intention to speed up the establishment
of the constitutional committee. China appreciates and
supports the active efforts of the United Nations and
relevant parties to promote a political settlement of the
Syrian issue.

Regarding to next phase, I wish to emphasize the
followingimperatives.First,wemustcontinueto leverage
the role of the United Nations as the main channel of
mediation and advance the political settlement process.
The United Nations should strengthen its coordination
with the Syrian Government and push for the early
formation of a representative constitutional committee
acceptable to all by balancing the legitimate concerns
of both the Syrian Government and the other parties in
order to set in motion a sustained and effective political
process. The international community should support
the mediation work of the Special Envoy, back the
Astana process in continuing to play its role and help
foster synergies among the many diplomatic efforts.
The Council members of should remain united and
speak with one voice in an effort to create an enabling
climate and conditions conducive to a political solution
to the Syrian issue.

Secondly, the international community must act
determinedly to combat the terrorist forces in Syria
and create safe conditions for the political process.
Terrorism threatens Syria's security and stability.
Counter-terrorism is therefore an important aspect
of settling the Syrian issue. Both the north-western
and north-eastern parts of Syria face serious counter-
terrorism challenges, with terrorist groups entrenched
in Idlib and some terrorist fighters moving freely.
in keeping with the new trends and characteristics
of the counter-terrorism landscape in some regions,
the international community should strengthen
coordination and cooperation and unify standards
in fighting all terrorist organizations designated by
the Security Council, consolidate the achievements
of counter-terrorism and continuously improve the
security environment in Syria.

Thirdly, the Syrian parties must prioritize the
future of the country and the fundamental interests of
the people, meet each other half way and continue to
resolve differences through dialogue and consultation.
The international community should encourage and
support the Syrian parties to build mutual trust through
prisoner exchanges among other measures and continue
to promote national reconciliation. Political negotiations
are the only realistic way to resolve the Syrian issue in
a lasting way. The Syrian must seek a solution that is
acceptable to all parties through an inclusive political
process based on the Syrian-owned and Syrian-led
principle and the spirit of resolution 2254 (2015).

Ultimately, the future of Syria must be decided
by the Syrian people themselves. The sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of
Syria must be upheld in moving the political
settlement forward. China stands ready to enhance
its communication and coordination with the relevant
parties, including the United Nations, jointly advance
the Syrian political process, vigorously improve
the humanitarian situation in Syria and support the
Syrian Government in conducting refugee returns and
economic and social reconstruction.

