Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) (spoke in French): I
wish to thank you, Sir, for having organized this open
debate at a time when the situation in the Middle East
is of the greatest concern to my delegation and to the
international community, due to both the ongoing
tragic situation in the occupied Palestinian territory and
the lack of progress towards resuming the peace process.

My delegation associates itself with the statements
made by the representatives of the Sultanate of Oman
on behalf of the Group of Arab States and of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, as well as that
to be made by the representative of Syria on behalf of
the Organization of the Islamic Conference.

Since the debate held by the Council in October
2009, (S/PV.6201) the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, has
continued to deteriorate. Israel's unremitting resolve to
create faits accomplis in the occupied West Bank and
the Gaza Strip appears increasingly to resemble a
comprehensive and deliberate policy aimed at making
the colonization project permanent and thus casts
serious doubt on the true intentions of Israel's leaders,

in contrast to their stated intention to resume
negotiations with a view to achieving a sustainable
peace agreement.

Precisely one year after the Israeli withdrawal,
the humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip has
continued to worsen despite the Council's adoption of
resolution 1860 (2009) and the remarkable international
mobilization in favour of its reconstruction. Yet Gaza's
return to the status quo ante, characterized by the
entrenchment of the blockade, has in fact prevented
reconstruction work from getting off the ground and
Israel continues to hinder the movement of people and
the delivery of humanitarian aid and construction
materials, thus preventing the resumption of normal
life and increasing the already high levels of poverty
and unemployment.

United with the Palestinian people and faithful to
its approach to their just cause, Algeria has continued
to call for an end to Israel's sinister plan, which seeks
to impoverish and starve an entire sector of the
Palestinian population and to cut it off from the rest of
the occupied Palestinian territory and from the
international community.

With equal urgency, Algeria condemns the illegal
and provocative measures taken by Israel in East
Jerusalem in an unacceptable attempt to violate the
city's age-old identity as a symbol of tolerance and
dialogue and its status as the crossroads of the three
revealed religions. It is particularly alarmed by the
pursuit and development of a methodical policy of
expropriation, intimidation and colonization aimed at
strengthening Israel's control over that Palestinian city
by altering its Arab nature and establishing a fait
accompli on an issue related to the final status
negotiations.

With the exception of Israel, the occupying
Power, the international community in its entirety does
not acknowledge the legitimacy of Israel's unilateral
claims to the holy city, which remains an integral part
of the Palestinian territory occupied by Israel and
whose fate is necessarily linked to the entire question
of Palestine. The Security Council must reaffirm that
the illegal unilateral measures taken by Israel to
modify or attempt to modify the demographic
composition, nature and status of the city are null and
void under international law and must be condemned
as such.

Because of Israel's obstinacy, the peace process is
deadlocked and the objective of a two-State solution
appears more elusive than ever. No significant progress
has been made towards guaranteeing the inalienable
right of the Palestinian people to establish a viable,
independent State based on relevant United Nations
resolutions, the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the Quartet Road Map. The international
community, which has continually shown signs of
exasperation in the light of Israel's deceitfulness and
evasive responses, must find the means necessary to
extricate the process from its current stalemate.
Without minimizing the importance of resuming the
Israeli-Palestinian negotiations called for by all, we
note that no one desires meaningless negotiations to
serve as a smokescreen for certain undeclared
intentions aimed at perpetuating the status quo.

In our view, successful negotiations require three
conditions to be met. First, the Israeli Government must
commit itself sincerely and unequivocally to a two-
State solution, underpinned by concrete improvements
in the situation on the ground, beginning with the
cessation of all illegal activities. Secondly, we must
ensure respect for the terms of reference echoed and
validated by United Nations resolutions, and which
make up the indisputable elements of any settlement
framework. All efforts must therefore seek to eliminate
the remaining obstacles on the road to peace. Lastly
and thirdly, we must define a clearer role for the
Quartet, whose main task is to give positive
momentum to the process by protecting it from the ups
and downs of power struggles.

Algeria remains committed to any initiative that
would put an end to Israel's occupation of the
Palestinian territory and other Arab territories, and the
establishment of a sovereign and independent
Palestinian State, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital,
living in peace with its neighbours within the
parameters laid out by a settlement with a view to a
just and lasting peace in the Middle East, established
by resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1397 (2002)
and on the basis of the principles of the Arab Peace
Initiative, in particular the principle of land-for-peace.

