Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): Given
that the representative of Greece made a statement
earlier on behalf of the European Union with which my
country - as a country associated with the European
Union - aligns itself, my comments will be very brief,
as you wished, Mr. President.

I begin by welcoming the President of the
General Assembly and the President of the Economic
and Social Council. Their presence points to the need
to better coordinate the action of the Security Council
with that of the Organization's other principal organs,
given that the management of post-conflict situations
requires an integrated approach by the whole United
Nations system, in the light of the growing complexity
of the situations that we face.

Mr. President, you asked that our comments focus
on four particular cases of post-conflict situations that
have been on the Council's agenda for some time -
Afghanistan, Kosovo, Sierra Leone and Timor-Leste -
and I believe you were right. Those are four successes
in terms of the management of post-conflict situations,
and I believe that the time is right to look for the
reasons for that success, without denying the existence
of problems and failures here and there. But I believe
that we all agree: those are four successes.

I am very grateful to the Secretary-General for his
statement, not merely because of his in-depth analysis
of post-conflict situations and the role of the United
Nations, but also because of the frankness and clarity
of his comments. It is clear that our discussion today is
taking place in the context of the situation in Iraq and
the possible United Nations role in managing that post-
conflict situation. The situation in Iraq is a part of the
backdrop to today's discussion, and the Secretary-
General was right to speak of it.

I believe that the Security Council's task consists
of determining the extent to which its action in Iraq can
benefit from lessons that we draw from these four cases
to which I just referred. What are the reasons for the
relative - even categorical - success of the United
Nations in those four situations, despite their
dissimilarities, as the Secretary-General said?

First of all, it is because the United Nations is
seen by the peoples concerned and by the international
community as a principal source of legitimacy and
justice. That is a fundamental fact that we cannot
ignore. At the same time, if one looks closely at
Afghanistan, Kosovo, Sierra Leone and Timor-Leste, it
is clear that the very nature of United Nations action in
those four situations strengthens the credibility of the
Organization to some extent. And I should like to draw
particular attention to United Nations activities on
behalf of democratic institutions and human rights in
those four cases and elsewhere. I thank in particular the
President of the General Assembly for having
mentioned that dimension of United Nations actions. I
believe that Mr. Kavan, a veteran champion of human
rights, is well placed to speak about it.

The importance that the United Nations attaches
to this aspect of its activities cannot be exaggerated. I
believe that one of the common points that emerges
from United Nations action is knowing how to manage
the oppressive and very negative legacy of post-
conflict situations arising from the recent past of these
countries, which very often have been the site of major,
long-term human rights violations. I believe that the
United Nations has taken the position of categorically
rejecting the culture of impunity. In order that those
societies may be able to build their futures and their
institutions on sound foundations, the desire for
stability and calm should not hinder the quest for the
truth.

The fact that the Security Council and the United
Nations in general have adapted to the facts on the
ground is of course another very important reason for
the Organization's success in these situations. Clearly,
these are four different situations; but the Security
Council has tailored the mandates of the peacekeeping
operations in each of these cases in such a way as to
ensure that they take into account major stakeholders in
the field. Cooperation with regional actors is therefore
crucial. In that regard, I wish to refer to the case of
Kosovo, in which cooperation with such organizations
as the North Atlantic Treaty Organization has thus far
been crucial to the success of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo.

Being faithful to the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and being flexible and realistic are
thus two aspects of that success. Once again, I
completely agree with the Secretary-General that these
principles should guide us as we make choices with
regard to the situation in Iraq.

I would like to thank the President once again for
having chosen this theme for our discussion today,
which I believe will permit a frank and interactive
debate.

