President Touadera (spoke in French): It is both
an honour and a pleasure for me today to address the
Security Council for the first time on an issue that is of
particular importance to me, that is, peace in the Central
African Republic. I would like to take this opportunity
to thank you, Sir, and through you the entire Security
Council, for the time being devoted to my country
despite the Security Council's busy schedule for this
month, as well as for inviting me to speak.

My country is grateful for the Security Council's
full support for its efforts aimed at ending the violent
crisis that it has experienced and for its determination
to silence the guns so as to achieve a just and lasting
peace. I would also like to express our deep gratitude
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) under the leadership of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga, whom I commend for his excellent
cooperation with the Central African authorities
and his ceaseless commitment to ensure peace and
protection for civilians in all regions of the Central
African Republic.

This meeting provides a new opportunity to take
stock of the evolution of the political and security
situation in the Central African Republic, a major
focus of the United Nations, which has continued to
vigorously support us since the holding of the latest
general elections at the end of 2016.

We have come a long way, from the transition
period to the elections and the appointment of
legitimate national authorities. In taking the reins
of the country, I have audaciously bet on change,
reconstruction and economic development despite
a security environment that remains volatile. Our
priority continues to be security and the pacification of
the entire country. The establishment of the committee
on disarmament, demobilization, rehabilitation and
reintegration (DDRR) programme, the reform of the
security sector reform and national reconciliation
are the result of that prioritization, which affords an
opportunity for all armed groups to find solutions by
consensus with the Government with regard to the issue
of the DDRR programme and some of their concerns
through dialogue.

On this solemn occasion, I welcome the decision of
the Front populaire pour la renaissance de la Centrafrique
and Maxime Mokom's anti-Balaka group to finally join
the process by nominating their representatives to the
advisory and monitoring committee for the national
DDRR programme. That is a decisive step that will
enable us to go further in the effective implementation
of that important programme for the return to peace.
All 14 armed groups will be represented at the next
meeting of the committee, scheduled for 23 March.

Although we have made some progress, the Central
African Republic needs substantial resources to launch
the necessary reforms. Since the Brussels Conference,
we have been working with our partners to develop
the monitoring and assessment framework for the
National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan, as well
as to implement the Mutual Engagement Framework.
Those fundamental elements for restoring peace and
rebuilding the economy must go hand in hand.

We regret the fact that, despite efforts by
MINUSCA, some armed groups refuse to lay down
their weapons and continue to mount their offensive.
By adopting a firm stance, through its mandate and
with my consent, MINUSCA has been able to protect
civilians, avert efforts to divide the country and, above
all, force armed groups reluctant to join the DDRR/
security sector reform/national reconciliation process
to at last appoint representatives to the DDRR advisory
and monitoring committee.

It is important to note that the ongoing military
action by MINUSCA in Bombari is an exception
and does not disregard the importance of dialogue
in achieving a lasting solution. I hope that that
initiative will lead to a final concrete outcome in the
operationalization of the DDRR/security sector reform/
national reconciliation process. I would like to express
our gratitude to the international community and to
neighbouring countries that have provided invaluable
support in the areas of DDRR and security sector
reform, in particular the Central African Economic and
Monetary Community, which allotted CAF 2 billion
to the DDR process. The ongoing recruitment of 500
police officers with the support of MINUSCA, training
for our security forces provided by the European Union
Military Training Mission in the Central African
Republic and the commitment of some countries in
the subregion have led to the establishment of Central
African Republic armed forces battalions.

At this juncture in my presentation, I would like
to highlight that I am concerned about the pace of the
training provided to the armed forces by the European
Union's Military Training Mission. The training process
is slow and does not allow us in the short term to have
enough personnel to assist in restoring peace and calm
to the country and protecting civilians. It is for that
reason that I ask the Security Council to assist us in
finding a faster way - through bilateral or multilateral
cooperation - to train our armed forces, in addition to
the training provided by the European Union's Military
Training Mission, because the security challenges are
immense. The country is very large, and that calls for
more training and the deployment of an even greater
number of soldiers. In addition, I would like to point
out concerns about furnishing trained armed forces of
the Central African Republic with military equipment
and other logistical tools, as it is very difficult for us
to put trained soldiers on the ground without adequate
equipment in areas of the country facing threats to
peace and people's safety. We have approximately
8,000 soldiers whom we cannot deploy because

they have not yet completed their training due to
insufficient resources.

I mention those facts because there is a close
link between security and development in the Central
African Republic. After many years of conflict, the
entire population, so badly in need of infrastructure and
basic services, longs for development, and that can be
achieved only if security exists. The need for security
therefore demands a higher number of trained defence
and security personnel, with adequate resources and
deployed on the ground alongside United Nations
forces, currently working alone because Central
African Republic forces are not yet operational.

Conflicts between armed groups continue in the
interior of the country and result in many lives lost and
widespread destruction. That is why we are more than
ever determined to put professional national forces on
the ground, working in conjunction with MINUSCA, to
protect civilians. I thank the Security Council, which
approved a robust mandate for MINUSCA to help us
to emerge from the crisis. But it is also important to
consider strengthening MINUSCA by increasing its
personnel and material resources to enable it to better
discharge its mandate. For I can see for myself the
challenges it faces daily given the size of the country
and the complex problems on the ground that require
additional resources.

We are open to constructive dialogue. We support
African initiatives towards peace and reconciliation
aimed at bolstering our own efforts. However, I would
like to reassure the Council of our commitment to
respecting the recommendations put forward by the
Bangui Forum, in particular on impunity and justice
in the context of all political agreements. We ask for
amnesty be granted to the perpetrators of serious crimes
and other breaches of the law, forgetting that amnesty is a
legislative measure that cannot be used by the executive
branch. All efforts must reflect the legitimate hopes of
the Central African people as expressed at the Bangui
Forum, as well as the provisions of the Constitution.
Nonetheless, we remain open to discussions on the
issue. At the same time, justice will be handed down
in due course and without compromising on principles.
The appointment of a special criminal prosecutor and
the operationalization of the special criminal court,
with the support of our partners, will enable us to meet
the expectations ofa people who have suffered so much
from this crisis and who quite rightly demand justice.

As the Council is aware, the humanitarian situation

remains critical. We must meet immense needs.
People in the interior of my country continue to flee
their homes, seeking refuge elsewhere and ending
up in makeshift sites. I make an urgent appeal to the
international community to redouble its efforts and give
us the necessary support to enable displaced persons to
return to their homes.

Despite a challenging environment, our partners
continue to provide support. We commend their
commitment, which is a sign of international solidarity.
The visit to our country on ll March by Mr. Makhtar
Diop, World Bank Vice-President for the Africa
Region, reflects that organization's interest in helping
us relaunch socioeconomic development. We are also
reassured by the recent visit by Ms. Christine Lagarde,
Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund,
as well as other high-level partners. In turn, we reassure
them of our absolute willingness to demonstrate good
governance and to be unwavering in our fight against
corruption - a scourge that has long undermined
our institutions.

The Central African Republic is at a crossroads
in its quest for lasting peace, reconstruction and
development. Its people are tired of the crises caused
by armed groups that hold socioeconomic development
hostage. I have always advocated change. There is
indeed too little progress, however we firmly intend
to proceed along the path to the country's development
and reconstruction.

The town ofBombari, in the prefecture of Ouaka, is
a pilot project. With the support of MINUSCA and our
partners, we hope to strengthen our presence, refurbish
administrative buildings and provide basic social
services - in short, ensure that some sense ofnormalcy
returns by restoring State authority. We must build
on efforts supported by the international community.
Rebuilding the country requires the participation of all
parties: central and local administrations, the private
sector, civil society and international partners.

I have given the Council a description of the
political and security situation in the Central African
Republic. We thank you, Mr. President, for having
given us this opportunity to speak about the Central
African Republic, in particular in the light of the current
challenges, and about the need for the international
community to continue its support.

