Mr. Oyarzabal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to thank Ambassador Quinlan
for his presentation of the quarterly report on the work
of the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006), and for his leadership of the
Committee.

I would first like to welcome the provisional
agreement reached in Geneva in November between
Iran and the group of the five permanent members of the
Security Council and Germany. It creates the possibility
of resolving pending issues, and we believe that it
demonstrates the value of diplomatic measures that
enable us to reach solutions through negotiation. At the
same time, we know that the international community
must continue to support the relevance of the nuclear
non-proliferation regime and its cornerstone, the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. We have
received the most recent report, dated 15 November, of
the Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), which outlines the agreement on a
framework for cooperation between the Agency and
Iran, which is aimed at resolving current and previous
issues. We realize that the agreement is an important
step forward in re-establishing the confidence of the
international community in the exclusively peaceful
nature of the Iranian nuclear programme. In that regard,
we believe that it is essential that Iran cooperate with
the IAEA and take the measures necessary to enable
it to fully comply with its obligations, including the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council.

Concerning the work of the 1737 Committee, I
would like to thank the Panel of Experts for its midterm
report. I would also to highlight the importance of
the open informational meeting held on 18 November
on the role of the Security Council and the Financial
Action Task Force in combating terrorism financing
and proliferation. Generally speaking, we believe that
the periodic holding of open informational meetings is
a good practice that improves ties between the Council
and all Member States, and we therefore encourage the
Committee to continue those efforts.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize once
again my country's historic commitment to the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. At
the same time, I should reaffirm the inalienable right of
all States party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons to develop their research on
and production and utilization of nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes without discrimination of any kind.

