Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Let
me begin by thanking the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honore
Braithwaite, for her very enlightening briefing, as well
as for her contribution and that of her teams to the
stabilization of Haiti.

I associate myself with the statements that will be
made by the observer of the European Union, as well as
by the representative of Peru on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti.

France welcomed the adoption of resolution 2350
(2017), which formally acknowledges the closure of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) by October 15, and establishes a new
mission focused on the issues of police, the rule of
law and human rights. That decision, which was made
unanimously by the Council, is essential. More than
13 years after the establishment of MINUSTAH, it
was time to formally acknowledge the successes of
the mission in stabilizing Haiti and to move towards
a new form of United Nations presence more adapted
to the needs of the country and the conditions on the
ground, which have evolved considerably and in a
favourable direction.

As underlined in the Secretary-General's report
(S/20l7/604), the work of MINUSTAH in recent
years has been essential to getting Haiti out of the
emergency situation in which the country found itself
even just recently. It has made it possible to restore a
general climate of relative security, participated in the
reconstruction efforts after the terrible earthquake of
2010 and contributed to the significant firming up of
the Haitian National Police, the increasing strength
of which is a guarantee of stability for Haiti. That is a
collective success, which, naturally, is due in great part
to Haitians themselves. However, we must also give
credit to the United Nations, the Council, as well as
to the troop-contributing countries, without which this
Mission could not play its role.

The new United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti, which will begin operations in
October, should consolidate the progress achieved. It
should make the Haitian National Police an autonomous
actor, but also undertake major new projects in the area
of the rule of law, such as the fight against impunity, the
strengthening of professionalism and the independence
of the judiciary, as well as the establishment of a
prison system that is compatible with the needs of the
country and the requirements in terms of respect for the
rights of prisoners. The human rights situation, which
remains a source of concern, should also be closely
monitored, with regular recommendations made. This
last component seems indispensable to robust and
effective peacekeeping, and is therefore inseparable
from the rest of the activities of the next mission. The
commitment of Haitian authorities will naturally be
essential to ensuring the success of the Mission.

France has long called on the Council to shoulder
its responsibilities with respect to the question of
Haiti, by making the necessary decisions to ensure that
the engagement of the United Nations on the ground
remains as appropriate and effective as possible over
time. It is now done, and we are very glad ofit. This new
essential step does not mean the end of the commitment
of the United Nations alongside Haiti. On the contrary,
it demonstrates the Council's ability to continually
adjust how the United Nations is involved on the
ground, with the main concern of responding to the
needs of the populations concerned. It also marks the
establishment ofa more responsive and powerful tool at
the service of Haiti and Haitians, the success of which
depends on maintaining our collective commitment. In
that framework, the fight against the terrible cholera
epidemic must of course continue to bring us together.

We believe that it is also essential - and this is
a crucial point - to help Haiti move from a logic of
assistance to one of sustainable development. That is the
priority. That will be the mission of the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti, in conjunction
with the country team. The latter will also have an
important role to play in future developments.

I would like to conclude by paying tribute once
again to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Ms. Sandra Honore Braithwaite, as well
as to all MINUSTAH personnel for their exemplary
commitment to peace and security in Haiti.

