The President (Spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Albania,
Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
the Czech Republic, Denmark, the Dominican Republic,
Estonia, Finland, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Latvia,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Montenegro, Morocco,
the Netherlands, Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal,
Serbia, Slovakia, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Tunisia and Turkey to participate in
this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Jean-
Paul Laborde, Executive Director of the Counter-
Terrorism Executive Directorate; Ms. Dorcas Oduor,
Deputy Director of Public Prosecutions in Kenya;
and Mr. Robert Strang, Executive Secretary of the
International Institute for Justice and the Rule of Law.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
to document S/2016/1030, which contains a letter dated
2 December 2016 from the Permanent Representative of
Spain to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-
General, transmitting a concept paper on the item
under consideration.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2016/1047, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Albania, Angola, Austria,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, Denmark, the Dominican Republic,
Egypt, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Iceland, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Kenya, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Malta, Montenegro, Morocco, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Senegal,
Serbia, Slovakia, Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
the United States of America and Uruguay.

The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.

A vote was taken by show ofhands

In favour:
Angola, China, Egypt, France, Japan, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Russian Federation, Senegal, Spain,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)

The President (spoke in Spanish): The draft
resolution has received 15 votes in favour. The draft

resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2322 (2016).

I now give the floor to Mr. Laborde.


