Mr. McIntosh (Liberia): It is an honour to be
here and to participate in this very important review of
the Secretary-General's report (S/2011/497) on the
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), including
the comprehensive update provided by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, our sister Her
Excellency Ms. Ellen Margerethe Loj. I must thank
you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to make a few
remarks.

Let me begin by commending members of the
Council for remaining engaged in a strong and positive
manner with the Liberian situation. We are grateful and
deeply indebted to the troop- and police-contributing
countries, international civil servants, agencies of the
United Nations system and international partners for
the continuous support to Liberia during these difficult
years. Our special appreciation and gratitude go to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
her staff for the demonstration of strong leadership and
commitment.

As we were told a few minutes ago, there have
now been eight years of unbroken peace in Liberia.
The country has moved progressively from an
environment once characterized by violence, chaos and
heavy indebtedness and lacking every semblance of
social progress to a stage where growth and
development can now be pursued. These positive
developments substantiate the outstanding
contributions that UNMIL has made since 2003.

UNMIL's achievements have ranged from
keeping the peace to building the capacity of State
institutions. It has played a key role in the coordination
of international assistance and in filling critical
logistical and infrastructural gaps. UNMIL has
provided basic and specialized training to more than
4,000 police officers, including at least 700 women.
These are but a few of the important benefits of
UNMIL's presence.

Nurturing the fragile peace and ensuring that
Liberia does not return to conflict remain major
challenges. Capacity gaps still exist in many areas. The
capacities of national security institutions still need to
be strengthened. The Liberia Peacebuilding
Programme, approved under the Liberian configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission, is supporting this
critical effort by establishing regional justice and
security hubs. The first of these has been established in
Gbarnga, one of our country's central cities. Four
others are to follow in the other provinces.

I must use this public forum to commend the
strong commitment of the Chair of that configuration,
Prince Zeid, for his strong commitment to the
achievement of this noble objective. All of this requires
urgent attention and concrete actions as UNMIL
strategizes its drawdown approach.

Today, Liberia is at a critical juncture. On
11 October, precisely 28 days from today, Liberians
will go to the polls to elect their President and
legislative representatives. It will also be a test of the
will and determination of the Liberian people to
conduct themselves in a peaceful manner, void of
election violence and any action that undermines the
hard-earned peace. The process leading to this
important national event has so far been generally
peaceful.

We are pleased to report that UNMIL has been a
significant partner in the process, providing security,
dialoguing with political parties and other stakeholders
and assisting the National Elections Commission in
providing logistical preparedness and delivering
electoral materials. This partnership between UNMIL
and the Government of Liberia is vital. It is vital for
ensuring that elections are free and fair, transparent and
credible. The Government is unreservedly committed
to this objective and hereby invites the international
community to join in observing the process.

As has been rightly emphasized by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, planning for
the elections and addressing developments along our
borders with cote d'Ivoire remain daunting challenges.
The recent mini-summit of heads of State and
Government of the Economic Community of West
African States, held in Abuja just a few days ago,
commended the role that is being played by the United
Nations missions to stabilize the security situations in
C6te d'Ivoire and Liberia. They urged the United
Nations to intensify joint UNMIL-United Nations
Operation in C6te d'Ivoire monitoring and control of
the common border zone between the two countries.
11-49483
They also called for the creation of the requisite
environment for the conduct of peaceful, free, fair and
credible elections. We are heartened that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General has
underscored the same sentiments.

The anticipated United Nations assessment
mission to Liberia in early 2012 will be critical for
Liberia. It will judge Liberia's readiness and ability to
build on the gains made over the years using its own
security capacity. The assessment mission will also be
critical to the Security Council, as it will determine the
nature and scope of its future engagement in Liberia.

It is our view that an orderly and well-paced
drawdown schedule will serve the mutual interests of
both the Council and Liberia. That is why we humbly
embrace and support the Secretary-General's
recommendation to this body for a l2-month extension
of UNMIL's mandate. The Government and people of
Liberia are appreciative of the general support and
endorsement that all the members of the Council will
give to the Secretary-General's recommendation.

