Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Like previous speakers, I am pleased to congratulate
the Minister of Security of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Barisa Colak, for his statement and to thank Lord
Paddy Ashdown, High Representative for the
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina, for his comprehensive report on the
situation in that country (S/2005/156, annex, enclosure), submitted in accordance with the
provisions of the Peace Agreement and the
Conclusions of the London Peace Implementation
Conference.

We would like to stress the significant progress
that has been made to ensure that Bosnia and
Herzegovina can become a viable and peaceful State,
moving towards Euro-Atlantic integration. As the
report makes clear, the authorities have made progress
towards fulfilling the legislative requirements for
membership in NATO's Partnership for Peace and have
begun to make significant structural changes in areas
such as crime prevention, the judiciary and customs
and taxation, as well as in the development of a single
economic space and in the energy market.

In this context, we welcome the repatriation of
the first 1 million refugees, which represents a
milestone since the signing of the Dayton and Paris
Agreements. We also believe that the unification of the
city of Mostar with the rebuilding of the Old Bridge -
which restored to the city its pre-war characteristics -
represents a very significant step.

We would also like to recall that, during the most
recent meeting of the Council on this issue, the High
Representative stressed his concern about the
unfavourable economic situation and the possibility
that it could deteriorate - which did not, in fact,
occur; that would have had negative implications for
the stability of the country. That is why we would like
to stress the significant progress that has been made in
implementing the various aspects of the economic
reform programme presented to the Peace
Implementation Council, in particular with regard to,
inter alia, the implementation of a single set of tax
rules for the whole country, the rebalancing of
Government budgets and measures to create equality
among all companies.

Those actions, almost 10 years after the
beginning of the implementation process of the Dayton
and Paris Agreements, clearly demonstrate that
progress has been made in that area, and we feel that
Operation Althea marks the beginning of a new phase
in the recovery of the country. As the report states, this
marks the transition from the Dayton era to the
Brussels era.

Despite that progress, however - including that
made in the area of defence, with the armed forces now
under the control of the State and with virtually all of
the parameters set out by NATO having been
fulfilled - NATO denied Bosnia and Herzegovina
admission to the Partnership for Peace because of the
lack of full corporation with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY).

Argentina encourages full compliance with the
Dayton Agreements and the effective implementation
of related commitments. In this context, we consider it
absolutely essential to highlight the need for
cooperation with the ICTY as one of the ways to secure
justice and the rule of law in societies that, like Bosnia
and Herzegovina, have gone through conflict
situations. Convinced that justice is an essential
prerequisite for stability and peace, we urge the
authorities - particularly those of Serbia and
Montenegro, as well as those of Republika Srpska and
all States, pursuant to Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations - to support the work of the Tribunal
so that those who have not yet been brought to justice
can appear before it.

We firmly believe that only by working together
against impunity in the face of serious violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law will
we be able to promote the development of legal
institutions and the reconciliation that are so necessary
if a just and sustainable society is to be achieved.

