Mr. Lacroix: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the latest
developments pertaining to the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA), including its
support to the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism (JBVMM). I will provide a brief update on
the situation since the publication of the Secretary-
General's report before the Council (8/2019/817), as well
as the key recommendations contained therein on the
way forward with regard to UNISFA and the J BVMM.

The continued partnership between the Sudan
and South Sudan, notwithstanding the recent change
of Government in Khartoum, presents a unique
opportunity to move the political process forward
on the border issues. Further to the reciprocal visits
of President Salva Kiir Mayardit and Prime Minister
Abdalla Hamdok to their respective capitals in the past
two months, since 14 October Juba has hosted peace
talks between the Sudanese transitional authority
and armed opposition groups. On 21 October, the
negotiating parties signed a political agreement, which
includes a renewed ceasefire. The delegation of the
Security Council also met with President Kiir and
Mr. Riek Machar in Juba a few days ago, in support
of the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan, of which the Sudan is a guarantor.

Building on that momentum, we have seen some
positive steps with regard to the border arrangements.
On 2 and 13 October in Juba, South Sudan and the
Sudan convened, respectively, two ordinary sessions
of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism. Both
parties reaffirmed their commitment to implementing
the Cooperation Agreement between the Republic of
the Sudan and the Republic of South Sudan, signed
on 27 September 2012, and, inter alia, withdrawing
all the forces, including the Sudan People's Liberation
Movement in Opposition, from the Safe Demilitarized
Border Zone, with immediate effect, as well as their
commitment to setting up border crossing corridors,
reopening the Kosti-Renk Nile river corridor and
Meiram-Aweil road corridor, and establishing customs
and immigration posts. The Joint Political and Security
Mechanism also urged UNISFA to accelerate the
opening of sector headquarters in Malakal and Buram.

In addition, from 11 to 13 October, the ad hoc
committee for the disputed 14 Mile Area visited
the JBVMM's sector headquarters in Gok Machar
and its team site at Sumayah/War-Abar to assess the
redeployment of forces and the opening of the Meiram-
Aweil border crossing. The 14 Mile ad hoc committee is
to hold one more meeting before the next meeting ofthe
Joint Political and Security Mechanism in Khartoum,
which is scheduled to take place on 4 December.

Meanwhile, those positive developments have not
extended to a settlement with regard to the final status
of Abyei. No meetings of the Abyei Joint Oversight
Committee have taken place since November 2017.
No progress has been made on the establishment of
joint governance institutions such as police, court and
corrections institutions. While the Government of the
Sudan has indicated its willingness to participate in
a joint planning exercise for the establishment of the
Abyei police service, South Sudan has not responded
to such an initiative. That is of paramount concern,
since the general security situation in Abyei remains
fragile, with persisting intercommunal tensions, the
increase in criminality and the sporadic presence of
armed elements in the area. The community protection
committees, which act as the alternative local security
response mechanism, continue to suffer from a lack of
logistical, administrative and financial resources.

In accordance with paragraph 34 of resolution
2469 (2019), in August and September the Secretariat
conducted an assessment mission, in conjunction with
a military and police capability study. The overall
objectives ofthose exercises were to assess the capacity
of UNISFA to implement its mandate and support for the
JBVMM, and to propose recommendations regarding
its structure, capabilities, and posture to fulfil all its
mandated tasks, based on the current and projected
security situation.

With respect to UNISFA support to the JBVMM,
in the light of the recent efforts taken by the Sudan
and South Sudan on border issues, we welcome the
decision of the Security Council to allow a one-month
technical roll-over of the mandate of the Mission
until 15 November. Furthermore, in his letter to the
Security Council dated 20 September (S/2019/768), the
Secretary-General proposed a six-month extension of
UNISFA's support to the JBVMM. The JBVMM. plays an
important role as a monitoring and confidence-building
measure between the parties. We stand ready to take
every possible effort in order to enable the J BVMM. to
reach its full operating capability, provided that the two
countries abide by their commitment to implementing
the outcomes of the border management discussions.

As for the reconfiguration of UNISFA, the military
and police capabilities studies have recommended that
the Mission update its operational concept and improve
its capabilities with regard to peacekeeping intelligence
and the protection of civilians by readjusting its
enablers. Specifically, the proposed actions included
upgrading its mobility with night-flying assets,
enhancing its engineering and medical capabilities and
deploying personnel with the appropriate skills. The
new operational concept is expected to take six months
to implement.

Informed by those recommendations, the two
options presented to the Council include, first, to
comply with the reduction of troops set out in resolution
2469 (2019), and, secondly, to seek the postponement of
the second phase of the reduction of the additional 295
troops until the end ofthe dry season, in April 2020. The
second option would be preferable, as it would provide
UNISFA with the sufficient forces to fulfil its mandate,
given the recent security and political developments on
the ground. In any event, further efforts will be made
to implement the police-related provisions of resolution
2469 (2019), including the deployment of at least one
formed police unit and 140 individual police officers
by January 2020.

The review mission also stressed the urgent need
to deploy civilian personnel with expertise in political
and civil affairs to Mission headquarters, JBVMM
headquarters and the liaison offices in Khartoum,
Juba and Addis Ababa. A small office should also be
established under the Community Liaison Office to
focus on criminality, justice and detention issues. As for
the request by the Council to appoint a civilian deputy
head of mission for UNISFA, the Sudan maintains its
objection on the grounds that such an appointment
would be inconsistent with the 2011 Agreement.

We witnessed an unprecedented opportunity to
resolve the border-related issues between the Sudan
and South Sudan. Both countries have never been
closer to achieving sustainable peace with each other
and with their armed oppositions as they continue to
support respective peace processes. Building on the
recent positive developments in their bilateral relations,
the two sides need to resume direct talks immediately
to resolve outstanding provisions of the agreements in
relation to the final status of Abyei and border issues.
We continue to work closely with the African Union, in
particular the African Union High-level Implementation
Panel, in support of a political process between the two
parties. In the meantime, UNISFA and the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism continue to
play a key role in stabilizing the security situation on
the ground. Their presence has had a deterrent effect,
filling the gap deriving from the absence of the formal
governance institutions and supporting community
reconciliation and law and order efforts.

In that context, the Secretary-General has
recommended that the role and capacity of UNISFA
to engage in local mediation, provide political support
for dialogue between the two parties and fulfil
protection-related tasks should be strengthened. At this
critical juncture of transition in both countries, it is
critical that the only international mechanism of writing
in the border area be equipped with the appropriate
mandate, capabilities and assets. That would also send
a strong signal to the parties that the United Nations
remains committed to maintaining stability in the
Area. In that regard, we seek the support ofthe Security
Council for the Secretary-General's recommendations
as set out in the report before the Council and to extend
the mandate of UNISFA and its support to the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism by an
additional period of six months.

