Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the participation in today's
meeting of the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Daeie, and share
his considerations and views.

We would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Zahir
Tanin, for his briefing on the activities of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). Mr. Tanin's statement confirms that the
situation in the province is far from being normal. In
a great many respects the trend is of course towards a
deterioration. Naturally, there was no objectivity in the
statement of Ms. Citaku, as is often the case.

The situation in the province remains unstable. We
are again forced to note the continuing poor level of
security for Serbs in Kosovo. The consequences of that
are unceasing attacks on them by Kosovars, including
with the use of Molotov cocktails. Towards the end of
June, similar incidents took place during the celebration
of a historical event of great importance for Serbs, the
Battle of Kosovo. Manifestations of aggression are
regularly experienced not only by tourists and pilgrims
but also byjournalists and those refugees and internally
displaced persons who dare to return to their homes. All
of that is almost completely ignored by the authorities.

There is concern regarding the fate of Serb

religious and historico-cultural facilities and heritage
sites in Kosovo. The transfer of responsibility for their
protection from the relevant international presences to
the Kosovo Police has not resolved the issue of their
security and safety. More robust guarantees, including
legal ones, are needed, and they should be enshrined in
Pristina's list of obligations.

The situation around the unfinished Christ the
Saviour Church in Pristina, which could serve as a
symbol of religious tolerance, persists. Instead of
rapidly resolving that long-lasting problem, the Kosovo
authorities have launched excavations within its
perimeter to find hidden, buried remains of Albanians
repressed by Serbs, which, by the way, as was expected,
never turned up. The unfinished structure has been
repeatedly desecrated by vandals during that process.

The dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina is
in a deep freeze. The Kosovo authorities brazenly
demonstrate their unwillingness to fulfil key
agreements providing for the creation of a community
of Serb municipalities in Kosovo. Pristina is attempting
to justify its unconstructive approach by putting its
own, less significant conditions, mostly economic in
nature, ones that require considerably more time for
comprehensive analysis and assessment. Those who
end up falling hostage to such shady and dubious
manipulations are the ordinary people, who continue to
suffer from all possible types of discrimination on the
part of the Pristina institutions.

By way of illustration, allow me to recall the
campaign launched in Serbian-speaking municipalities
aimed at replacing Serbian forms of identification
documents with Kosovar ones. Those refusing to do
so have experienced difficulties in accessing services
that require proof of identity, as well as in crossing
administrative borders and lines. Such initiatives are
not provided for under resolution 1244 (1999) and
represent a dangerous "improptu" on the part of the
Kosovo authorities.

Also of concern is the direction of discussions
in Kosovo with regard to the so-called agreement on
territorial delineation with Montenegro. Increasingly,
nationalist calls are heard in favour of unifying all
Albanian lands, including those in Serbia, Macedonia,
Greece and Montenegro, and the creation of a "greater
Albania". The core of such a pseudo-Albanian State,
based on the words of high-level politicians in Pristina
and Tirana, will be formed by a comprehensive
integration between Kosovo and Albania. We urge
restraint from such rhetoric, fraught as it is with a
further exacerbation of ethnic confrontations, not just
in Kosovo but in the region as a whole.

We consider unacceptable recent statements in
Pristina claiming that the United Nations Mission
in Kosovo is allegedly an instrument for Russian
influence. We view such statements as attacks not
only on the Mission, but also on the United Nations as
a whole. We have noted the attempts by Kosovars to
delay as long as possible the process of extending the
mandate of the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX), despite the seemingly good relations
between Brussels and Pristina. The ratification of the
relevant law did not occur until three days after the
expiration of the previous mandate. Despite a significant
narrowing of EULEX functions in Kosovo, Pristina
continues relentlessly to try to deprive that entity of
its remaining executive authority and transfer it to the
Kosovo authority. Such actions can only cause concern,
inter alia in the light of the current prosecutions for
serious crimes carried out by the Kosovo Liberation
Army.

With regard to the special international tribunal
created for that purpose, its initial work continues to be
unjustifiably delayed, allowing the potential suspects
and the accused to gain time so that they can identify
and neutralize any witnesses to their actions. We expect
that the new structure will learn from the mistakes of
the past and operate decisively and effectively, holding
to account all those guilty, regardless of their position
in the political hierarchy.

We would again like to draw attention to the fact
that, as a result of the weakness of the law-enforcement
structures and the security system as a whole, the
province constitutes to be a grey zone at the very
heart of Europe, used as a safe harbour and transit
corridor, not only by organized criminals, but also
by radical Islamists. It also facilitates the use of the
province's territory by extremist groups to recruit and
train fighters. Kosovo is among the top three European
sources of individuals fighting for Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). If any measures have
been undertaken to end that situation, they are clearly
insufficient.

We would also like to draw the Council's attention
to the following. Within the framework of visits to
Pristina by the Russian Ambassador to Belgrade, our
colleagues requested, through the United Nations
Mission in the province, the organization of contacts
with the commanders of the Kosovo Force (KFOR)
for an exchange of views regarding a settlement of
the Kosovo problem. After stating that such a meeting
required authorization from NATO Headquarters in
Brussels, the KFOR command structure ended up not
being able to find any time to meet with the Russian
party. We deeply regret that the KFOR leadership has
drifted away from dialogue with Russia regarding
Kosovo. We would like to underscore that NATO
forces are present in the province in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999) and are operating under a
Security Council-approved mandate. Ignoring Russia,
which is a permanent member of the Security Council,
is simply unacceptable. We also demand that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo
include that episode in his quarterly report.

In conclusion, we would like to underscore that,
given the unstable internal political and security
situation and the ongoing inter-ethnic conflicts
and given the deadlock in the dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina and the problems regarding the
implementation of agreements reached between the
parties, we are convinced of the need to maintain a
strong United Nations presence in the province and to
adequately finance the operation. Regular consideration
of the situation of Kosovo by the Council also remains
very important. Resolution 1244 (1999) remains fully
in force and remains the mandatory international legal
basis for a settlement of the situation in the province.

