Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): We are happy that this
open meeting is taking place today to discuss the United
Nations partnership with Africa and how to make it more
productive. My delegation appreciates the initiative taken
by the United Kingdom under its presidency of the
Council for this month. And we thank you, Mr. Minister,
for personally coming here and conducting our meeting.
We hope that the conclusions that you will be drawing at
the end of the meeting will spur future action in this area.
We also thank your Permanent Representative,
Ambassador Sir Jeremy Greenstock, for very effectively
running the work of the presidency for this month. My
delegation is also very happy to learn that during the
presidency of the United States, next month, four
meetings will be devoted to the discussion of issues on
Africa. We welcome this initiative.

Bangladesh is grateful to the Secretary-General for
his statement this morning, which contains a number of
very specific and useful suggestions. We believe that it
will be appropriate for the Council to focus on some of
those. Since his report last year, the Council has adopted
four resolutions and statements of the President. We
believe that those resolutions contain very useful
recommendations and suggestions. One of the first actions
that the Council can take is to follow up on those four
resolutions and let us see what can be implemented. At
the moment, for this debate, we will make six comments
regarding possibilities of action in this area by the
Council.

First, on the question of regional and subregional
organizations: in this context we refer to Council
resolution 1197 (1998), particularly on the aspect which
relates to the establishment of an early warning system.
There seems to be emerging already a good trend in the
association of regional and subregional organizations by
the Security Council. The co-deployment succeeded in the
case of Liberia. There is cause for optimism for a similar
mission in Sierra Leone. So we would strongly welcome
such a trend.

Secondly, the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) Mechanism for the Prevention,
Management, Resolution of Conflicts, Peacekeeping and
Security: this Mechanism is very significant, and we
believe that the Council may associate itself directly with
such a mechanism by sending special missions of its own
representatives. Here we would like to recall with great
satisfaction the Council mission which Ambassador
Andjaba led to East Timor. I think this is a precedent
worth following in the future.

Thirdly, the Council should take a more proactive
role and employ all the mechanisms available under

 

Chapter VI of the Charter - negotiation, investigation
enquiry, mediation; all these are very effective ways of
resolving or preempting crises and should be taken
advantage of. We are very happy that President Mandela
has very graciously agreed to work as the facilitator in
Burundi, and we believe that this kind of instrument or
mechanism could be used in other areas too, in
collaboration with the OAU and ECOWAS.

Fourthly, enhancing African peacekeeping capacity is
also important. I think it has been recognized as an
extremely useful instrument. Particularly, we believe that
the relationship could be established with the existing
regional peacekeeping centres in Africa, and we would
encourage such a move by the Council and by the
Secretariat in the future.

Fifthly, the Council's timely response to peacekeeping
needs in technical and physical terms requires building a
United Nations rapid deployment capacity. We believe that
this area also needs special attention.

Sixthly, my last point is the issue of children and
armed conflict. The Security Council adopted a resolution
a few months ago, and we believe that this is an area which
needs special attention in Africa. Two comments: one,
relating to the Secretary-General's proposal for curbing the
arms bazaar in Africa and this problem of illicit arms flows
and small arms, and Security Council resolution 1209
(1998). We believe there is a lot there to implement;
particularly, the Council can support the ECOWAS
moratorium on import, export and manufacturing of small
arms. I think this is an area for action by the Council. We
would also like to say that addressing Africa's problems
requires a simultaneous, system-wide approach, and I think
that is one point we should not lose sight of.

Finally, Mr. President, as you conclude our meeting
and draw some conclusions, we would suggest that the
presidency might tabulate all the specific suggestions and
ideas that have come up during our interventions in this
meeting. Perhaps this tabulation could be made available to
the delegations so that we can pick and choose and see how
best we can move forward on all these specific ideas and
suggestions.

