Mr. De Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank Mr. Soren J essen-Petersen, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
detailed presentation of the report on the work of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). I join others in welcoming
Mr. Boris Tadic, President of Serbia. I also wish to add
my voice to the condolences expressed on the death of
Mr. Ibrahim Rugova, President of Kosovo, whose
legacy of dialogue and non-violence should continue to
guide the search for a peaceful solution for Kosovo.
We also welcome the recent election of President
Fatmir Sejdiu, to whom we wish success as he carries
out his functions. I would also like to convey the
condolences of my Government to the Government and
people of Slovakia on the tragic plane accident that
took the lives of 42 of its officials in the service of
UNMIK.

With the beginning of the political process aimed
at determining its future status, we have entered a
decisive year for the future of Kosovo. The work of the
United Nations is of more importance than ever. Peru
would like to reaffirm its resolute support for
UNMIK's undertakings.

We are encouraged by the meaningful progress
made in a relatively short time with regard to
preparations for the political process to determine the
future status of Kosovo. The adoption of governing
principles to resolve the matter, which were prepared
by the Contact Group, and the preliminary meetings
that have recently been held, are positive sign that we
are on the right path to defining Kosovo's status.
Another positive sign is the adoption by Kosovo's new
Government of a negotiating platform for the Vienna
meeting.

In seeking to determine the status of Kosovo, it is
important that we not fall behind in implementing
standards. Their implementation is central to UNMIK's
work. All the authorities concerned should continue to
make their best efforts to facilitate substantial progress
in that area, progress that will make it possible to
establish the foundations for a lasting solution to the
issue of Kosovo. The sustainability of the political
process is also linked to progress in building a
democratic and multi-ethnic society through the
effective implementation of the standards for Kosovo.

The future Kosovo should be a democratic and
multi-ethnic entity where the civil liberties set out in
the United Nations Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights are respected, where civil society can develop,
where there is political and religious tolerance and
respect for minorities and where there is a regular
transfer of power through free, transparent and fair
elections. However, none of that will be possible in the
absence of a viable, modern economy in Kosovo that is
able to join the global economy in an effort to increase
people's income. That would lead to the growth of a
middle class, which in every country serves as the
underpinning for civil society, political parties and
democracy.

We have been concerned by the tendency so far in
the Security Council to attempt to resolve political
problems through political formulas and elections. That
is well and good, for, in rebuilding States, there is a
need for institutions that have been legitimized through
the popular vote. Nevertheless, that is not enough. We
stress that the Council should place greater emphasis
on economic and social issues, as was very effectively
done for the first time in the Compact established by
the London Conference on Afghanistan.

In that regard, one aspect that my country
considers central is, as I have said, building a modern
and viable economy that has sufficient productive
capacity and can ensure the economic sustainability of
democracy in Kosovo. Encouraging measures have
been taken to speed up privatization. That has been
reflected in the increase in private investment in the
region - which had not been the case for many
years - as well as in the expectation that up to 4,000
jobs may be created, either directly or indirectly. We
have also noticed the progress made in budgetary
management and the important contribution by the
United Nations Development Programme in the
employment-generation project, whose results were
presented at the beginning of last December.

However, there remains a great deal to be done,
given that the economy of Kosovo continues to depend
on donations from the international community. This
year's budget, recently approved, already has a 10 per
cent deficit to be covered by donor funds. According to
the publication "Kosovo in figures 2005" of the
Statistical Office of Kosovo, the unemployment rate
stands at almost 40 per cent of the population, of which
two thirds constitute unskilled workers. The report
indicates that quality basic public services are not
available to any community and that urgent
improvements are needed, especially in education and
health. The modernization and reactivation of the
economy are therefore critical to democracy in Kosovo
and to the materialization of the European perspective
there. In addition, the generation of economic
opportunities for the local population is essential to
reinforce the activities that have already taken place to
fight the crime prevailing in the area, including cases
of corruption, money-laundering and human
trafficking.

In conclusion, Peru reiterates its commitment to
supporting UNMIK's objectives and to the political
process under way to determine the future status of the
province. It must be a democratic, multi-ethnic and
inclusive entity that is anchored in a viable economy.

