Mr. Cardi (Italy): I would like to thank all the
briefers for their contributions to today's debate.

Before delivering my statement, I wish to condemn
in the strongest terms last Friday's terror attack in
Jerusalem and the murder of the Israeli police officer
Hadas Malka. We wish to extend our sympathy to the
victims of the attack and to their families.

Fifty years have passed since the 1967 war.
There must be no room for fatalism or resignation.
On the country, this anniversary must reinforce our
collective resolve to work for a peace deal between
Israelis and Palestinians. Regardless of the length
of the historical controversy or the complexity of the
geopolitical situation, where there is a will there is a
way. We are encouraged by the level of engagement
that the United States Administration is showing on the
Middle East peace process, and we support its efforts.
Any new approach that can lead to a just and lasting
peace will be welcome, and Italy will contribute to it
as long as it remains within the Oslo framework and is
aimed at a two-State solution, which in our view is the
only achievable possibility.

Although we maintain that peace must ultimately
be attained through direct negotiations between the
parties, we believe that the support of other actors is
also ofparamount importance. I refer in particular to the
role of the Middle East Quartet, which has the ability
to contribute effectively to creating new momentum for
the peace process. In that regard, I should stress that the
European Union, as a member of the Quartet, continues
to consider the peace process one of its top priorities.
Similarly, a credible path towards peace requires the
direct involvement of the main Arab partners, which
recently reaffirmed the importance of the Arab Peace
Initiative as a strategic tool in helping to achieve peace
between Israel and Palestine and bring about a future
of cooperation and prosperity for the entire Middle
East. Besides that, intensifying and accelerating those
international diplomatic efforts is an integral aspect
of resolution 2334 (2016), about which we have just
received the second quarterly report of the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process.

The resolution is very clear on violence. There is
no justification whatever for any acts of violence or
terror of any kind by anyone, nor for any incitement to
such violence. All those in charge have a fundamental
obligation to take a clear stance against any kind of
violence, take all possible measures to prevent and end
such violence or incitement to it and firmly condemn
any attacks and their perpetrators. Provocations and
inflammatory rhetoric should also be avoided by all
concerned. With regard to settlements, we continue to
believe that they are an obstacle to a two-State solution
and that they give rise to further tensions and do not
contribute to achieving peace.

Any diplomatic initiative relies on solid partners
and their willingness to make bold decisions. That is
why we support Palestine's President Mahmoud Abbas
as the legitimate representative of the Palestinian
leadership, which has the responsibility to engage
constructively in order to advance peace negotiations.
It is time for the Palestinian Authority to retake
control of the Gaza Strip, where living conditions have
deteriorated dramatically thanks to years of neglect,
political clashes and conflict. In the process ofrestoring
the whole of Palestine under a single democratic and
legitimate authority, it is absolutely essential to ensure
that the humanitarian imperative is taken into account.

In the light of that complicated environment, I
would like to express Italy's deep appreciation for the
hard work that has lately been done by the Special
Coordinator and his staff, and by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East and all United Nations entities in the
region in general. I would once again like to stress the
invaluable contribution that the United Nations has
made to the lives of Palestinians in the region and to the
security of Israel itself. In that spirit, we encourage all
United Nations agencies operating in the area to further
strengthen the vetting and accountability mechanisms
relating to their own employees.

In conclusion, we firmly believe that the two-
State vision remains the only achievable goal that can
bring this long conflict to an end and the only one that
will help the international community rally for the
stabilization of the entire Middle East.

