Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Haile Menkerios for the support that
the United Nations Mission in the Sudan is providing
for the referendum process, as well as President Mkapa
for the work of the Secretary-General's Panel. I also
thank both of them for their briefings this morning.
This has been an impressive United Nations operation.

Although we are concerned about events in
Abyei, we are very encouraged by the peaceful and
orderly conduct of the voting process in the
referendum and by the Panel's assessment that the
voting process allowed the people of the Sudan to
express their will freely. Both the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and the African Union
called the referendum free, fair and credible. The
Southern Sudan Referendum Commission and both
Sudanese parties should be highly commended for this
successful process. We welcome the timeline that the
Southern Sudan Referendum Commission has
established for the announcement of the results. It is
important that the timeline and the results, when
announced, be respected by all parties. We must all
work to ensure that the aggregation and counting
process takes place in an atmosphere of patience and
calm.

We deplore the clashes that took place in Abyei
between 7 and 10 January and deeply regret the loss of
life. We welcome the efforts of the parties' local
leaders and of Special Representative Menkerios to
restore calm and secure the local peace agreement
reached on 13 January. We urge all parties to continue
to work to that end. Such clashes underline the urgent
need for reaching a lasting agreement on Abyei. We
urge the swift resumption of talks and call on the
parties to make the compromises necessary to secure
long-term peace and stability.

A similar spirit of compromise will be needed to
resolve crucial post-referendum issues, which include
the border, citizenship and wealth-sharing. We call on
the parties to show leadership in these areas, as they
have done on the referendum. The Security Council
remains united in its support for a peaceful and
credible referendum and for the full implementation of
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement.

I cannot close without addressing the situation in
Darfur, which remains of deep concern. The recent
abduction of United Nations Humanitarian Air Service
employees in West Darfur highlights the lack of
security in Darfur and its impact on humanitarian
operations there. We call on all parties to cease
hostilities immediately and to ensure full and
unhindered access for humanitarian workers and the
staff of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur. We continue to support the work
of African Union-United Nations Chief Mediator
Djibril Bassole and his efforts to negotiate a peaceful
settlement in Darfur. Genuine and enduring peace in
Darfur will require a comprehensive and inclusive
agreement. We therefore call on all rebel groups to join
the peace process without delay or preconditions.
6

