Mr. Rakhmetullin (Kazakhstan): 1 thank the
presidency of Lithuania for drawing renewed attention
to the horrific acts that have been committed against
journalists and for calling for more resolute action to
defend them.

Targeting journalists represents a direct attack
on freedom of expression and on democracy. Such
attacks have a far-reaching impact, since they prevent
us from receiving first-hand information about
political developments, the extent of conflicts, human
rights violations and crimes against humanity. That
reduces the ability of the United Nations and regional
organizations to act promptly and appropriately.

In our joint actions, we have to take into
consideration the now radically changed character
of war, with its multiple perpetrators - the State,
opposition parties, radical religious extremists and
criminals. Today, journalists are deliberate targets
of public kidnappings and killings for ransom and
the release of detained terrorists. Yet countless more
unseen and unheard local journalists are silenced
through imprisonment and intimidation by their own
countries, with sexual violence inflicted on women
journalists. So far, regrettably, none of the perpetrators
of such acts have been brought to justice, and impunity
is increasing.

My delegation would like to propose that UNESCO,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe - through its Representative on Freedom of
the Media - the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights, the United Nations and its country
teams, together with large media and aid agencies,
begin by ensuring that Governments and non-State
actors enforce the relevant existing instruments,
which include the Geneva Conventions and the Rome
Statutes, as well as the United Nations Plan of Action
on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity,
resolution 1738 (2006) and UNESCO's Berlin and
Medellin Declarations. It is imperative that we improve
training related to working in hostile environments,
the rules of war, first aid, improved registration and
coordination and insurance coverage, along with the
provision of protective gear and better use of digital
security devices forjournalists.

The United Nations system must therefore work
with its partners in the non-governmental media
organizations, such as the International Federation
of Journalists, Reporters Without Borders, the
International Press Institute, the Committee for the
Protection of Journalists, and others, to provide
better protection and safeguards. That would include
enhanced ratification of the Additional Protocols,
specific classifications of attacks on media personnel
as war crimes under international criminal law and,
finally, better mitigation, advocacy and education.
The Security Council needs to devote further regular
attention to such attacks and call upon the Secretary-
General and Member States to provide increased robust
action.

The Government of Kazakhstan devotes great
attention towards implementing norms and standards
in its national media legislation, promoting public
participation in enacting new laws that minimize
administrative barriers in media reporting. It also
provides financial and legislative support towards
developing independent media. Recently, on 26 and
27 May, Astana hosted, together with the United Nations
Department of Public Information, a media seminar on
peace in the Middle East. It is one ofa series of events
and programmes supporting journalists and media
representatives in areas of armed conflict. Kazakhstan
is considering cooperation with Middle East countries
to strengthen peace and stability within the larger
international agenda in accordance with relevant United
Nations resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative.

Another significant contribution of Kazakhstan
is the international Eurasian Media Forum. It is
held annually in Astana and serves as a platform to
discuss and exchange views on improving the use of
best practices in the protection ofjournalists through
United Nations peacekeeping missions, operations of
other international and subregional organizations and
the involvement of national Governments in peace
processes.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Kazakhstan's
readiness to work further with the international
community in ensuring the greater protection of
journalists as conflicts become more complex,
protracted and hostile.

