Mr. Maurer (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
The international community has been strongly
committed to Kosovo for more than five years now.
The deplorable events of last March have forced us to
review the strategy we had pursued until then in order
to find a lasting political settlement. The Secretary-
General made proposals to this effect. Switzerland
welcomes the Secretary-General's report of
17 November 2004 on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo, and welcomes the
work of the Special Representative Mr. Seren Jessen-
Petersen, as well as that of Mr. Eide. We also share the
analysis of the political situation the report presents,
which shows that lessons have been learned from the
March events, but that there is still much progress to be
made. The measures necessary to achieve this progress
require sustained commitment from all parties
involved.

My country supports the idea of a comprehensive
and integrated strategy for Kosovo, because, for the
moment, there seems to be no other way to unite local
players and the international community for the
purpose of defining the future status of Kosovo. As
well, Switzerland supports the approach of addressing
the question of Kosovo within the overall context of
the region and in the framework of a dialogue
involving all the communities concerned, in particular
the Kosovo Serbs, especially because the region's
political calendar will be very full in 2005. There will
be important elections and equally important
constitutional discussions.

As underlined by the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2004/907), ensuring the economic future of
Kosovo is an indispensable precondition for ensuring
stability in the region. Improving the economic
situation requires not only creating conditions
favourable to economic development but also
strengthening political and civil-society institutions.

A lasting political settlement of the question of
Kosovo remains a key element for stability in South-
East Europe. Switzerland is particularly concerned by
the fact that a significant number of Kosovo Albanians
and others from the former Yugoslavia in general have
settled in our country. That is why my country remains
strongly engaged in Kosovo. Switzerland is especially
engaged in the areas of consolidating local democracy
and decentralization and strengthening mechanisms to
ensure the protection of minorities. Thanks to the
experience gained in the region over the past decade,
Switzerland remains prepared to enhance its already
active role in promoting dialogue between Pristina and
Belgrade, as well as among the various communities.

The future of Kosovo is first and foremost in the
hands of the Kosovars themselves and depends on their
willingness to live in peace and to respect and protect
minorities. The events of March must never recur. At
the same time, the future of Kosovo depends also on
the international community's preparedness to
contribute to finding a solution to the question of the
province's status that is viable and acceptable to all
parties. Switzerland calls on States to establish a good
process.

To be sure, UNMIK's work is still far from
finished, as is the work of Kosovo Force, which has the
crucial role of ensuring security for the population.
Switzerland reaffirms its full support for those
missions.

