Mr. Holmes: I will be brief. Let me begin by
welcoming the support expressed for resolution 1894
(2009) by many speakers. I hope that it will translate
into a serious effort to implement the resolution and, of
course, previous resolutions, too.

I also welcome the participation of the more than
60 delegations that have spoken today. Again, I hope
that this is an indication not only of the seriousness
with which States view this tenth anniversary, but also
and more importantly a sign of their commitment to
action. Otherwise, the gap between rhetoric and reality
will yawn further and the credibility of the Council
itself will also be further impaired.

It is too easy to talk of the issue at hand, as the
Permanent Representative of Zambia put it this
afternoon, "from the comfort of distance and in the
shelter of the edifices of wealth" without fully
appreciating the genuine horror for individuals and
families of what we are actually talking about.

It is very late, so let me make one or two rapid
concluding comments.

Many speakers have expressed support for those
parts of the resolution dealing with the role of
peacekeeping missions in the protection of civilians
and for the findings of the joint study commissioned by
the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) on this subject. Let
me just repeat that OCHA and DPKO look forward to
working with many Council members in the months
ahead to take those recommendations forward.

Several speakers mentioned the important role of
regional and subregional actors in peacekeeping. We
certainly intend to share the findings of the study with
those regional organizations that have a role in
peacekeeping, for example, the African Union, the
European Union and NATO.

Many speakers have underlined, correctly, the
importance of ensuring accountability for those who
violate the law, and some have referred to the
importance in this context of fact-finding mechanisms.
I would certainly urge the Council and Member States
to give greater consideration to how to employ such
mechanisms on a more frequent, consistent and less
politically influenced basis.

On the issue of the value of engagement with
non-State armed groups for compliance and access,
mentioned by a number of speakers, the Secretary-
General has called on the Council to convene an Arria
formula meeting to discuss the experience of United
Nations and non-governmental actors in engaging such
groups. I hope the Council will convene such a meeting
ahead of the first protection of civilians open debate in
2010.

Let me also reiterate the point, made by the
Secretary-General and several others, that when it
comes to protecting civilians in armed conflict, the
Council cannot afford only to address protection
concerns in those situations on its political agenda. We
need to find ways to address other alarming situations
better and to make better use of the unique protection
tools at the disposal of the Council.

Finally, a few speakers noted that the nature of
contemporary conflict, marked by the struggle against
non-State armed groups in what is known as
asymmetric warfare, poses new challenges for the
protection of civilians. I acknowledge the complexity
of these challenges, but the suggestion seems to be that
fighting an enemy who is difficult, if not impossible to
identify or distinguish from civilians, and one that at
times commits flagrant violations of international
humanitarian law, somehow makes the application of
the law to States parties to conflict less relevant.

The law itself is quite clear. All parties to conflict
must at all times take the necessary steps to spare the
civilian population and distinguish at all times between
civilians and combatants.

Moreover, violations by one party, including
non-State parties, do not permit or justify violations by
any other party to that same conflict. Indeed, the nature
of contemporary armed conflicts and the increasing
prevalence of conflict in urban and densely populated
settings means that all parties must be ever more
vigilant and determined to respect and ensure respect
for their obligations under the law, even if there is
room for experts to look at how that can be best done
in such challenging circumstances.

One issue here is the choice of weapons. As noted
in the last report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/277), there are increasing concerns about the
humanitarian impact of explosive weapons when used
in densely populated areas in terms of the risk to
civilians caught in the blast or killed or injured by
damaged buildings, and in terms of damaged
infrastructure vital to the well-being of the civilian
population such as water and sanitation systems.
Again, there is scope for a new look at this crucial
issue, and I hope the Council will take it up at some
point.

