Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): Sir, please accept my delegation's sincerest
congratulations on Botswana's assumption of the presidency
of the Council for this month. We are sure that with the
experience and diplomatic skills of Botswana's Permanent
Representative, we shall successfully complete our tasks.
My delegation wishes to assure him of its full support.

We also express our gratitude for the outstanding work
of Ambassador Emilio Cardenas of the Argentine Republic
last month.

My delegation also wishes to welcome the Ministers
of Foreign Affairs of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU), particularly His Excellency the Minister of External
Affairs of Angola, Mr. Venancio de Moura, who have come
to the Council to support and contribute to the peace
process in Angola. We believe that if we could rely on the
resolute support of regional organizations in the search for
solutions in those regions of the world where conflicts are
taking a considerable economic and human toll on the
countries involved, such conflicts would find no fertile
ground in which to grow. In this respect, we express our
deepest gratitude to OAU for its efforts in Angola and in
other regions of Africa where difficult situations stemming
from internal political conflicts persist. We call upon it to
do in the future, in other countries or regions of the
continent where conflicts persist, what is now being done
for Angola.

My delegation considers the signing of the Lusaka
Protocol of 20 November 1994 the culmination of the
conflict in Angola. In adopting it, the parties clearly
demonstrated their desire to resolve the conflict and
restore peace in their country by peaceful means. For that
reason, we appreciate the efforts both of the Government
of Angola and UNITA to uphold the agreed cease-fire.
Although the implementation of the Protocol has not been
perfect and has been delayed in certain aspects, the
overall outlook is rather positive and encouraging.

My delegation is grateful for the Secretary-General's
report on the second United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM. II), submitted to the Council in
accordance with paragraph 8 of resolution 966 (1994).
The report gives a wide-ranging and comprehensive
picture of the current situation in Angola, and we
therefore support both its content and its appeal for the
prompt provision of the humanitarian assistance Angola
needs.

In his report, the Secretary-General has
recommended that the United Nations mission in Angola
should continue following the progress achieved in the
political realm through the "Acordos de Paz", the signing
of the Lusaka Protocol and the commitment by the parties
to implement and abide by the Council's resolutions. My
delegation gives its broadest support to that
recommendation and therefore also supports the draft
resolution now under consideration, which establishes the
third United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III) peace-keeping operation, with an initial
mandate in force until 8 August 1995.

It is also the wish of my Government to see the
Lusaka Protocol implemented without further delay so
that the leaders of Angola can get their country moving
along the path of peace, democracy and development.
This, if properly fulfilled, would give justification for the
provisions of paragraph 10 of the draft resolution: the
intention to conclude the mandate of UNAVEM. III when
the objectives of the Lusaka Protocol have been achieved.
Thus, once the mandate of UNAVEM. III comes to a
close, the destiny of Angola will lie exclusively in the
hands of the Angolans themselves.

We therefore believe that the draft resolution should
be seen not only as an incentive but also as cause for
profound reflection so that the parties involved in the
conflict in Angola may act in all seriousness and looking
to the future of their country.

 
We appeal seriously to the leaders of Angola to come
to the firm conclusion that, once the mandate of UNAVEM
III is over, if they do not help themselves to resolve their
own internal political problems it will not be easy for the
international community to come to their aid. We trust that
those leaders will act with prudence, maturity and a high
sense of patriotism and that they will put Angola in its
rightful place in the international scene.

