Let me begin by thanking the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, Mark Lowcock, for his frank briefing on the humanitarian situation in Syria. We also thank the Regional Director of Syria Relief and Development, Amany Qaddour, for her briefing. Reports of increased security incidents and airstrikes in various pockets of Syria are of great concern to South Africa. While South Africa, welcomes the general maintenance of the ceasefire agreement in the north-west of Syria, reports of the use of improvised explosive devices, landmines, air and ground strikes and of incidents involving explosive remnants of war cannot be ignored, especially given the resulting injury and death of civilians, including women and children. South Africa again calls on all parties to the conflict to respect their obligations under international human rights and international humanitarian law regarding the protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure, such as schools, health facilities and water reticulation facilities. South Africa recommends that such facilities be regarded as neutral by all parties to the conflict. The continued loss of civilian life is unacceptable. These continuing security incidents and violence have a direct impact on the socioeconomic and humanitarian situations in Syria. The deteriorating economic environment has seen a significant impact on the daily lives of Syrians, with over 9 million people food insecure, and many households are engaging in negative coping mechanisms in order to make ends meet. These negative coping mechanisms are having a destructive psychological impact on civilians who have already been devastated by nine years of violence, resulting in injuries, deaths and the detention of loved ones. The deteriorating economic circumstances in Syria are having a direct impact on the already dire humanitarian situation. South Africa therefore reiterates its call for the immediate lifting of all unilateral sanctions currently being imposed on Syria, especially given the growing spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) throughout Syria. With the rising number of COVID-19 cases, it is important that humanitarian response efforts be focused on preparedness and response planning to minimize the potential impact of COVID-19 on the vulnerable refugee and internally displaced person (IDP) populations. Testing, especially in locations susceptible to the spread of the virus, such at detention centres and formal and informal refugee and IDP camps, is essential in that regard. South Africa is concerned by the impact of the reduction in humanitarian border crossing points. We welcome the extension of the humanitarian border crossing at Bab Al-Hawa for 12 months, as this is the only way that essential humanitarian assistance is currently being delivered to north-western Syria. The 12-month mandate renewal will also allow the United Nations humanitarian agencies and parties the necessary time to adequately plan and prepare for their important and continued efforts. In view of the reduction of the cross-border assistance mechanisms, the focus must turn towards the improvement and enhancement of the cross-line assistance mechanisms. The scaling up of cross-line assistance is essential to close the gap in humanitarian assistance resulting from the closure of the Al-Yarubiyah and Bab Al-Salam border crossings. In that regard, we also reiterate our call for the safe, unimpeded and impartial delivery of humanitarian aid and assistance to all who require it, in line with the provisions of international humanitarian law. I have a question for Mr. Lowcock. Given the dire economic and humanitarian situation, as he mentioned in his statement, and the increasing needs, especially for children, women and those with disabilities, does Syria have oilfields and, if so, where are they located, who controls them and why is he unable to use the proceeds from the oil that is produced for the relief agencies to assist the Syrian people? In conclusion, we reiterate that the situation in Syria can be resolved only through negotiations and dialogue, and we therefore call on all parties to exert every effort towards the full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015) to further avoid the displacement of Syrians and loss of innocent lives. If there is no progress on the political front, the humanitarian catastrophe will further deteriorate and there will be more loss of life and destruction. An alternative to war must be found.
