Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We
would like to thank you, Sir, and congratulate you on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council. We
would also like to congratulate you on the adoption of
resolution 2341 (2017) this morning. Let me also take
this opportunity to thank the Swedish presidency of the
Security Council during January.

Turning to the topic of today's debate, I would like
to thank you for the concept note that your delegation
has provided (S/2017/104, annex), as well as all previous
speakers for their constructive statements.

Terrorism is a danger that threatens
international peace and security and targets innocent
civilians - women, children and the elderly - as well
as critical civilian infrastructure. In 2015, we suffered
a terrorist attack in Kuwait that targeted religious
institutions and caused many casualties. In 1990, while
our country was occupied by Iraq, oil sites were targeted,
thereby undermining our country's environment. That
is why we called for the designation of 6 November as
the International Day for Preventing the Exploitation of
the Environment in War and Armed Conflict.

Kuwait has undertaken many measures to protect
its infrastructure. We support the efforts of the
international community to combat the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant. We condemn terrorism in all
of its forms and manifestations. Terrorist acts are
unjustifiable. They cannot be linked to any religion
or nationality. The fight against terrorism requires
bolstering international efforts, while also fully
complying with human rights, the rule of law, good
governance, peaceful coexistence among religions and
respect for all religious symbolism. In that respect, we
stress the need for the implementation of, inter alia,
resolutions 1373 (2001), 1963 (2010), 2129 (2013) and
2322 (2016).

We also stress the need to implement the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy and support the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate along
such lines. We emphasize the importance of technical
assistance and capacity-building aimed at protecting
critical infrastructure while strengthening dialogue
between countries and regional and international
organizations with a View to exchanging best practices
and drawing upon each other's experiences. We also
note the importance of international cooperation with
INTERPOL, inter alia, in the area of information- and
expertise-exchange in order to combat terrorism and
improve the protection of critical infrastructure.

We urge all Member States to draw upon the work of
United Nations programmes and specialized agencies,
as well as regional and international organizations.
Critical infrastructure across the world is a particular
target for terrorists, as its connectivity makes it more
vulnerable to attacks. Information technology entities,
when attacked, can become a multiplying factor for
danger. That is why there must be cooperation among
Governments to devise emergency plans.

Here we would take note of resolution 2286 (2016),
on the protection of medical facilities, personnel and
equipment in armed conflict. The resolution is fully in
line with international humanitarian law and human
rights law.

In spite of terrorism continuing unabated and
the fact that ISIL is still continuing with its heinous
acts, in addition to those committed by Boko Haram,
Al-Shabaab and the Al-Nusra Front, in Yemen, Syria,
Iraq, Libya, Somalia, these groups continue to lose
ground in many regions across the world, as noted in
the Secretary-General's report contained in document
S/2017/97. We stress the importance of collective action
to rebuild critical infrastructure, and we highlight
Kuwait's assistance to displaced persons and refugees,
as well as the need to rebuild critical infrastructure
destroyed by terrorism, so as to ensure that life goes
back to normal in hospitals and schools that have been
struck as well as other sites.

Finally, we reiterate that our unchanged position
of condemning terrorism and stress the importance of
international law, the four Geneva Conventions and
the relevant Security Council resolutions, as well as
international cooperation within the United Nations to
tackle this threat.

