Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I too wish
to thank Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his in-depth briefing and for all
his efforts over the past few years. We wish him every
success in his future endeavours.

I welcome Mr. Ivica Daeie, First Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia, and Mr. Hashim Thaci, Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Kosovo, and thank them both for their statements.

Jordan attaches great importance to the significant
progress that has been made by the Government of
Kosovo to honour its commitment to delivering stability
and advancing towards regional integration. We would
like to express our satisfaction with the progress being
made on more than one front, in particular with regard
to the amendments adopted by the Kosovo Assembly to
pave the way for the establishment for a specialist court
on war crimes - an issue towards which the European
Union Task Force has been working in order to establish
accountability. We welcome that step to ensure the rule
of law in the nation.

We call for all steps to be taken to protect religious
minorities in Kosovo, including their property and
goods, as well as steps to preserve the cultural heritage
and religious sites in Kosovo. We call upon the Kosovo
authorities to bring to justice all those who have
perpetrated abuses against minorities or threatened
the cultural heritage. It is essential to deliver on that in
order to ensure that perpetrators do not enjoy impunity.

Meeting internal and security and political
challenges in Kosovo will require the support of the
international community, which must guarantee peace
and stability in the country as well as in the countries
of the region. We therefore express our support for
the ongoing efforts to ensure that there is further
agreement and better relations among all ethnic and
other minorities in Kosovo. We must continue the
economic and political reform programme, as well as
to deliver on the development programme. We would
like to emphasize the need to resolve issues relating
to cadastres, border demarcation and missing persons,
including also facilitating the return of the displaced.
Such returns have dropped off considerably over the
past few months. We must ensure that it increases and
that those who do return can fully reintegrate into
society.

We welcome the progress achieved by both Kosovo
and Serbia as they seek to continue dialogue at all levels.
We call upon them to redouble their efforts to ensure that
relations between both countries can be strengthened
and to expand the space for political consulation and
dialogue between the two countries so that progress can
be made on points of common interest. The goal should
be to ensure that relations between Kosovo and Serbia
can be normalized. We also call on both sides to ensure
that the bilateral agreements reached thus far can be
fully implemented.

We also believe that the support of the countries of
the broader Balkan region is essential in order to ensure
better peace and security in the region and a whole.
All countries of the region have a common political
interest in ensuring peace and stability while building
on historical ties. We are aware that there have been
obstacles in the way that have prevented such friendly
ties at the broader regional level. However, making
progress in that regard is the only way to break the cycle
of violence and conflict. There is therefore a need for
support to Kosovo and Serbia from their neighbours
in order to open a new chapter in their history, one that
paves the way towards development and prosperity in
future.

It is essential that we establish a development and
security partnership for the Balkan region in order to
guarantee integration and peace. That can be achieved
only with the support of the international community
and of the broader region. Europe in particular has
a special role, as it has the necessary capacity and
diplomatic tools required to ensure that an agreement is
reached between the various officials and countries in
the Balkans. Given the well-known history of conflict
in the region, perhaps the parties can learn from the
model of the broader continent, where differences have
been put aside.

We welcome the signing of the Stabilization and
Association Agreement between the European Union
and Serbia, which is a key step towards stability, as
well as for the stability of Kosovo - should such an
agreement be signed with that country as well, setting
on a pather towards joining the European Union.

Jordan, which has recognized Kosovo as
an independent, sovereign State, calls upon the
international community to follow in our steps and
do likewise. We also call upon the international
community to allow Kosovo to join all international
organizations and all agencies of the United Nations as
an independent, sovereign country. That would allow
the country to build a brighter future and pursue the
path of political maturity, economic growht and social
development, and put it in a better position to achieve
lasting peace.

In conclusion, we would like to express our gratitude
to UNMIK and all its staff for their considerable and
commendable efforts and positive contributions to
ensuring peace and security. We also commend the
Head of Mission and his team for their professional
attitude and dedication to achieve UNMIK's goals.

