Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation thanks Sweden for convening and presiding
over this debate, as well as for the concept note
(S/2017/6, annex), which was prepared and circulated in

a timely manner. We also thank the Secretary-General
for his outstanding statement. It is very encouraging for
us to see that in his New Year's message, coinciding
with the beginning of his new mandate, he has made the
issue of peace a priority for 2017, which is a matter that
depends on all of us.

We also appreciate the importance that he attaches
to diplomacy and mediation as fundamental tools in the
search for peace and the prevention of new conflicts.
Moreover, we especially welcome his willingness to
work to develop a comprehensive, modern and effective
peacebuilding architecture in order to bring about long-
term development and strengthen the prevention and
peaceful settlement of conflicts. The broad review that
was made in the United Nations in 2015 has been very
clear with regard to the need to prioritize the prevention
of conflicts.

Uruguay believes that it is important to maintain
the momentum created by the concurrent adoption of
Security Council resolution 2282 (2016) and General
Assembly resolution 70/262 on 27 April 2016 on the
review of the peacekeeping architecture, so as to
continue to produce constructive input concerning
peacebuilding throughout the United Nations system.

We should nevertheless ask ourselves what tools
are available to us in order to prevent conflict. First, we
have the United Nations Charter and institutions, as well
as regional and subregional organizations. The work of
prevention requires a political commitment on the part
of relevant actors in order to address situations that,
owing to their character, pose the risk of a resurgence
of or a return to conflict.

In the region to which my country belongs, there
exist regional and subregional organizations that
have contributed successfully to preventing potential
conflicts through mechanisms such as good offices and
mediation, among others.

The Security Council, under the Charter, is
entrusted with a responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. Preventive diplomacy
efforts on the part of the Council are relevant, as it is
the system's principal organ for the maintenance of
peace. But to that end, it is key that all of its members,
not just some of them, have early access to the relevant
information with regard to possible breaches of
the peace.

In this regard, Uruguay supported last
year New Zealand's initiative to hold periodic
situational-awareness meetings with the various
departments and offices of the Secretariat. Uruguay,
as a traditional troop-contributing countries, knows
first-hand of the challenges that arise in the field
during and after conflict. The work that our Blue
Helmets have done and will do can very often be
considered as early peacebuilding. This coincides with
the View expressed in the review of the peacebuilding
architecture, namely, that peacebuilding tasks are not
limited to post-conflict situations but are in fact part
of a continuum encompassing the period before, during
and after conflict.

The three pillars of the United Nations are
interdependent and mutually reinforcing. Therefore, it
is possible to build peace only when there is respect for
human rights in developed societies that respect the rule
of law. The root causes of conflicts must be overcome
by putting into practice the various instruments at the
disposal of the United Nations. Fighting organized
crime, terrorism, extreme poverty, discrimination and
other scourges affecting societies should be a priority.

The maintenance ofpeace is a complex process that
covers a broad range of tasks and actors and that requires
integration and coordination with the Government of
the country involved, leading to dialogue and peace
processes that are inclusive and representative of society
as a whole. In this regard, we would like to stress that
the role of women is essential in order to ensure peace.

Uruguay reiterates its commitment to international
peace and security. Sustainable peace is everyone's
business. It is the goal towards which we must work
together in order to translate into action that which
we so often preach in speeches, resolutions and
other documents.

