Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I extend my thanks to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo,
Mr. Zahir Tanin, for his comprehensive briefing to
the Security Council on the report (S/2017/387) of the
Secretary-General. Egypt reiterates its full support to
Mr. Tanin in the performance of his duties. We also
welcome Ms. Nela Kuburovie, Minister of Justice of the
Republic of Serbia, and Ambassador Vlora Citaku and
thank them for their statements.

Egypt stresses its concern with regard to promoting
security and stability in the Western Balkans region,
which is affected by the situation in Kosovo. We highly
value the efforts deployed by the Kosovo authorities
recently with a view to achieving that objective and the
reforms it has begun to implement. We commend the
progress achieved in the economic, security and rule-of
law-fields, which were reflected in higher development
rates, lower unemployment and a general improvement
in the investment environment. We call upon the new
Kosovo Government to continue that approach of
settling differences through constructive dialogue.

At the same time, we are concerned by the
information contained in the report of the obstacles
facing the dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade
and the implementation of the agreements achieved
between them. Egypt stresses that high-level
dialogue between the two sides under the auspices
of the European Union remains the most appropriate
framework to settle differences peacefully between
them. We call upon the two sides to exercise restraint
and to refrain from unilateral steps that may exacerbate
the situation between them. We therefore urge leaders
in both Belgrade and Pristina to continue the high-level
dialogue with a view to achieving agreed and sustainable
solutions that are acceptable by both sides and lay the
foundations for peace and stability in the region.

We also express our concern at the surge of ethnic
and nationalist tendencies, and also stress the need to
avoid instigations that may exacerbate the situation
and internal divisions. We welcome the decision by
the political powers representing the Kosovo Serbs
to end their boycott and resume their participation
in the Government and the Assembly. We call upon
all parties in Kosovo to also adopt the approach of
dialogue, understanding and the establishment of State
institutions, and stress the importance of achieving
progress in the establishment of local Serb-majority
municipalities in Kosovo, which we believe is vital to
ensure the institutional protection of the Kosovo Serbs.

Lastly, and in view of the importance we attach
to regional peace and security as one of the pillars of
our foreign policy, we stress the importance that the
Kosovo Assembly should accept the border demarcation
agreement with Montenegro in order to expedite the
integration of Kosovo in Europe.

