I am grateful for the opportunity to participate in this meeting on Venezuela, a sister country facing a colossal crisis. My country has a historic tradition of respect for democracy and international law. It has been a strong advocate for multilateralism and dialogue to resolve differences. Colombia, together with more than 50 countries and multilateral organizations, has disavowed the illegitimate Maduro regime for over a year, and instead recognizes interim President Juan Guaido. As a part of the Lima Group and along with other countries, it supports his efforts to restore democracy in Venezuela. Colombia's relationship with Venezuela is a strategic issue. The tight bonds forged by proximity have guided our international policy. Both nations share a long history and an extensive border that has been described as the most alive border in America. Over the past two decades, Colombia has implemented a policy aimed at integrating and supporting the social and economic development of the border regions and their communities. However, such efforts stand in stark contrast to Venezuela's ongoing support for terrorism and its collusion with transnational organized crime, thereby adversely affecting Colombia's national security and the stability of the region. Both Chavez and Maduro turned purported attacks - all failed ones - and attacks against Venezuela's sovereignty - all of them under control - and systematic conspiracy theories against their regime into the core tenets of their propaganda. The regime's hostile policy against Colombian institutions runs counter to the rules of international law and the resolutions of the United Nations and the Organization of American States. Venezuela has been driven to a multidimensional crisis. It has gone from being one of the most prosperous nations in Latin America to a situation of profound deterioration. Today it is widely considered a failed State. Between 2014 and 2019, Venezuela lost two thirds of its wealth, and last year hyperinflation stood close to 10,000 per cent. In addition, its oil production went from 3 million barrels a day in 1999 to 622,000 barrels a day in April 2020, and half of its population lives in multidimensional poverty. Who could believe that a country with one of the largest oil, gas and minerals reserves in the world would end up experiencing scarcity, a lack food and medicines, a shortage of electricity and water supplies and insufficient gasoline for domestic consumption? The human rights situation in Venezuela is unprecedented. Since 2003, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights has reported on the clear weakness in the fundamental pillars for the existence of the rule of law. Furthermore, since 2018, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights has noted patterns of violations of all human rights. The High Commissioner has also documented the increasing repression of political dissidents and the subjection of detained persons, including children, to various forms of cruel, inhumane and degrading treatment, as well as punishments such as beatings, electric shocks, suffocation and threats of sexual assault. More than 5 million Venezuelan citizens have had to abandon their homeland due to poverty and repression. As a result of this unprecedented exodus, more than 1.8 million Venezuelans have established their residence in Colombia. Confronted with the challenge of the second-largest displacement crisis in the world, Colombia has acted with unfailing fraternity and solidarity, investing significant financial and institutional resources on an ongoing basis despite the emergency caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic. Responding to a humanitarian call by the Venezuelan National Assembly and interim President Juan Guaido, on 23 February 2019 an effort was made to provide Venezuelan citizens with urgently needed food and medicine. Together with Brazil, Curacao, Chile, Paraguay, the United States and Puerto Rico, my country gathered humanitarian supplies at the border city of Cucuta with the intention of delivering them to volunteers who would carry them to Venezuelan territory. The Maduro regime responded with violence, and the paramilitary armed groups known as "colectivos" thwarted the delivery of the provisions. Tensions at the border led to the expulsion of all Colombian diplomatic and consular personnel from Venezuelan territory, and diplomatic ties were broken. The Lima Group has repeatedly called for a democratic transition in Venezuela that will allow for the rule of law to be restored and the economy to be rebuilt. In making that call, however, the Lima Group members have always stressed that such a process must take place peacefully and in accordance with the Venezuelan Constitution. The European Union has also promoted initiatives aimed at facilitating the recovery of democratic institutions in Venezuela, such as the International Contact Group. Norway and Sweden have also undertaken efforts to find solutions to the crisis through dialogue. Unfortunately, the regime has proven its unwillingness to abandon its position of oppression against the people of Venezuela. Corruption and other criminal activities provide enormous proceeds to Maduro and his collaborators, who are unwilling to abandon those activities and give up their lucrative business, even if that means continuing to deprive Venezuelan citizens of goods and services essential to their survival. According to Transparency International's Corruption Perception Index, Venezuela is the most corrupt country in Latin America and the fifth most corrupt in the world. Recently, the United States Attorney General charged Maduro and 14 other current and former officials of the regime, including Ivan Marquez and Jesus Santric, former leaders of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia - Ejercito del Pueblo, with formal criminal charges for narco-terrorism and corruption, among others. The Government of Colombia has acted in strict observance of international law with the aim of seeing Venezuela's democracy restored, and has not carried out any covert or hidden actions. On the contrary, it has deployed all diplomatic efforts within its reach and has spoken in various forums on the abuses committed by the regime against the Venezuelan people. In May 2017, President Ivan Duque, a senator at the time, filed a complaint before the International Criminal Court (ICC) against Nicolas Maduro for the commission of crimes against humanity. In May 2018, the Secretary General of the Organization of American States also submitted a report to the ICC Prosecutor's Office, in which he shows that there is no access to a fair justice system in Venezuela. In September 2018, the Heads of State of Argentina, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Paraguay and Peru filed a petition with the ICC, formally requesting the opening of an investigation into the commission of crimes against humanity under the Nicolas Maduro regime. France later supported that petition. Likewise, the member States of the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance agreed to activate the Organ of Consultation of the Treaty. In September 2019, they adopted a resolution that indicated that "all of these criminal activities, associated with the humanitarian crisis generated by the deterioration of the political, economic and social situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, represents a threat to the maintenance of the peace and security of the continent". Maduro's illegitimate regime irresponsibly accuses Colombia of tolerating the commission of crimes that may affect Venezuela. But nothing could be further from the truth. Some examples of actions taken by Colombian authorities to promote law enforcement and criminal prosecution can be found in the document that I delivered today to the President of the Security Council. Several of the criminals that the Venezuelan regime mentions in its recent complaints have been imprisoned in the past year. The allegations are also false with regard to the seizure of weapons on 23 March. At the time of the arms seizure, Colombian judicial authorities issued a warrant for the arrest of the person in possession of said weapons, issued a criminal notice and began an investigation. Mr. Cliver Alcala, who claimed responsibility for acquiring said weapons, is the subject of open investigation by the Colombian Attorney General's Office. He voluntarily surrendered to the United States authorities in order to collaborate with the criminal proceedings against him in this country. The events of the so-called Operation Gideon are also under judicial investigation. Regarding the false accusations purporting to implicate the Colombian authorities in the use of force contrary to international law, we reiterate the 7 May communique from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, which strongly rejects those claims. Colombia has never been an aggressor country. On the contrary, it has devoted its efforts to strengthening its institutions, consolidating its institutional capacities to ensure stability and security, and raising the quality of life of its citizens. We have waged an ongoing war against crime and have made significant economic and social progress since the beginning of the century. Allow me to express clearly our emphatic rejection of any allegations purporting to link my Government to actions that run counter to international law. The restoration of democracy in Venezuela is a shared purpose and a moral imperative. The Security Council can be certain that Colombia does not pose a threat to international peace and security.
