Mr. Zerihoun: I am thankful for this opportunity to
brief the Security Council on developments in Burundi
and the efforts of the United Nations and partners to
help resolve the crisis in the country.

As members of the Security Council are aware,
on 5 May, the Secretary-General appointed former
President of Burkina Faso, Mr. Michel Kafando, as
his new Special Envoy to lead and coordinate United
Nations political efforts on Burundi, and to provide
assistance to the mediation and facilitation led by the
East African Community (EAC). Mr. Kafando visited
New York from 30 May to 7 June for briefings and
introductory meetings and consultations with Member
States and the Secretariat. He will travel to the region
shortly to meet with Burundian stakeholders, the
East African Community Mediator and Facilitator,
the African Union and other relevant actors. That
engagement in the region will give us a better insight
into the status of the political process, the assessment of
regional leaders of the situation and on the way forward.

Since the most recent briefing to the Security
Council on 9 March (see S/PV.7895), the situation
in Burundi has remained volatile. With regard to the
political process, after some delays, an EAC Summit of
Heads of State and Government was held on 20 May in
Dar es Salaam, at which President Museveni of Uganda
was elected Chair of the Eastern African Community
and the progress report and recommendations
presented by EAC Facilitator, former President Mkapa,
were approved. In the report, Mr. Mkapa highlighted
nine points to, as he put it, clean the polluted political
environment to allow for effective preparations for
the 2020 elections, including confidence-building
measures, inclusivity and political space, the return of
refugees and exiled political leaders and the preservation
of the Constitution and the Arusha Agreement.

Mr. Mkapa expressed concern over the slow
progress in the dialogue and called on all parties to
engage in good faith without preconditions. He also
expressed concern over the Government's demand to
repatriate the EAC-led dialogue to Burundi. Mr. Mkapa
urged the leaders of the region to put their full weight
behind his facilitation, including by providing
appropriate funding for the process. The next round of
consultations is scheduled to take place in Arusha in
early July. The joint EAC-United Nations-Africa Union
working group continues to meet regularly in Arusha,
with the participation of a team from the Office of the
Special Envoy in Burundi in support of the efforts of
the Facilitator.

The security situation in Burundi remains fragile.
Recent weeks have seen grenade attacks in the capital
and repression and intimidation by security forces and
associated groups. The Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, as well as human
rights non-governmental organizations, continues to
report targeted arrests, arbitrary detention, torture and
ill-treatment of real or perceived opposition members
and supporters, as well as extrajudicial killings and
forced disappearances.

Reports of incitement to hatred and violence have
increased since April, with regular testimonies and video
recordings of rallies by the Imbonerakure, the youth
wing of the ruling Conseil national pour la defense de
la democratic-Forces pour la defense de la democratie
(CNDD-FDD). The dissemination of one such video
on social media prompted the CNDD-FDD to issue a
statement on 5 April condemning the inflammatory
lyrics and attributing the events to influences outside
the party. On 18 April, the High Commissioner for
Human Rights issued a strong statement condemning
the hateful rhetoric and incitement to violence.

The Government of Burundi has not resumed its
cooperation with the Office of the High Commissioner
since it was suspended in mid-October 2016. The
High Commissioner has been awaiting a response
from the Government regarding amendments to a
proposal for a new memorandum of understanding. The
Commission of Inquiry on the human rights situation
in Burundi, established by the Human Rights Council,
presented its second oral briefing on 15 June. The
three commissioners regretted the lack of access to the
country and the lack of cooperation by the Government
of Burundi. The Commission of Inquiry has collected
more than 470 testimonies of human rights violations
allegedly committed in Burundi since 2015. The
Commission will present its final report to the Human
Rights Council this coming September.

In its final report, issued on 12 May, the Commission
Nationale de Dialogue Inter-Burundais (CNDI) stated
that the majority in Burundi supported a revision of the
Constitution, the lifting of presidential term limits and
changes to other provisions of the Arusha Agreement.
Subsequently, President Nkurunziza appointed a
constitutional review commission, which has yet to
be established, with a six-month mandate to submit
proposals to amend the Constitution. The CNDI report
and the creation ofthe constitutional review commission
were denounced by opposition parties, including the
Conseil national pour le respect de l'Accord d'Arusha
pour la paix et la reconciliation au Burundi et la
restauration de l'etat de droit. Civil society leaders in
exile also condemned the move, which they consider a
potential catalyst for unrest.

It is of great concern that those developments
are taking place against the backdrop of widespread
restrictions on civil liberties and political freedom.
Implementing the proposed changes in the current
climate will likely lead to an escalation of the crisis.

Since the Secretariat's previous briefing, the
socioeconomic and humanitarian situations have also
deteriorated. Three million people in Burundi are in
need of humanitarian assistance. Nearly 2.6 million
others experience acute food insecurity, with over
700,000 in need of emergency food assistance. Mass
displacement continues due to natural hazards, food
insecurity and sociopolitical factors. About 209,000
people are internally displaced. The number of
Burundian refugees in neighbouring countries exceeds
400,000. Humanitarian actors have scaled up their
response, but have yet to reach the capacity required
to meet emerging life-saving needs. The Government
has eased some restrictions on humanitarian access.
The humanitarian community has appealed for
$73.7 million to assist a third of the estimated 3 million
people in need. The appeal is currently funded at only
35 per cent, and the humanitarian community urgently
needs additional financial support.

The International Monetary Fund projects a growth
rate of 0 per cent and an inflation rate of more than
12 per cent in 2017. Severe fuel and electricity shortages
further disrupt business and social activities and drive
up prices. Blackouts, lasting several days at a time,
have reportedly caused an uptick in criminal activity
in some areas.

The Secretariat remains fully committed to
assisting the people of Burundi and supporting the
EAC-led dialogue process. Regional actors and
international partners need to put their full weight
behind the EAC-led dialogue and continue to press for
the implementation of confidence-building measures to
help create conditi
