The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Malaysia.

My delegation, too, would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Bernard Miyet for his
comprehensive and useful briefing on the latest
developments and the ongoing work of the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH).

We are gratified by the progress that has been
made in the implementation of the 1995 Dayton Peace
Agreement. UNMIBH, under the leadership of Special
Representative Jacques Klein, continues to solidify the
establishment of the rule of law through the
restructuring and strengthening of the local police and
judicial system. Equally important are efforts by High
Representative Wolfgang Petritsch and his Office, and
by the Stabilization Force (SFOR) and other
international organizations, to further consolidate the
path towards peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
fully support these efforts and appreciate the
achievements made so far.

We nonetheless recognize that progress in the
peace process has thus far been slow and has fallen
short of expectations. Much remains to be done and
many challenges remain to be overcome before Bosnia
can enjoy self-sustaining peace and security. Further
determined efforts should therefore be made with a
view to tackling effectively the core issues or
challenges that continue to impede the building of a
democratic, unified and multi-ethnic Bosnia and
Herzegovina, within its internationally recognized
borders.

One of the main challenges that remains is the
need to strengthen Bosnian State institutions. These
institutions must be able to carry out their functions
and responsibilities effectively. We are concerned by
the continuing obstacles to the smooth functioning of
these joint institutions, in particular the Joint
Presidency and the State Parliament, which are
necessary if Bosnia and Herzegovina is to be viable as
a State. The leaders of Bosnia must exercise their
political will to work together for the common good of
the country, and not for their sectarian and other short-
term interests.

This underlines the urgent need for much stronger
commitment and cooperation on the part ofthe Bosnian
leadership and people at every level, in order to match
the commitment and contributions of the international
community to the peace process. Ultimately, the main
responsibility for achieving peace, national
reconciliation and nation-building lies with the people
of Bosnia themselves.

We are pleased with the progress made in
consolidating the Bosnian State Border Service. We
welcome the recent steps to further strengthen the
Service by deploying it at additional entry points.

The State Border Service not only is a vital
political symbol of Bosnian statehood, but also is
essential in the fight against trafficking and transborder
organized crime. We strongly support the efforts being
made at restructuring and integrating the military
forces of the two Bosnian entities. A unified Bosnia
cannot afford to have two separate armies.

The return of refugees and displaced persons is
another major challenge; nearly every problem in
Bosnia today stems from this core problem. The safe
return of all refugees and displaced persons to their
homes is an important ingredient for lasting peace in
that country. We have been encouraged to learn of an
increase in the number of returns in recent months.
However, the return process overall has been slow.
Well over 1 million refugees and internally displaced
persons are still not able to return to their pre-war
homes. The situation is much worse in the case of the
so-called minority returns and the return to urban areas.
The overall return process to the Republika Srpska is
still much slower, compared to other areas in the
Federation. Political and administrative obstructions
still impede the return process. So do return-related
violence and intimidation. Clearly, further effective
measures should be taken to effectively address these
problems.

On 13 July 2000, the Council issued a
commemorative statement on the anniversary of the
tragic event at Srebenica. We recalled the horrors of
ethnic cleansing and gross violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights that characterized
the Bosnian conflict. Reconciliation after that conflict
will obviously require a long time for healing, as well
as the meting out ofjustice for the perpetrators of those
heinous crimes. In this regard, we wish to underline
once again the important role of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and to emphasize that the necessary support should be
extended to it so as to enable it to fully carry out its
mandate. We reiterate our call for more serious efforts
to be made to bring those indicted by the ICTY to
justice, especially the major figures, such as Radovan
Karadzic and Ratko Mladic, who continue to enjoy
freedom and impunity.

This also contributes to the climate of insecurity
that limits refugee returns, particularly in minority
areas. The arrest and prosecution of war criminals is
not only an issue ofjustice, but also one that will have
important and long-lasting effects on Bosnia and
Herzegovina's ability to form a democratic State,
institute market reform and effect national
reconciliation among the ethnic groups. In this regard,
we would encourage the Office of the High
Representative and the Stabilization Force to work
more closely with the Tribunal.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I shall now give the floor to Mr. Bernard Miyet to
respond to the comments and questions addressed to
him.

