Mr. Montovani (Italy): Mr. Howells, I first wish
to welcome you and thank you for being with us in the
Council today and presiding over this meeting. I also
wish to thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his
briefing.

Recent weeks have recorded promising
developments in the Israeli-Palestinian crisis.
Following the establishment of the National Unity
Government and direct contacts between the
Palestinian Authority President and the Israeli Prime
Minister, the Arab League has offered the peace
process a perspective that should not be neglected. The
proposal that emerged from the Riyadh summit to
revive the 2002 Beirut plan represents an interesting
basis for negotiations, one which might bring the
political process closer to defining the parametres
required for transition to the final phase of the Road
Map.

We are pleased by the positive attitude taken by
the Israeli Government towards the Arab League's
decision to request Egypt and Jordan to study the
modalities for defining the terms of application of the
proposal relaunched by the Riyadh summit. Italy has
long felt the need to increase the number of countries
that support the peace process and considers the
involvement of Arab countries useful to enhance the
prospects of a regional solution to the conflict. We are
confident that the contacts to that end among Israel,
Egypt and Jordan will help to gradually bring positions
closer together. We hope that the parties will show the
flexibility and good will needed to start an effective
dialogue.

Italy confirms its support for the Road Map
principles and at the same time reiterates that their
implementation must take into account the need to
quickly progress toward a just and conclusive solution.
In that framework, we continue to fully support the
role of the Quartet, and of the European Union within
it, to foster successful negotiations between Israel and
the Palestinians.

We are very concerned by the statements released
by some Palestinian factions that intend to put an end
to the truce in Gaza, which has substantially held so
far. Such statements, should they be followed by acts,
risk igniting a dangerous spiral of violence that could
endanger the slow progress achieved so far. It will
therefore be essential that the Palestinian Government
strongly commit to ending any violent attack, the
launching of Qassam rockets, weapons smuggling in
Gaza and the detention of Corporal Shalit.

At the same time, we believe that Israel should
take concrete action to loosen restrictions on the
freedom of movement of the Palestinian people,
particularly in the West Bank, so that the access of
people and goods to the Gaza Strip is no longer
blocked, particularly at the Rafah crossing point. Israel
should also rapidly resume the transfer of customs
revenues to the Palestinian Government. In that
framework, we hope that the necessary conditions can
be assured for the European Union Border Assistance
Mission to resume its operations in full.

It is equally important that both parties strive to
avoid actions or take positions that might be ill
interpreted by public opinion and could generate
tensions likely to hinder or to halt the dialogue. It is
vital that both Israel and the Palestinian Authority work
to avoid any action that might jeopardize the fragile
dialogue that has been established.

While we believe the meetings between President
Abbas and Prime Minister Olmert hold promise, one
must avoid giving the Palestinian public the impression
that it is mere media hype, without any tangible impact
on their living conditions in the territories.
That is another reason why we believe that Israel
should seize the opportunity to revive, with conviction,
the dialogue with President Abbas, whose

responsibility over peace negotiations is clearly
recognized in the programme of the new Palestinian
Government - although within the limit that any
agreement would have to be ratified by the Palestinian
National Council or by referendum.

In that context, it is crucial to foster the economic
reconstruction of the Palestinian territories and to ease
the rehabilitation of the fabric of Palestinian society -
a task in which the European Union has distinguished
itself in recent months through its assistance to the
Palestinian people.

Regarding Lebanon, we are concerned by the
sensitivity of the political situation there, which
continues to be highly complex and closely tied to the
solution of the two main interrelated questions: the
establishment of the international tribunal on the Hariri
assassination, and the national unity Government. We
are convinced that the political impasse that grips the
country can be broken only through a courageous
assumption of political responsibility by all the
Lebanese parties. We therefore once again urge the
Government and the opposition to resolutely resume
the dialogue to address and resolve the political
problems of the country at their roots.

We are convinced of the need to establish the
international tribunal. Nevertheless, at this sensitive
juncture in the Lebanese political process, we need to
be aware of the repercussions that a more incisive
action by the international community might have on
the domestic framework.

What must re-emerge in Lebanon first and
foremost is the will to revive the national dialogue so
as to address the root causes of the country's political
problems, which have brought about the present
institutional impasse. Italy thus believes that the
resumption of dialogue between the majority and the
opposition must be encouraged and consolidated as the
prerequisite for an agreement that will bring Lebanon
out of the difficult political crisis.

The international community is deeply engaged
in the stabilization of the country, and the presence of
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
in southern Lebanon is a guarantee of that commitment
by the international community. We are concerned,
however, that a solution still seems to be far off on
some key issues regarding the normalization of
bilateral relations between Lebanon and Israel,
especially the release of the kidnapped Israeli soldiers,
the Sheba'a Farms and Israeli overflights in Lebanon.

On various occasions, UNIFIL has proven its
ability to intervene promptly and effectively to defuse
tensions on the Israeli-Lebanese border that risked
spiralling into a dangerous situation. We believe that
the tripartite mechanism comprised of UNIFIL, the
Lebanese armed forces and the Israeli Defense Forces
is particularly useful for resolving possible
controversies, and we urge the parties to continue to
make regular use of that mechanism. We encourage the
parties to proceed expeditiously, in cooperation with
UNIFIL, towards a more accurate demarcation of the
Blue Line, with a View also to preventing the
recurrence of incidents along the Line.

In this regard, we believe that it is essential to
clearly define the question of the Sheba'a farms, which
continues to represent a dangerous source of tension
along the border between the two countries. We
appreciate the work carried out in recent months by the
United Nations cartographers and hope that a proposal
may soon be drafted which would provide the basis for
political consultations.

We are concerned by reports that weapons
continue to be smuggled into Lebanon, especially
outside UNIFIL's area of operations, despite the ban
provided for by resolution 1701 (2006). We have
confidence in the commitment of the Lebanese Armed
Forces to prevent arms smuggling, but it is
fundamental that all the neighbouring countries commit
themselves to preventing an increase in the destructive
potential of the various opposing Lebanese factions.

We believe that it is important that the United
Nations engage itself on this question. With this in
mind, we extended support to the Secretary-General's
proposal to send an independent mission in order to
assess the monitoring of the Lebanese border with
respect to weapons trafficking and to make
recommendations, a proposal that the Security Council
endorsed in the presidential statement adopted on
17 April (S/PRST/2007/12).

We deem it important that Syria genuinely engage
itself in this respect. Damascus can play a positive role
in the stability and development of the region, but only
if it confirms in deeds its will to act in good faith and
in the interests of peace. In this regard, we look
forward to learning about the outcome of the recent
visit of the Secretary-General to Damascus.

The full implementation of resolution 1701
(2006) is primarily the responsibility of the Lebanese
Government. We are aware, however, of the difficulties
encountered by the Lebanese Armed Forces due to the
lack of equipment and inadequate training to carry out
some of the fundamental tasks provided for by the
resolution, particularly with regard to the prevention of
arms smuggling. It is essential that we start thinking
soon about how to help the Lebanese Armed Forces
achieve adequate standards in terms of training,
equipment and resources.

