Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): Before I begin my
statement, I should like to make a remark. I think that
we have to get back to our system of drawing up lists
of speakers, because today, as you rightly recognized,
Mr. President, I was one of the first to raise my hand to
be on the list; now I am the twelfth speaker.

I reserve my right to return to this issue during
consultations on the working methods of the Council.

I am grateful to Special Representative
Haekkerup for his comprehensive and informative
update on the latest developments in Kosovo and on
the activities of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).

Let me express my appreciation for both the
report of the Secretary-General and the presentation
made by the Special Representative, I should like also
to commend the efforts carried out by the men and
women ofthe Mission in implementing resolution 1244
(1999).

On 3 October, which was marked by the official
start of the 45-day Kosovo election campaign, the
Security Council and UNMIK entered a new stage of
their activities aimed at bringing peace and stability to
Kosovo. The results of the elections to be held on 17
November will not only open another chapter in the
chronicles of the history of the province of Kosovo-
Metohija; they will test the very efficiency of the
Council's peacemaking strategies and policies.

Before turning to the forthcoming Kosovo-wide
elections, let me highlight a few issues related to the
noticeable progress made by UNMIK during the period
under review.

My delegation strongly supports a further
improvement in the relations between UNMIK and the
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. We
are counting on a further enhancement of the
institutional links between UNMIK, KFOR and the
Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, as
we consider them key prerequisites for the stable
development of a democratic, multi-ethnic Kosovo
society.

Important steps have been taken by UNMIK in
implementing the Constitutional Framework, preparing
for the transfer of authority to the provisional
institutions of the Kosovo self-government, and
enhancing institutional capacities. As a positive sign,
let me mention the recent decision of the Special
Representative to promulgate regulation 2001/19,
which sets out the functions and competencies of the
ministries of the provisional self-government and lays
out general principles to guide the establishment of the
civil service.

I wish also to point out UNMIK's role in the
creation of improved judicial, economic and social
conditions in the province. The progress made in the
police and justice reform is a visible and welcome
development. The forthcoming completion of the
Kosovo Organized Crime Bureau may provide another
important impetus for improving the general civil
security situation in the region.

It is very encouraging to note that the police
forces are increasingly operational in almost all areas
of Kosovo. In this regard, we welcome UNMIK's
efforts to further improve the operational environment
for the police, including steps to establish confidence
in the Kosovo northern municipalities. Another
noteworthy element is the growing capacity of the
Kosovo Police Service, which should be enhanced and
strengthened.

As concerns the economic dimension, we fully
endorse the priorities set by the Special Representative
to hand over a balanced budget to the provisional self-
government, to introduce modern financial
management and to develop a Kosovo-wide public
investment programme within the framework of the
Kosovo consolidated budget.

I should like to note also the useful efforts made
in the agricultural sector and in the sphere of civil
security and emergency preparedness capability. With
respect to the latter, let me express Ukraine's readiness
to provide the Department of Civil Security and
Emergency Preparedness and the Kosovo Protection
Corps with the necessary training assistance.

There is a Norwegian proverb that says:

"There is no wind that blows right for the sailor
who does not know where the harbour is."

The general security situation in Kosovo remains
windy but stable. However, the perceived security
improvement could be qualified as extremely shaky.
The recent Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) and Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) report on
the situation of ethnic minorities in Kosovo stresses:

"The negative attitudes and perceptions that
continue to drive the post-conflict situation can
come to the fore and lead to a sharp deterioration
at any time."

Moreover, the number of reported security
incidents in August alone indicates that long-term
improvements in the overall situation can be
guaranteed only through an effective confidence-
building policy and effective security, policing and
judicial systems.

In this context, let me stress that my delegation
supports the results-oriented efforts of UNMIK and
KFOR to improve the situation and enhance
confidence-building measures through such important
acts as the re-establishment of the Political Violence
Task Force, the launching of UNMIK-Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia contact groups on missing persons, and
so on.

Much more has to be done. A vivid example of
the persistent problems in this area is the continued
exodus of Kosovo Serbs and non-Albanian nationals
from the province. I should like to quote the OSCE
report I mentioned earlier, which states that the number
of Kosovo Serbs in Pristina

"is subject to constant fluctuation. Estimates for
the current number of Kosovo Serbs [who are
permanent residents] have fallen as low as 300."

I repeat: 300 Serbs. That is quite something. It
means that people do not want to return home because
they are afraid for their lives; that they do not know
how to live with others without fear; that there is an
urgent need to improve the security environment
through robust measures against any form of violence,
including terrorist activities; and that there is an
extreme need to facilitate dialogue not only between
UNMIK and the FRY authorities but between the
Kosovo Albanians and Kosovo Serbs as well. In the
context of the forthcoming elections, these challenges
take on special importance.

My delegation fully supports the provisions of the
presidential statement to be adopted at this meeting.
We believe that the firm position of the Security
Council, aimed at the full implementation of resolution
1244 (1999), and the active encouragement of all
Kosovo communities to participate in the elections will
give the necessary impetus to further stabilizing
processes in the region. I hope that it will also send a
clear message conveying a philosophy of peace and
trust.

As Ambassador Kolby recently said, the progress
in Bosnia and Herzegovina has been incremental, not
fundamental. It seems that these words will become
another Norwegian proverb for me to quote today. We
must be fully aware that the progress in Kosovo is still
rather more incremental than fundamental. However,
my delegation believes that the situation should be
improved by our resolve and united actions. Kosovo
stands on the edge of a new historic period. Sailors
should know where their harbour is.

