Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): In my capacity
as Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1132 (1997)
concerning Sierra Leone, I would like to report to the
Council on the work of the Committee during the
period of 2008-2009 and share my assessment on the
way forward.

Since the adoption of resolution 1132 (1997),
Sierra Leone has achieved tangible progress in the
course of peace consolidation, socio-economic
2

reconstruction and international reintegration. Despite
the still fragile security situation, which requires
sustained attention, the parties in Sierra Leone remain
committed to a cessation of all acts of political
violence and to a bipartisan consensus on important
national policies. The Government has proceeded with
its Agenda for Change, and incremental results have
been achieved in the areas of combating corruption,
reforming the security sector, creating jobs and
empowering youth. The cooperation between Sierra
Leone and the United Nations country team, the
Peacebuilding Commission and other development
partners has been further strengthened within the
framework of the United Nations peacebuilding
strategy for Sierra Leone and the Joint Vision of the
United Nations family for Sierra Leone.

However, Sierra Leone today is facing the
emerging threats of piracy, drug trafficking, illegal
trade in natural resources, uncontrolled migration to
urban centres and other adverse effects of the global
financial downturn, all of which have the potential to
create an environment conducive to violence and
instability.

It is in that context that the relevant functions and
activities of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1132 (1997) concerning Sierra Leone have
evolved. The Council originally mandated the
Committee to oversee the implementation of the
sanctions measures set out in that resolution, which
consist of an arms embargo on non-governmental forces
in Sierra Leone and travel restrictions on members of
the former military junta and of the Revolutionary
United Front (RUF). The Committee was assigned
amended mandates in resolution 1171 (1998) and then
adapted its work with the lifting of the ban on the
export of diamonds from Sierra Leone since 2003.

As of December 2009, the work of the Committee
has been confined to tasks related to the embargo on the
export of weapons to non-State actors in Sierra Leone
and the travel ban imposed on individuals included on
the Committee's list, who currently number six. Unlike
some other sanctions bodies, the Committee has neither
a panel of experts nor a monitoring group.

During the time of Viet Nam's chairmanship,
while there have been no violations of the sanctions
regime, a number of notifications of arms exports to
Sierra Leone were brought to the attention of the
Committee in a timely manner, in accordance with
09-64650
paragraph 4 of resolution 1171 (1998). In a letter dated
7 January 2008, the Chairman of the Committee
informed the Registrar of the Special Court for Sierra
Leone of the adoption by the Security Council of
resolution 1793 (2007), whereby the Council decided
to exempt from the travel restrictions the travel of any
witnesses whose presence at trial before the Court is
required. In the same letter, the Chairman sought the
agreement of the Court on notification procedures for
the travel of listed individuals, which would be
modelled upon those agreed between the Court and the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1521 (2003) concerning Liberia.

In June 2008, upon the request of the Government
of Sierra Leone and in light of overall developments in
the country, the Committee held informal consultations
to remove the names of 24 individuals from the list of
those affected by the travel ban restrictions imposed by
paragraph 5 of resolution 1171 (1998). The Chairman
of the Committee addressed a letter to the Permanent
Representative of Sierra Leone to the United Nations
informing him of the Committee's decision, and then
conveyed the latter's letter of request to the President
of the Security Council for the attention and
appropriate action of the Council.

In 2009, although no meetings were held, the
Committee continued to maintain positive cooperation
with the Special Court of Sierra Leone and issued a
waiver of the travel ban against five former members
of the RUF convicted by the Court so that they might
serve their sentences in Rwanda.

Sierra Leone is now at a critical juncture of post-
conflict peacebuilding, with many challenges ahead.
The United Nations, regional organizations and
Member States have a role to play in helping Sierra
Leone to better fulfil its responsibilities under relevant
Security Council resolutions, taking into due account
the fundamental principles of respect for the political
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Sierra Leone. I maintain, however, that the spirit of
targeted sanctions should be fully preserved so as to
avoid adverse impacts on the livelihoods of civilians
and that all sanctions regimes be reviewed and
ultimately lifted once the underlying reasons for the
imposition of such sanctions are no longer valid. Given
the prevailing trend of peace and reconciliation in
Sierra Leone, the Council may wish to initiate such a
process and dialogue after the trials of Charles Taylor.
09-64650

In conclusion, I wish to thank all members of the
Council for their support and cooperation in helping us
to fulfil our duty. I also express my appreciation to the
Security Council Subsidiary Organs Branch in the
Department of Political Affairs, in particular Mr. Kiho
Cha, for their untiring assistance to the work of the
Committee and the Chairman.

