I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this timely discussion. I would also like to thank Ms. Ingrid Hayden, Officer-in-Charge of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), for her briefing. Viet Nam commends and reiterates its full support for the work of the Mission. We also express our gratitude to the former Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, for his tremendous efforts over the past five years, and look forward to working closely with the new Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Deborah Lyons. Viet Nam is closely following the situation in Afghanistan. It is a historic moment and critical time for the people of Afghanistan. Resolution 2513 (2020), adopted unanimously by the Council, has laid the foundation for the pursuit of long- term peace for the country. However, the situation on the ground continues to see worrrying developments. We strongly condemn the continued attacks of the Taliban and other terrorist groups in Afghanistan, which resulted in more than 10,000 civilian casualties in 2019 and have claimed hundreds more since the beginning of 2020. We are also concerned about the increasing spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and its impact on security, peacebuilding and socioeconomic development in Afghanistan. Allow me to emphasize the following points. First, the most important issue now is to continue implementing resolution 2513 (2020), particularly as it relates to starting negotiations towards a permanent ceasefire. Viet Nam reiterates its support for the Afghan-led and -owned inclusive peace process, and welcomes the Government's efforts, including the announcement of an inclusive peace negotiations team. We look forward to the increasingly active participation of women in this process. We call on the Government of Afghanistan and the opposition party to continue to strengthen unity and set aside their differences in this difficult time. We also emphasize the importance of strengthening international support for intra-Afghan negotiations. In that regard and given the current situation, the international community should lend additional technical support for facilitating remote dialogue. Secondly, it is also vital to improve the deteriorating security situation. Despite the agreement to a nationwide reduction of violence, the Taliban has continued to carry out attacks on the Afghan people, many of whom are women and children. We are concerned by the attack perpetrated just yesterday by the Taliban, which resulted in the death of 27 Afghan soldiers. In the light of the spread of COVID-19, Viet Nam urges the Taliban and all other terrorist groups to immediately stop fighting and targeting civilians, and to allow unhindered access to humanitarian aid and health care in the country. Thirdly, as stated in the UNAMA report (S/2020/210), the economic and humanitarian situation in Afghanistan continues to face many challenges. Long-term peace and stability also require strong economic development and the sustainable livelihood of its people. Viet Nam calls on the international community to continue assisting Afghanistan in eradicating poverty, fostering post-conflict reconstruction and overcoming the challenges resulting from natural disasters. We also call on its international partners, as well as UNAMA and the relevant United Nations agencies, to further provide training, funding and technical support to Afghanistan in order to counter cross-border crime and drug trafficking. In conclusion, Viet Nam once again emphasizes its support for the independence, sovereignty and stability of Afghanistan.
