Mr. Yamamoto: As we reach the third anniversary
of the National Unity Government, I see progress,
challenges that are still daunting, and new opportunities
for political engagement for peace.

First, I would like to focus on some areas where
progress on key reforms has occurred. This has
been achieved despite ongoing security challenges.
If those reforms can be consolidated and sustained,
they will significantly strengthen the foundation for
a more self-reliant Afghan State. The good working
relationship between President Ashraf Ghani and Chief
Executive Abdullah Abdullah has greatly enabled the
reform process.

The efforts of the Government to address corruption
have begun to bear results after many years during which
the debilitating issue was ignored. The major effort has
been led by the Anti-Corruption Justice Centre, which
is increasingly tackling complex cases involving high-
level officials. The Centre has completed 21 cases and
14 appeals, enabling it to put a dent in the long-standing
problem of impunity for Government corruption.

On 5 October, exactly one year after the Brussels
Conference on Afghanistan, senior officials will
convene in Kabul to review progress made on the
Brussels commitments. In that meeting of senior
officials, the Afghan Government will need to
demonstrate to the donors, including their taxpayers,
and to Afghan citizens that the reform and development
programmes are translating into real improvements in
the well-being of all Afghans. I was encouraged, during
the intensive preparations for the meeting, by the active
engagement of all Afghan and international partners.
International partners also need to demonstrate their
clear commitment, and I very much count on the
highest level of participation from Council members'
respective capitals.

There has also been progress on the organization of
parliamentary and district council elections scheduled
for next July. The Independent Election Commission
(IEC) has completed its assessment of polling stations,
reportedly reaching more than 90 per cent of districts.
The next step will be voter registration. These two
processes will lay the foundation for what will be the
most important electoral reforms since 2001 - the
establishment of polling station-specific voter lists and
the completion of a viable voter registry.

It is imperative that we hold the elections
according to the plan. Timely elections will enhance
the credibility of the political system and institutions.
Many stakeholders, however, remain skeptical that
credible elections will be held on time. The IEC needs
to further increase its public outreach to demonstrate
greater transparency and greater urgency in its electoral
preparations. Many Afghan politicians and citizens
across the country have told me repeatedly that the
country could not endure another election like that of
2014. The electoral commissioners and their staff have
inherited a huge responsibility, but the elections are not
the responsibility of the IEC alone. The independence
of the electoral management bodies must be respected,
and the Government must do everything possible to
secure the elections. The international community must
provide financial and technical support, but the IEC is
in the lead and time is passing quickly.

The announcement of the electoral date has
prompted the creation of new political coalitions,
some of which are highly critical of the Government.
Due to the fact that democracies require responsible
oppositions, that may be seen as a constructive
development. Many of these groups are crossing ethnic
lines in a way that we have not seen before and building
national coalitions. A risk, however, is that some might
orient their activities towards actions that destabilize the
constitutional order, promote ethnic and geographical
divisions, or seek to undermine the State. The need
to avoid that risk has been a constant element in the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan's
(UNAMA) outreach to all political actors.

The security situation continues to be a major
concern. The Secretary-General's report (S/2017/783)
describes the main security trends in some detail. With
the persistence of the Islamic State, also known as
Da'esh, in the east of the country, and some reports of
new Da'esh activity in the north, as well as in Kabul
itself, the situation has become more complex. The
human cost of that violence is high, disproportionately
impacting women and children.

Current Afghan security planning foresees that
Afghan forces will reach sufficient strength to reverse
recent Taliban gains by 2020. The Taliban, meanwhile,
continues to resist appeals to negotiate with the Afghan
Government. At the current rate of death due to conflict,
tens of thousands more Afghans will have been killed
by 2020.

In the midst of this human tragedy, all sides
acknowledge that there is no military solution to
the conflict. The costs, including the human cost of
the ongoing conflict, raise the urgency of the peace
process. Frankly, the efforts of the past few years have
led to little progress. We are, however, seeing renewed
interest and efforts towards political engagements for
peace. The announcement in August by the United
States Administration of a continuing, conditions-
based commitment to Afghanistan has removed some
uncertainties. Some countries of the region and key
countries are actively seeking to foster and promote
regional engagements for peace.
We are all aware that preparations leading to a peace
process are complex and require patience and time. Such
efforts must be pragmatic and flexible, yet principled
so as to ensure an inclusive political process to define
the country's future. That can occur only when all
relevant parties to the conflict communicate with each
other to identify the contours of a mutual settlement.
On that basis, confidence can be built and a process can
be structured. The process must allow for the strategic
interests of the countries of the region to be taken into
consideration and built on a regional consensus.

I am convinced that a political settlement is
possible. We should not let another fighting season begin
without progress towards substantive negotiations.
Opportunities will be lost, with the price paid in
thousands of Afghan lives and at tremendous financial
cost. I appeal to the countries of the region to conduct a
profound reassessment of their strategic interest and to
renew work towards a viable peace process, leading to
an Afghan-owned solution to the conflict. If requested,
the United Nations stands ready to assist all parties in
achieving that goal.

Another potential cost ofthe conflict is backsliding
on recent human rights gains. Violence against women
and girls remains widespread. The criminalization
of acts of violence against women, included in
the legislative decree, remains to be approved by
Parliament. The ongoing involvement of children in
armed conflict remains a major problem. On a positive
note, I welcome the Government's formal endorsement
of the national policy on civilian casualty prevention and
mitigation. I now call on the Government to implement
the national policy through a structured action plan.
I am encouraged by Afghanistan's candidacy for the
Human Rights Council, and hope that it will be used
to consolidate human rights progress in Afghanistan.

Allow me to turn to the Secretary-General's
strategic review of UNAMA, carried out at the request
of the Security Council. That undertaking provided us
with a renewed opportunity to think more profoundly
about our role, especially the centrality of the search
for peace. We look forward to the Security Council's
review of the Secretary-General's recommendations.
Furthermore, the entire United Nations family in
Afghanistan, as requested by President Ghani, is
developing an innovative strategy to deliver its
development assistance as one and in full alignment
with the Government's priorities. President Ghani
welcomed our proposal, and we are now working
ever more closely with his Office and key parts of the
Government to put things into place swiftly.

The recommendations of the strategic review will
entail significant cuts to the Mission. We will implement
our mandate with greater focus and with a streamlined
structure. In the past two months, I have visited 8 of
our 12 field offices and met Government officials, civil
society and United Nations staff. These visits made it
clear that the presence of the United Nations is seen
as a great benefit to Afghanistan and its people. I am
confident that UNAMA will remain well positioned to
deliver on its strategic tasks and serve the needs of the
Afghan people.

In closing, I emphasize how important it is for
Afghan leaders to deliver and demonstrate concrete
achievements. Progress must be made in less than
four years to make the best use of the Warsaw and
Brussels commitments. Afghanistan must demonstrate
to its donors that it has taken not just steps, but strides
towards self-sufficiency. It is my hope that Afghanistan
will soon not be perceived as a source of global security
threats, but as a destination for trade and investment.

