Ireland aligns itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the European Union (annex 29). As the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic emerged at the beginning of 2020, the world was already facing record levels of humanitarian need, with conflict as a primary cause. Today, beyond the immediate health crisis, Ireland remains deeply concerned about the interlinked political, social and economic impacts of the disease and the potential for these shocks to cause new, or exacerbate existing, conflicts. We therefore want to thank Foreign Minister Marsudi and Indonesia for organizing today's important open debate and for ensuring a continued focus on these challenges. We also thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon and Ms. Sarah Cliffe for their insightful and informative briefings. First, Ireland strongly welcomed the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire and the adoption of resolution 2532 (2020). As an incoming member of the Security Council, Ireland will continue to support United Nations efforts aimed at addressing the COVID-19 pandemic in countries and situations of armed conflicts or those affected by humanitarian crises, as mandated by the resolution. COVID-19 affects us all. However, its potential negative impacts are significantly multiplied in conflict-affected and fragile States, where pre-existing vulnerabilities in health and governance systems, as well as in community cohesion, are amplified, placing additional pressures on already vulnerable regions. For example, in East Africa, the ongoing impact of climate change and the locust outbreak are now compounded by COVID-19. As the secondary impacts of this global crisis begin to hit, prevention and early response will be key. The importance of a coherent and joined-up United Nations system focused on peacebuilding and sustaining peace cannot be overstated. The pandemic will test the United Nations system and its ability to act collectively and build on the success of recent reforms that we have all worked hard to make happen. To rise to the challenge posed by COVID-19, we need to maximize the existing mechanisms, whether for coordination or flow of funds, to their greatest effect, including United Nations country teams and the strengthened resident coordinator system. We urge the Council to step up support for the work of all United Nations special representatives and political missions, regional organizations, national actors and local communities in building and maintaining peace, including through robust conflict analysis and early mediation. As a member of the United Nations Peacebuilding Commission, we welcome the Commission's early efforts aimed at discussing the impact of the COVID-19 crisis on peacebuilding efforts both globally and as part of ongoing country discussions, and at briefing the Security Council on those discussions. In collaboration with resident coordinators, the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) has been proactive in supporting United Nations country teams, such as in Guatemala, Cete d'Ivoire and Mali, to adjust existing projects to address the peacebuilding and prevention dimensions of the pandemic. As the Organization's instrument of first resort for sustaining peace in situations at risk or affected by violent conflict, the PBF must be adequately funded. In recognition of this, Ireland is committed to providing multi-annual and predictable funding for the Fund. Our contribution of €6 million over the past three years was double the original commitment made in 2017. The disproportionate impact of the pandemic on women and girls is visible in many ways, including adverse effects on their health, education, livelihoods, food security and nutrition, and increased risk of gender-based violence. This must not be ignored. In the twentieth anniversary year of the women and peace and security agenda, we must continue to amplify women and girls' voices during peacebuilding and recovery processes. Supporting local ownership, improving leadership and broadening inclusion in conflict and fragile settings, with special attention to gender and youth, remains critical to an effective COVID-19 response and recovery. We have numerous examples of the effectiveness of this approach in the Ebola response in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Sierra Leone and Liberia, and we commend the efforts of civil society to highlight and address these critical issues. COVID-19 presents unique and complex challenges to peacekeeping missions. United Nations contingents must continue to be sensitive to the needs of the host nation and local population while implementing mandates. It is critically important that the United Nations be seen as part of the solution rather than as part of the problem. The measures that the United Nations has put in place to protect local populations and our peacekeepers from COVID-19 are welcome, and we urge full compliance with them. The current crisis is testing us all but it is also demonstrating that the security of each of us is inextricably interlinked. In the words of Mike Ryan of the World Health Organization, "none of us are safe until all of us are safe". While there are heavy domestic demands on resources, we must not lose sight of the benefits we all reap from conflict reduction and prevention. We must ensure that our missions are fully resourced to carry out the tasks we ask of them. Within missions, addressing the pandemic through a protection-of-civilians lens is vital. Missions must leverage all capabilities, including strategic communications, outreach and engagement, civil-military cooperation, medical assets and key leader engagement, to address protection-of-civilian concerns in a holistic and integrated manner.
