I am honoured to submit this statement on behalf of the following 24 countries that had the privilege to serve as elected Security Council members in recent years, from 2011 to 2019: Angola, Australia, Bolivia, Chile, Cete d'Ivoire, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Guatemala, Italy, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Lithuania, Luxembourg, New Zealand, Nigeria, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Rwanda, the Republic of Korea, Senegal, Spain, Sweden and Uruguay. We welcome the progress made in recent years, including in the context of the work of the Council's Informal Working Group on Documentation and other Procedural Questions. We express our full support to Saint Vincent and the Grenadines in its capacity as current Chair of the Group. Elected members continue to have a particular interest in the working methods of the Security Council. Getting them right is essential to the work of this body. It goes to the heart of its performance and accountability to the broader United Nations membership and to the Charter of the United Nations. Good working methods, big and small, help create an environment enabling each and every Council member to be fully involved, to contribute to informed discussions and to play a full and meaningful role in the Council's work. This becomes even more important when there is disunity in the Council on an issue and seemingly no space for a political solution. In line with the concept note for this discussion (S/2020/374, annex), we offer the following observations and proposals with respect to the interlinked and mutually reinforcing elements of transparency, efficiency and effectiveness. With respect to transparency, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has starkly illustrated how important transparency is to the Council's legitimacy. While we recognize COVID-19's unprecedented challenges to how the Council normally operates and also recognize that sometimes the Council needs to have frank exchanges on sensitive issues away from the public eye, the Council must find ways to be visible to maintain public confidence. We encourage the Council to continue active discussions and efforts to adapt its working methods to these extraordinary and unprecedented circumstances in a transparent and efficient manner. We call for all Council meetings to be included in The Journal of the United Nations. We also encourage the continued publication of the President's addendum in addition to the Council's monthly programme of work. Between start-of-presidency briefings and wrap-up sessions, we encourage Council members to consider other ways throughout the month to keep the membership updated on the Council's work and products under consideration. We welcome all extra efforts being made to agree public remarks following meetings. We encourage this to become normal practice. Where there is no agreement on public remarks, Council Presidents should be empowered to address the media, in a manner respectful to other colleagues. All Council members are encouraged to participate actively in wrap-up sessions and should strive to be as candid as possible. Organizers should seek questions ahead of time in order to better shape discussions. Concerning efficiency, Council members should reflect on, and have a frank discussion about, the ever-increasing workload and proliferation of meetings. While noting the importance of keeping attention on situations on the Council's agenda, the Council should be prepared to innovate and adapt to ensure that it is making the best use of its time. The chairing of subsidiary bodies should be the shared responsibility of all 15 members. Briefers should continue to be encouraged to provide focused remarks and to use maps and graphics as appropriate, to better support discussions. Council members should continue to think creatively about tailoring the format and focus of meetings to secure the best chance of a meaningful outcome from the Council's deliberations. Members should also reflect on the experience of working remotely and any efficiencies that could continue to be employed during normal operations. With regard to effectiveness, the Council should have a fair and equitable division of labour for penholdership so that members are not precluded from offering their insights and ideas. This spirit should also apply to negotiations on products. The Chairs of subsidiary bodies should be closely consulted with and involved in the deliberations on, and drafting and preparation of, relevant Council outcomes and initiatives related to the committees they chair, given the expertise and knowledge accumulated, including through their periodic travels to regions applicable to their work. The veto may not strictly be a working method, but it has a significant negative impact, or cascade effect, on the working methods of the Council, including where elected members are routinely excluded for no reason other than habit. When the Council does agree outcomes, it should revisit these and hold itself accountable rather than waiting until its next regularly scheduled deliberations. Council members should select briefers who can deliver insights to add value to the Council's deliberations. Civil-society representatives, notably female briefers, should be invited regularly to share experiences, including from the field. Council members should continue to think innovatively about ways to engage with affected countries. Council members should also continue to create informal spaces for more meaningful discussions focused on identifying collective approaches and solutions. Council members should promote more interaction with the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), an advisory body to the Security Council, taking into account the fact that the PBC plays an important role in preventing the recurrence of conflict. Members should make better and more frequent use of situational awareness briefings, and they should also make requests under the agenda item "Any other business" to ensure that emerging threats are addressed with the right timing. The Council must live up to its own undertakings as agreed in presidential note S/2017/507. This must be matched by cultural change and the courage to do things differently and exercise the powers conferred under the Charter. COVID-19 presents a unique opportunity to look critically at the way in which the Council works with a view to improving transparency, efficiency and effectiveness. Members have our full support.
