Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): As the
Council holds its first quarterly open debate on the
situation in the Middle East of this year, my delegation
is disheartened by the continuing instability in the
region. Despite all the efforts made by the Security
Council over the years to curb the threat of terrorism,
in particular through the adoption of resolutions 2170
(2014) and 2178 (2014) last year, the threat posed by
radical terrorist organizations such as Al-Qaida and the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), continues to
spread around the world.

Along with the rest of the international community,
the Republic of Korea was shocked and dismayed by the
terrorist attack on the Paris office of Charlie Hebdo. We
strongly condemn such acts of terrorism and offer our
deepest condolences and consolation to the bereaved
families of the victims and the people of France for
their losses. In the aftermath of that tragedy, what is
clear to us now is that the volatility in the Middle East
affects us all. None of us is free from the long reach
of radical extremists. That was the message carried by
my Foreign Minister as he traveled to the region last
month. Through his meetings with the Prime Minister
of Palestine and the Foreign Ministers of Jordan, Israel
and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, he highlighted
the importance of the Middle East to Korea's foreign
policy and reaffirmed Korea's continuing commitment
to making constructive contributions to bringing peace
and prosperity to the region.

Turning to the situation in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem, the Republic of Korea remains concerned
about the ongoing tension in those areas. Terror attacks,
violent protests and harsh security reprisals remain
a daily reality for the civilians living there and have
the potential to spill over into a larger conflagration.
Although the Gaza ceasefire is being maintained, we are
also disconcerted by the slow speed of reconstruction
and Gaza's continued isolation.

While working diligently to ease the humanitarian
burden in Gaza and promote the lessening of tensions
in the West Bank, we must keep in mind, however, that
the only long-term solution to the ongoing conflict is a
negotiated settlement with the two-State solution as its
essence. Unilateral actions will not achieve that vision,
and we urge all parties to respect previous agreements
and return to the negotiating table with a View towards
ensuring a brighter future for all.

On Syria, the Republic of Korea continues to be
deeply concerned about the unprecedented scale of
impunity and terror. The international community,
including the Council, simply must do more to end the
conflict and lessen the suffering of the Syrian people.
The current humanitarian situation is extremely grim,
with over 7.6 million Syrian internally displaced persons
and 3.8 million Syrian refugees living difficult lives in
neighbouring States. Humanitarian access within Syria
remains hindered by all parties, in spite of the series
of resolutions adopted to address the problem. On our
part, the Republic of Korea delivered 300 temporary
housing units to Syrian refugees in Jordan in December,
bringing our total humanitarian assistance for Syrian
refugees to $13 million.

ISIL remains a global scourge that ruthlessly
controls sizeable territory in two States through terror
and is inspiring the actions of radicalized extremists
beyond Syria and Iraq. Recent images of conscripted
child soldiers taking part in executions, as well as the
sexual enslavement of ethnic minorities, are extremely
disturbing. The international community must do its
utmost to end that tragedy.

