The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Peru.

We too would like to begin by expressing our
gratitude to Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed, Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo, and Ms. Jamila Afghani for the valuable and
detailing information they have provided us with today.

We also join others in offering our condolences to
the people of Tunisia following the passing of President
Essebsi, as well as to the Government and people of
Afghanistan in the wake of yesterday's attacks, whose
many victims included women and children.

We wish to commend Ms. Mohammed's leadership
in making the journey to bear witness to the situation
of women in Afghanistan in situ. We welcome the fact
that she was accompanied by Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo,
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka and Ms. Natalia Kanem,
which enabled a comprehensive approach to be taken.
We believe that the visit was particularly significant
in the light of the presidential elections to be held in
Afghanistan in September. These must be held on the
basis of a spirit of dialogue, tolerance, inclusion and
mutual respect.

In that connection, we welcome the historic
appointment of two women as respective heads of the
Independent Election Commission and the Electoral
Complaints Commission. This constitutes a crucial step
forward for the involvement of women in the political
life of the country, which will undoubtedly contribute
to strengthening governance and the legitimacy of the
Afghan political system.

Moreover, we consider it essential to promote
the participation of women in the implementation
processes and mechanisms of the peace and
reconciliation process. Based on reports on the ground,
Peru is convinced that women's participation is a vital
element of conflict resolution, peacebuilding and
peacekeeping. In addition, the greater involvement of
women in decision-making must be promoted through
the creation of employment opportunities and the
establishment of quotas in Government positions.
We hope that the Afghan Government will continue
to work on the implementation of its National Action
Plan on Resolution 1325 (2000): Women, peace and
security, as well as on its programme for the economic
empowerment of women.

At the same time, it is necessary to strengthen
access to justice and the fight against impunity so that
victims are able to trust their institutions and that those
responsible for acts of violence are held accountable. We
must bear in mind that, in the majority of cases, women
and girls affected by so many years of conflict do not
have access to protection services or legal assistance.

In order to contribute to that cause, the Council
should maintain and strengthen its gender perspective
and the women and peace and security agenda,
particularly in the development of mandates, as well
as in following up on the recommendations made. In
this connection, we believe it important to further
synthesize the work of women's organizations and that
of the Informal Expert Group on Women, Peace and
Security - which Peru has the honour to co-chair with
Germany - in terms of their approach to the various
cases that form part of their agenda. We discussed the
situation in Afghanistan, for example, as recently as
10 July.

I resume my functions as President of the Council.

I now give the floor to the representative
of Afghanistan.

