Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): I am pleased to give
this account of the Security Council visit to Sierra
Leone on 23 May, on behalf of Ambassador Sir Mark
Lyall Grant, Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom, and of myself.

The aim of the Council's visit to Sierra Leone was
to encourage continued efforts to consolidate peace and
national reconciliation. During the visit, the Council
met President Koroma and several of his Ministers,
representatives from all 10 registered political parties
and the National Electoral Commission. The Council
also met members of civil society, including women's
groups, so that the Council could hear from the people
of Sierra Leone about the remarkable journey that
their country has made since the civil war, which will
continue with the forthcoming elections.

We would like to thank Mr. Jens Anders
Toyberg-Frandzen, Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General, and the staff of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office (UNIPSIL) for
welcoming the Council and supporting our visit, in
particular given how recently Mr. Toyberg-Frandzen
himself arrived in Freetown. We greatly appreciate the
support that UNIPSIL, working with the rest of the
United Nations family, is providing to peacebuilding in
Sierra Leone. Truly, that is "One UN" in action.

As you might expect, Mr. President, the forthcoming
elections featured prominently during the Council's
visit. We received from President Koroma a clear and
welcome commitment to a free, fair and transparent
process. Discussions with all political parties and the
National Electoral Commission reassured us that good
progress was being made in preparing for November's
poll. While we heard that the political environment in
the country continues to be dominated by intense rivalry
and mistrust between the two major political parties,
the Council was encouraged by the signing, by all the
political parties, of a declaration agreeing to contest the
elections fairly and not to resort to violence.

In our meetings with the military and other
representatives from the security sector, we were
encouraged by the commitment we heard to army
and police neutrality. The military and police training
provided by the United Nations and bilateral donors
over the past 10 years has clearly helped to develop a
culture of policing based on protecting the security and
human rights of all citizens in Sierra Leone. That work
needs to continue.

On the issues ofthe purchase of weapons for the use
of the Sierra Leone police, President Koroma reassured
us that those weapons were transferred to the armed
forces of Sierra Leone in the presence of international
observers.

A further mark of the progress that the Council
observed was the pride that the Government of
Sierra Leone and the military conveyed to us about
the forthcoming deployment of the armed forces as
peacekeepers to the African Union Mission in Somalia.

At our luncheon with civil society, we met
representatives of women's groups who shared their
ideas about peacebuilding and reconciliation, including
on the question of reparations for war victims. All
speakers stressed the role that women can play as an
early-warning system for potential conflict, and spoke
in favour of greater representation for women in
Parliament.

In conclusion, it is worth reflecting upon how far
we have come. The progress that Sierra Leone has made
since the civil war ended, 10 years ago, is remarkable.
Of course, huge problems remain, including high youth
unemployment, infrastructural dilapidation and a lack
of institutional capacity. But there are grounds for
optimism that Sierra Leone is on the path to building
lasting peace. The Security Council will continue to
play its role in that journey.

I am grateful to Ambassador Sir Mark Lyall
Grant and the United Kingdom Mission for their joint
leadership on this mission. Ijoin other Council members
in expressing my appreciation to the Secretariat for its
diligent professionalism in organizing the mission on
short notice.

