Mr. Dhakkar (Somalia): On behalf of the
Permanent Representative of Somalia to the United
Nations, who is not currently in New York, and in my
capacity as officer-in-charge of the Mission, on behalf
of the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia,
and, indeed, on behalf of all the suffering people of
Somalia, I would like again to thank the Security
Council and its President for giving us an opportunity
to participate in this discussion.

At the outset, I would like to welcome the position
taken by our colleague Ahmedou Ould Abdallah. We
would like to offer him our full support in his worthy
endeavours. We wholeheartedly endorse the last
position he outlined, which is the only option. The only
option is for the Security Council and the United Nations
system to move in the right direction - not only to
move in the right direction, but to do so with speed, in
order to make up for lost time. It is no secret in
Somalian and other circles that many Somalis - inside
Somalia, in the neighbouring countries and all over the
world - wonder why it is so relatively easy for the
Security Council and the United Nations system to
move faster and in the right direction in other places in
the world where there is or has been conflict.

Basically, we endorse the idea that the Security
Council should move speedily in three directions. First,
existing measures should be implemented: first of all,
the deployment of African Union peacekeepers. I take
this opportunity to thank profusely the African Union,
the Government of Uganda and the Government of
Ethiopia for helping Somalia in its hour of need.

Secondly, it should be possible, in this day and
age, in the twenty-first century, for the Security
Council to come up with an acceptable formula to
move ahead on Somalia in the right direction in the
political and security sphere. It is not in the interest of
the United Nations system to find ways to delay real
action on Somalia.

Thirdly, of course, wherever there is conflict,
there is a humanitarian disaster, and Somalia is no
exception. It pains us to see Somalia for so long the
subject of the worst possible headlines. The Somali
people would like to move out of this situation. Those
us who know us know us as proud people.
Unfortunately, since the civil war, and since 1991,
when the central Government collapsed, our pride has
been crudely dented, but we have faith that we will
come back and regain our strength.
After all, we have one language, we have one
history, we have one ethnic group and we have one
religion. In many situations where I have been in my
capacity as a former senior United Nations official for
23 years and as a part-time lecturer at New York
University, I have been asked, "if you have all this
homogeneity, what is the problem? What are you
fighting about?" In many situations, I was able to
explain, in two minutes rather than in two hours, what
the problem was.

So my third point, talking about directions for the
Security Council, was to emphasize humanitarian
assistance.

I will be brief. We fully support the position
taken by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Somalia. We fully endorse the need for the
Security Council to move fast, and in the right
direction - and now. We have faith in the United
Nations system and in the Security Council. After all,
part of Somalia was a United Nations Trust Territory,
and the southern part gained independence with the
help of the United Nations. There are many Somalis in
the diaspora. There are many Somalis who have been
in the United Nations system.

We all have faith in the United Nations system.
We hope that five or ten years down the road we will
still have faith in the United Nations system.

