Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I shall begin with a brief review of the
situation that has led me to ask the Council to convene.

On the morning of Monday, 1 December 2008,
the Libyan ship Al-Marwa was headed for the port of
Gaza loaded with humanitarian aid - specifically,
flour, rice, vegetable oil, dairy products and
medicine- destined for the population of the Gaza
Strip, which has been under an almost total siege by
the Israeli authorities for several weeks. As the Council
is aware, Israeli authorities have even prevented the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East from delivering assistance to
the Gaza Strip. While en route to the port of Gaza, the
Al-Marwa was intercepted by two Israeli gunboats,
which initially simply collected information about the
crew and cargo; then they ordered it to return from
where it came, explicitly threatening to destroy it if it
failed to comply with that order.

At that time, I informed the President of the
Security Council of the incident in order for the issue
to be brought before the Council for the urgent action
necessary to permit the ship to enter the port and
unload its cargo. In my letter to the President
(8/2008/754), I made it clear that Libya would accept
inspection of the ship by the United Nations or by any
humanitarian organization, such as the Red Crescent or
the Red Cross, to verify that it did not hold anything
but a crew, foodstuffs and medicine.

Having been threatened with the use of force, the
ship had no option but to head away from the
Palestinian coast and into international waters.
However, the Israeli gunboats pursued the ship and
forced its crew, under threat of force, to sail in a
specific direction and not change that direction. At
08-63224
times, in addition to the gunboats, aircraft flew
overhead.

The actions of the Israeli authorities, which have
often claimed to have withdrawn from Gaza, are an
explicit act of piracy under article 101 of the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. Under that
article, piracy is defined as any illegal acts perpetrated
on the high seas against a private ship or against
persons or property on board outside the jurisdiction of
any State. The Libyan ship was more than 220 nautical
miles from the coast of Gaza at 5.55 pm, Libyan time,
when the Israeli boats were forcing it to head in a
specific direction under threat of force.

Under international conventions in force, States
are obliged to extend their full cooperation to suppress
piracy on the high seas or anywhere outside the
jurisdiction of any State. In recent months, the Security
Council has dealt with the growing phenomenon of
piracy and assumed its responsibilities and adopted a
series of important resolutions aimed at making the
suppression of piracy an obligation enshrined in
international law. In response to that trend, and in
accordance with obligations under international law,
we call upon the Council to assume its responsibilities
and condemn the actions by Israeli authorities vis-a-vis
the Libyan ship Al-Marwa, which was carrying
humanitarian assistance. We also call on it to take
effective steps to ensure Israel's compliance with
international humanitarian law and the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea and to hold it
accountable for its deliberate violations of the freedom
of navigation on the high seas.

We would today like to remind the Security
Council that Israeli authorities shot down a Libyan
aircraft over the Sinai in 1973, despite having
identified it as a civilian craft whose passengers
included children. That serious precedent leads us to
conclude that Israeli authorities would not hesitate to
perpetrate the same crime against the Libyan ship. It
would be a flagrant violation of international law if the
Council were to remain silent in the face of Israel's
actions and its collective punishment by way of the
suffocating siege against 1.5 million Palestinians.

Once again, we hope that the Council will assume
its responsibilities with regard to what has occurred
and what is happening now. We hope that, with Israel
having closed all land crossings, the Libyan ship will
be able to continue its voyage in safety and enter the
08-63224
port of Gaza to unload its cargo. We also hope that all
other ships carrying humanitarian aid will be able to
enter that port.

My delegation has prepared a draft press
communique. We hope that consultations will continue
and that the Council will achieve consensus thereon.

