The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Tunisia.

At the outset, I would like to thank Mr.
Guehenno, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, for his detailed and useful briefing on the
situation in Kosovo.

The Balkan region has witnessed new and
important developments in recent months. Those
developments have been manifested in a clear political
will to overcome obstacles and arrive at a final and
comprehensive settlement of this issue. They have also
opened up new and truly encouraging horizons for all
parties. This calls for the international community to
support the recently manifested will in order to
establish peace in the region and implement the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
particularly resolution 1244 (1999).

We are concerned about continuing acts of
violence in the Presevo Valley, as well as in the ground
security zone. Those acts could have negative
repercussions, jeopardizing peace and security and
undermining the efforts of the international community
in the region.

At the same time, we express our optimism about
the path chosen by the authorities in Belgrade to
contain the crisis through political negotiations and the
establishment of a plan to guarantee the rights of ethnic
Albanians and improve their living conditions, which
will contribute to their integration into the economic
cycle and to normalizing the situation in the region.

With regard to the situation inside Kosovo, I will
confine my comments to four issues we believe to be of
great importance.

First, at the top of our list of priorities in Kosovo
is to address the root causes of violence. Despite the
marked improvement in the region, there clearly
remain sources of tension and instability. In our view,
this situation cannot be overcome without achieving a
permanent reconciliation among the ethnic groups that
would guarantee their coexistence in peace and safety
and steer them towards a better future.

Secondly, we believe that reconciliation cannot be
brought about without providing the necessary,
objective conditions. By this I mean finding a
definitive and comprehensive solution to the question
of missing persons and detainees, in particular now that
Ambassador Amneus has been appointed as Special
Envoy on Persons Deprived of Liberty. Arrangements
should also be made to facilitate the safe return of
refugees and displaced persons. They must be given the
opportunity to settle and to be integrated socially and
economically into society.

Thirdly, the thesis of Tunisian sociologist Ibn
Khaldfin - who is known as the founder of
sociology- that justice is the basis of civilization
applies fully to the situation in Kosovo. An impartial
judiciary would reassure Kosovo's residents, enhance
their sense of security and contribute to a normalization
of the situation there. We therefore urge the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo to
continue to make efforts aimed at reform of the
judiciary, with a view to implementing the laws in
force in an impartial and non-discriminatory manner.

Fourthly, the legislative elections scheduled to be
held shortly represent an important step on the road to
develop a practical plan for the implementation of
large-scale self-government, as envisaged in Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999). Serious preparations
should therefore be made to hold those elections within
a legal context so as to guarantee the participation of
all in an atmosphere of security and respect for others'
differences.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I invite the representative of Sweden to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.

