Mr. Holliday (United States of America): On the
occasion of the first public meeting since you assumed
the Council presidency, Sir, I would like to
congratulate you and to express our appreciation for
the work of the outgoing President, Ambassador
Akram.

My delegation would also like to thank Chairman
Bryant and Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Klein for their presentations to the Council.
We appreciate their presence here today, but, most
important, we appreciate the work that they have
undertaken on behalf of the Liberian people. They
faced enormous challenges when they assumed their
respective offices, and although many challenges
remain, much has been accomplished since the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement was signed in Accra
last August.

The most significant of those accomplishments is
unquestionably the near-full deployment of United
Nations peacekeepers and the relative calm that they
have brought to Monrovia and environs. The calm and
stability remain fragile, but we commend the
peacekeepers and encourage their sustained
deployment outside Monrovia. We very much
appreciate the efforts of troop-contributing countries,
and we urge current and potential troop contributors to
support the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO).

We welcome indications that peacekeepers of the
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) will work
closely with peacekeepers in neighbouring countries
such as Cote d'Ivoire and Sierra Leone. Close
cooperation and collaboration among UNMIL, the
United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI)
and the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) will serve the interests of all three
peacekeeping operations and of peace and security in
the region.

We take note of the meetings between the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General and the
exchange of liaison officers highlighted in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2004/430). We hope that
continuing exchanges of ideas will result in the
development of concrete plans for cross-border
activities and the sharing of resources, and we look
forward to further developments on this issue.

While military deployment has speeded up and
has nearly reached authorized levels, civilian staffing
for UNMIL lags behind. We are very concerned that
the Special Representative should have all the means
necessary to carry out his work. We encourage all parts
of the United Nations - in Monrovia and in New
York- to do whatever is necessary to ensure that
UNMIL has the right staff in a timely manner.

A key task for UNMIL has been the disarmament
and demobilization of combatants. Successful
completion of those activities has often been identified
as the key to Liberia's lasting stability and security. We
need to disarm and demobilize the fighters in order for
the political process to go ahead, and we need to
support reintegration efforts in order to minimize
future threats. We also need to be sensitive to the
simultaneous returns of internally displaced persons
and of refugees, as well as to the needs of the
communities to which those groups are returning.
Illiteracy, unemployment and a lack of prospects afflict
all those groups equally. We recognize the particular
significance of ex-combatants and the risk they pose to
the political process, but we must also keep in mind
their civilian victims, and we must not be seen as
rewarding ex-combatants. We can best reach that
balance not by slowing or ceasing disarmament,
demobilization, rehabilitation and reintegration
(DDRR), but by devoting similar energy and resources
to assist all the other war-afflicted groups.

We would urge that all parts of the United
Nations system involved in the DDRR process begin
the RR phase immediately. We are concerned about the
gap between the DD and the RR. We understand that
disarmament and demobilization - which got off to a
bit of a rocky start - have been well under way since
being restarted in mid-April. We encourage serious
collaboration with non-governmental organizations in
Liberia and with others with relevant experience to
ensure continued success in the DD phase. And we
urge rapid commencement of rehabilitation and
reintegration. Only serious and sustained assistance
programmes will discourage former combatants from
returning to political violence or from embarking on
criminal activity.

We also urge the Liberian factions to do their part
for DDRR. The ultimate responsibility for DDRR
belongs to Liberians themselves, albeit with strong
support from the international community. The
Secretary-General's report (S/2004/428) notes that just
over 30,000 combatants have been disarmed but that
fewer than 15,000 weapons have been collected. We
are concerned that more weapons have not been
brought in, but we recognize that not all combatants
had their own weapons and that most combatants are
still reluctant to give up their weapons. Their faith in
the peace process is understandably fragile, and they
continue to feel a need to rely on their guns as the sole
source of security and livelihood. We propose that the
current emphasis on demobilizing combatants and
dismantling the militias be followed by consideration
of how to ensure that the weapons are permanently out
of circulation.

In conjunction with DDRR, as Jacques Klein
mentioned, my Government is taking the lead on
security-sector reform. We have sent a 30-person
assessment team to Liberia to consider security-sector
issues. Its members are now drafting its
recommendations for a reform plan. We will direct a
significant part of our bilateral funding for Liberia to
that effort in recognition of Liberia's need for
professional defence forces and of the need to replace
Liberians United for Reconciliation and Democracy
(LURD), Movement for Democracy in Liberia
(MODEL) and ex-Government forces with a serious,
professional and trained force loyal to the new
Government of Liberia.

Security-sector reform is a large task. Although
we expect to play a significant role, we encourage
other donors to step in and work with us. I would add
that, as many members know, one of our security
assessment team members was tragically murdered in
Monrovia last week. We are saddened by that loss, but
it does not diminish our commitment to completing and
pursuing this important task in Liberia.

Liberia needs both short-term humanitarian and
long-term development assistance. We must support
immediately the establishment of an effective police
force and a functioning judiciary, and must ensure that
there are adequate resources for elections next year.
February's donor conference was a huge success. It
represented a unique collaboration of key assistance
actors on a results-based framework, and donors
responded enthusiastically, pledging roughly $500
million. However, four months later, less than 20 per
cent of those pledges have been met. We urge donors to
stand by their commitments and not to let the fact that
the spotlight has perhaps moved away from Liberia's
immediate crisis to be an excuse for those needs not
being met. We would urge donors and stakeholders to
coordinate. Cooperation has generally been good, but it
would be useful to have a more disciplined sharing of
plans to ensure maximum coverage of needs. We
encourage donors to pay particular attention to returns
of refugees and internally displaced persons. We
anticipate the return of 850,000 to Liberia, including
half a million internally displaced persons and 350,000
refugees.

We also encourage the National Transitional
Government of Liberia to work with United Nations
agencies, donor Governments and non-governmental
organizations to ensure that programmes are in place to
receive all the returnees and to ensure that their return
is sustainable. Again, the responsibility belongs to
Liberians, with support from the international
community.

My Government notes the initial steps that
Chairman Bryant and other members of his
Government are taking to institute control over
Government revenue to ensure that funds are spent
appropriately to benefit the people of Liberia. These
are welcome developments, and we applaud the
ongoing efforts.

However, there will be no lasting change in
Liberia absent the establishment of values that reflect
honesty, trust, service, transparency and accountability.
It has been suggested that we should ease current
restrictions imposed by the Security Council on Liberia
under resolution 1521 (2003), particularly in the areas
of diamonds and timber. We too look forward to that
day. However, my delegation respectfully has a
different view of the current situation and believes that
a history of corrupt practices in Liberia has fostered an
environment in which abuses of power were permitted
to flourish. The time has come, as resolution 1521
(2003) states, for the National Transitional Government
to establish transparent accounting and auditing
mechanisms to ensure that all Government revenues
are not used to fuel conflict but instead are employed to
improve the lives of all Liberians. We note the
Chairman's description of some of the positive steps
that have been taken in that direction.

Finally, despite the best efforts of committed
Liberians, United Nations staff and members of the
international community, Charles Taylor continues to
remain a threat to Liberia. We continue to believe that
Taylor should be held accountable for his actions in
Sierra Leone and should appear before the Special
Court.

Before closing, Mr. President, I would like to
thank you for chairing this timely and critical meeting,
and for allowing us to have such a robust and
comprehensive statement. I must also re-emphasize the
intention of the United States to work closely with our
colleagues in Monrovia, with Chairman Bryant and
with our Security Council colleagues here in New York
to ensure a brighter future for the people of Liberia,
who deserve no less than our continued engagement as
they rebuild their nation.

