Mr. Oshima (Japan): I would like to begin by
thanking you, Madam, and the delegation of the United
Kingdom for the important initiative you have taken of
organizing this timely debate on the security
implications of climate change and global warming,
and I thank you as well for the excellent concept paper
that was presented.

We are aware that this is the first time that the
Security Council has held a thematic debate on this
topic. Scientists and economists around the world have
once again - more clearly and convincingly than ever
before - drawn our attention to what is, without a
doubt, one of the most imminent, serious and
multifaceted risks and challenges confronting all of
humanity. Given the rapid advances that have been
made in research on climate change and its impact on
the global ecosystem, and in the light of the facts and
the prognosis presented to us by the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), the Stern review
team and many others, it would be not only foolhardy
but also highly irresponsible if we failed to move on
from discussing science to practical planning,
strategizing and taking action.

It is clear that climate change can pose threats to
national security, including those discussed in the
United Kingdom concept paper. National security has
been threatened by conflicts over claims to land and
natural resources since ancient times. In the
foreseeable future, climate change in all its
manifestations may well create conditions or induce
circumstances that could precipitate or aggravate

international conflicts, and it therefore has serious
potential national and international security
implications.

Also, as noted in the recent IPCC report and other
authoritative studies, global warming will generate
conditions and circumstances that could have a
negative impact on development and poverty reduction
strategies in a variety of ways. Food production may be
affected, natural disasters may increase in number and
intensify, the supply of fresh water may diminish,
infectious diseases may become more rampant, and so
forth. Clearly, the implications for human security
would also be quite serious.

As projected, it is the poor and the weakest of
countries and societies that are most vulnerable to the
onslaught. The projected rise in sea levels poses an
immediate threat to the survival of small island
developing States and lowland areas. We must
acknowledge the linkages between the new emerging
global phenomenon, sustainable development and
poverty-reduction strategies.

Climate change is a global challenge, and
meeting it will require a global response: the concerted
efforts of the international community on a number of
fronts. In this, the United Nations should continue to
play a leading role; indeed, it should play a stronger
one by involving all relevant organs and bodies of the
system, including the Security Council, as relevant to
their respective mandates, because doing so is essential
for system-wide coherence on the issue.

Among the many challenges and issues that we
face, I would like to note - without going into too
much detail - three that require our urgent attention.
If fact, they require that we mobilize.

The first is the overriding importance of
controlling greenhouse gas emissions and creating an
effective post-Kyoto framework. It is of the utmost
importance that the maximum number of countries
responsible for any significant emissions linked to
global warming participate in this effort - and I am
speaking of developed and developing countries alike.
Currently, only about 30 per cent of the world's total
greenhouse gas emissions are covered by the parties to
the Kyoto Protocol. That is grossly and dangerously
inadequate. According to a report by the International
Atomic Energy Agency, emissions of carbon dioxide
by developing countries reached 40 per cent of total
global emissions in 2004, and if the current trend
continues, by about 2015 the overall total of emissions
from developing countries will overtake that of the
countries of the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development. In our View, any new
post-Kyoto arrangement must seek to enable all
countries to cut emissions according to their ability,
and thus maximize emission controls on a truly global
basis, the goal being to halve the level of total
emissions as soon as possible. In doing so, we must
acknowledge the close linkages that exist between
development strategy and climate change strategy.

In this connection, let me mention that on the
occasion of the visit by the Premier of China, Mr. Wen
Jiabao, to Japan last week, Japan and China issued a
statement on the further enhancement of cooperation in
the area of environmental protection. In it, they
expressed their shared intention to work together on
the issue under discussion, stating

"Under the framework of the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change and its Kyoto Protocol, both sides
reaffirm their political resolve to engage in
efforts towards the resolution of climate change
issues through international cooperation, in
accordance with the principle of common but
differentiated responsibilities . Both sides will
actively participate in the process towards the
construction of an effective beyond-2012
framework, based on the principles and
regulations set forth in the above-mentioned
Convention and Protocol."

The second challenge is supporting the
development and use of clean energy, including nuclear
or renewable energy, and new, effective energy-saving
technologies. This is obviously an essential part of any
effort to reduce the level of greenhouse gases.
Cooperation and exchanges on such technology at all
levels - bilateral, regional and international - should
be strengthened. United Nations agencies have an
important role to play in that regard, including
facilitation of the transfer of advanced clean-energy
and energy-saving technologies to developing
countries, which should be encouraged in any way
possible.

The third, related, challenge, which is no less
important, are issues regarding adaptation -
preventing, mitigating and adapting to the negative
effects of climate change, especially those arising from

natural disasters. The Stern review states that "the
benefits of strong and early action far outweigh the
costs". Such action needs to be taken now, because we
cannot ignore the fact that global warming, with all its
potential harmful consequences, is here to stay and will
get worse before it can get better. Governments set out
what needs to be done to reduce vulnerabilities and
disaster risks in the Hyogo Framework for Action
2005-2015, agreed at the World Conference on Disaster
Reduction, held in Hyogo, Japan, in January 2005.
Governments need to take urgent action to
simultaneously reduce the emissions causing climate
change and adapt to the changes that are unavoidable
by implementing the Hyogo Framework for Action.

In order to deal with these and other issues
surrounding climate change and global warming, it is
time for Member States to take a look at how
comprehensively - or how inadequately - the United
Nations system is equipped. We welcome the intention
of Secretary-General Ban to make climate change one
of his priorities. Indeed, we will welcome any initiative
that he takes that helps to strengthen the United
Nations role and enhance its agenda in that area. To
that end, I would like to propose that the Secretary-
General be requested - perhaps not by the Council
but, more appropriately, by the General Assembly - to
make a report with recommendations at the earliest
possible date on how best the United Nations system as
a whole can organize itself to strengthen its capacity so
that it will be able to address this matter more
effectively and coherently. The report should address
such questions as the role and function of the Inter-
Agency Secretariat of the International Strategy for
Disaster Reduction, which is responsible for
coordination of disaster prevention and mitigation.

Before concluding, I would like to state that
Japan is strongly resolved to continue its active
engagement in all international efforts on climate
change-related issues, both in the United Nations and
outside it, including negotiations for a new, post-Kyoto
greenhouse gas emissions regime.

Climate change will be one of the main themes at
this year's Group of Eight (G-8) Summit, to be held in
Germany, and it is expected to remain high on the
agenda next year, 2008, when Japan will host the G-8
Summit. In its bilateral and multilateral development
cooperation and partnership arrangements with the
countries of Asia and the Pacific including the Pacific
Islands Forum, Africa, the Caribbean Community and
others, Japan has accorded high priority to projects and
programmes aimed at preventing, mitigating and
adapting to the effects of climate change. In the future,
it will give them even more attention.

Allow me to say a few words about the form such
cooperation and partnership has taken, or will take in
the future. Japan, together with the United States,
China, India, the Republic of Korea and Australia,
established the Asia-Pacific Partnership on Clean
Development and Climate. At the Second East Asia
Summit, held at Cebu in the Philippines, Prime
Minister Abe announced Japan's cooperation initiative
for clean energy and sustainable growth for the East
Asia region.

Japan has promoted the Tokyo International
Conference on African Development process, which
focused greater attention on energy and environmental
issues, as well as on adaptation to the effects of global
warming, in the context of sustainable development in
Africa, through the holding of a ministerial conference
in Nairobi in March.

Japan attaches high priority to disaster
prevention, especially the steps proposed in the Hyogo
Framework of Action, and it supports the International
Strategy for Disaster Reduction. Japan also contributes
to multilateral institutions, such as the World Bank,
through the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and
Recovery.

Finally, we continue to be closely involved in
programmes that focus on water and sanitation,
including through participation in bilateral aid
programmes and the United Nations Advisory Board
on Water and Sanitation.

