Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Thank you, Sir, for
creating this opportunity for us to come and speak and vent
our frustrations about the unfolding situation in East Timor.
I would like to commend the Secretary-General, the
Secretariat and the United Nations agencies for their
untiring efforts to assist the East Timorese people. On
behalf of the South African Government I want to assure
the Secretary-General and the United Nations of our
unwavering support as they try to assist the people of East
Timor.

Allow me, Mr. President, to express through you my
country's condolences to the people of East Timor because
as we speak people have either died or are dying in East
Timor, and that is a reality. The brutality that we have
witnessed in East Timor, and continue to witness, is
absolutely senseless. It should not have been allowed to
happen.

South Africa has always been committed to the
peaceful resolution to the dispute on the settlement of East
Timor. Our political leaders, especially former President
Nelson Mandela and the then Deputy President and now
President Mbeki, have taken special initiatives in support of
the United Nations actions regarding East Timor and have
always called for the release of the East Timorese leader,
Mr. Gusmao.

Also, the South African Government welcomed the
signing of the New York Agreements of 5 May 1999. We
understood that the Government of Indonesia had
committed itself to full responsibility for the maintenance
of law and order in East Timor in the interim phase
between the ballot and the implementation of its results.
We also understood that the Government of Indonesia had
committed itself to the responsibility for the protection of
the United Nations and other international personnel and
property in East Timor.

It was with a deep sense of pride and relief that we
observed the transparent and largely peaceful conduct of
the ballot on 30 August 1999, in which the United
Nations Mission in East Timor (UNAMET) conducted
itself with high distinction. The East Timorese people
turned out in overwhelming numbers to exercise their
democratic right to determine their own future with calm
and dignity, despite ongoing violence and intimidation by
the so-called militias who were bent on killing and
maiming those who dared to choose to be free.

For us South Africans, those long lines of voters
reminded us of our own first democratic election, when
we also had to overcome fear and Violence in order to
exercise our fundamental democratic right. Due to our
commitment to democracy, when the United Nations
organized a referendum on independence in East Timor,
South Africa sent a team of election experts, who had
learned how to monitor the birth of a democracy by
helping in nurturing our own. One of the three UNAMET
Commissioners was one of South Africa's distinguished
judges, Mr. Justice Johann Kriegler, Judge of the South
African Constitutional Court, who had been Chairperson
of our own independent electoral commission at our first-
ever democratic election. In other words, South Africa's
involvement in East Timor was more than just political.

When the people of East Timor voted
overwhelmingly for independence, we thought that the
democratic transition which is currently under way in East
Timor had more than a chance, despite the odds against
it. On a number of occasions, my Government expressed
its alarm at reports of escalating violence in East Timor
in the lead up to the referendum. We urged all sides in
East Timor to reject violence and intimidation and to
exercise maximum restraint. At the same time, we
expected that the Government of Indonesia would protect
the people of East Timor and help guide them through
their difficult democratic transition.

 

For a while everything looked so promising in East
Timor. It seemed as if the people of East Timor would
finally realize their long-held dream of self-determination.

The events that have unfolded so far have shocked us
and at the same time have outraged the rest of the world.
We keep wondering how it is possible for a so-called
militia to cause such widespread humanitarian destruction
in such a short time? How could armed killers rampage
throughout East Timor so easily? We must ensure that the
so-called militias and other undemocratic forces are not
allowed to reverse the democratic process in East Timor. If
that happened, it would send the wrong signal to other
people who face violent tyranny and domination elsewhere.
This hearing serves to assure the people of East Timor that
they are not forgotten.

The South African Government and its people
condemn unreservedly this latest expression of violence that
has brought about a complete collapse of social order in
East Timor. In particular, we are appalled at and saddened
by the murder of countless unarmed and defenceless East
Timorese people, the displacement of hundreds of
thousands of people and the attacks on United Nations and
other international personnel by the so-called militias.

The South African Government welcomes the
announcement by the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, Ms. Mary Robinson, that she will go to
the region to obtain a first-hand assessment of the situation.
We welcome also the recent agreement between the
Indonesian Government and the International Committee of
the Red Cross to re-establish the latter's operations in East
Timor.

The South African Government calls on the Indonesian
Government to protect the people of East Timor, to prevent
the further escalation of violence in the territory and its
spread to neighbouring West Timor, to guarantee the safe
return of displaced persons to their homes and to create the
conditions to allow UNAMET to resume its work in all the
regions of East Timor and to allow the international
community to assist in addressing the growing humanitarian
catastrophe.

We support the recent offers of international assistance
made by the United Nations Secretary-General and the
Security Council to the Government of Indonesia to restore
stability and security in East Timor, and we strongly urge
the Indonesian Government to accept such assistance. Any
urgent action by the United Nations will assure the whole
world that our Organization is ready to stand up for
suffering people wherever they are around the world.

The restoration of peace and stability to East Timor,
and the full implementation of the results of the 30
August 1999 ballot are not only in the long-term interests
of the East Timorese but of all of the people of Indonesia.

South Africa has always sought to play a positive
role in support of the Secretary-General's efforts to find
a lasting solution to the East Timor problem and to assist
the people of East Timor in determining their own future.
We remain steadfastly committed to seeing the peaceful
settlement of the East Timor matter and the granting of
independence to the East Timorese people. Many may
have been killed at the dawn of their freedom, but we
believe that the lives of those East Timorese that were
lost were not lost in vain.

We commend the members of the Security Council
for having taken great risk by travelling to Indonesia and
East Timor to witness the situation first hand. We eagerly
await their report, which we believe will lay the basis for
the United Nations to discharge its solemn duty and
responsibility for protecting peace and democracy in East
Timor and elsewhere around the world.

