Mr. Krokhmal (Ukraine): I thank you, Mr.
President, for scheduling this meeting of the Security
Council on East Timor. Our thanks also go to Mr.
Annabi for his briefing. We welcome Mr. Gusmao,
President of the National Council of Timorese
Resistance, and Mr. Ramos-Horta, a member of the
transitional Cabinet, and thank them for their
participation today in this meeting of the Security
Council.

We share the analyses of the latest developments
of the situation in the region and of the activities of the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) expressed by the members of the
Council who spoke before me. I will abbreviate my
own comments.

My delegation welcomes the interim report of the
Secretary-General and the conclusions contained
therein. It is certainly of critical importance to be
guided by the need to safeguard the international
community's considerable investments in East Timor's
future at this particular stage of the political transition.
The next step, one that may perhaps do more than any
other taken to date to move towards the goal of
obtaining independence, is the completion of the
constitution by the Constituent Assembly and the
subsequent holding of democratic elections. We feel
sure that continued success in the political transition
will depend largely or maintaining a secure
environment.

The recent series of violent incidents that has
been mentioned has raised concern that the political
process may not remain peaceful. In this connection,
my delegation would like to stress the continued
importance of the security arrangements currently
provided by the military and civil police components of
UNTAET.

With regard to refugees, there was an increase in
March in the number of refugees who returned to their
places of origin, but the general situation has not
improved significantly. We would also like to
emphasize the necessity of quickly resolving the
situation of refugees. My delegation considers that the
reconciliation of the population of East Timor- a
question that has a direct bearing on the return of
refugees- will be extremely limited until those
responsible for the major crimes are prosecuted in
conformity with international standards.

We would like to join the delegations that
expressed their frustration about the light sentences
handed down in the Atambua case. Here I must also
emphasize our concern regarding limited scope of
jurisdiction for the recently established ad hoc tribunals
over gross violations of human rights in East Timor
committed before the ballot in August 1999. We are
interested in further clarification regarding this
situation and how it corresponds to the commitments
made by the parties on the basis of the memorandum of
understanding on cooperation in legal affairs.
In conclusion, my delegation will continue to
support the work of UNTAET, whose activities in East
Timor are a serious test of its effectiveness in resolving
various kinds of problems.

