Mr. Nkoloi (Botswana): My delegation would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this important
debate. We welcome this opportunity to continue to
engage the Council on matters of international peace
and security.

Our appreciation also goes to the Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, Mr. Feltman, for his
comprehensive briefing this morning.

It has become a tradition for the Security Council
to discuss the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. This is in an effort to engage
the international community and to share ideas on
how we can work together to contribute to peace and
prosperity in the Middle East. My delegation continues
to follow with great interest the socioeconomic and
political events in the Middle East, especially events in
Syria and the Israeli-Palestinian peace process.

On the situation in Syria, my delegation would
like to express its continued support for the people of
Syria and to call for an end to the horrible humanitarian
catastrophe besetting the heroic people of that country.
We are particularly concerned about the plight of
millions of women and children who have been
displaced and are without food, shelter and medical
care. As we speak, some 6.8 million Syrians require
urgent medical assistance, and 4.2 million remain
internally displaced. We are told that of the 1.7 million
Syrian refugees scattered and stranded in neighbouring
countries, 50 per cent are children. It is disheartening
for a people who have lived in their ancestral land from
time immemorial to be forced into refugee camps on
foreign soil. We call on the international community
as well as humanitarian organizations the world over
to respond with kindness and care to the refugees of
Syria.

While we welcome the recently adopted resolution
2118 (2013), which calls on Syria to eliminate and hand
over its chemical weapons to the United Nations, we
would have preferred to have seen stronger language
clearly stipulating the measures to be taken in the case
of failure by the Al-Assad regime. However, we remind
the international community not to be blinded by the
resolution, but to remain vigilant and resolute to ensure
that those responsible for the many atrocities in Syria,
including the 21 August massacre, account for their
deeds.

My delegation wishes to reiterate its position, which
is in line with that of more than 60 other countries, to
refer the Syrian question to the International Criminal
Court. It is our firm belief that atrocities such as those
of 21 August defy humankind and human nature. Those
who played a part in the planning, organization and
execution of those crimes should be investigated and
tried by an international court of last resort.

On the question of the Palestine, Botswana continues
to believe that there is no alternative to the two-State
solution. The coexistence of Israel and Palestine,
living side by side as two sovereign States, cannot be
overemphasized. That will not only be of value to the
Israeli and Palestinian people, but will contribute to
regional stability and offer new opportunities for the
region as a whole.
My delegation is therefore encouraged by the
resumption, in July, of the long-overdue talks between
the Israelis and the Palestinians. We believe that
the talks present an opportunity that should not be
squandered. The Israelis and the Palestinians should, at
the same time, prove their will and desire to shape their
destiny and future.

We also commend all those who continue to be
committed to the peace process, the representatives of
the Quartet and the Security Council for their relentless
efforts towards seeing a peaceful end to the Israel-
Palestinian conflict. It is my delegation's belief that
these efforts should be augmented by both regional and
international support. We further call on the parties to
create an environment of mutual trust throughout the
negotiations in an effort to safeguard the integrity of
the negotiations, lest they be undermined.

In conclusion, Botswana believes that a stable and
peaceful Middle East will not only usher in prosperity
for the people of the region as a whole but will allow
them to play a pivotal role in the development of their
region and the world at large.

