Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): At the outset, Sir, let me
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for the month of January.

The first draft resolution now before the Security
Council is one of the most important documents the
Council has dealt with since the outbreak of the crisis in
the area of the former Yugoslavia. This draft resolution
sends a loud and clear message to the people in the
occupied territories of Croatia. It is a message of hope to
the silent majority yearning for peace, and an even louder
and final message of "no more" to the belligerent fringe
that profited from war and the status quo. For my
country, this draft resolution is a reason for satisfaction
and confidence. It aims to achieve a goal by means
consistent with the objectives of my Government: a
peaceful, timely and complete reintegration of the region
of Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium with
Croatia.

In his recent report (S/l995/1028*) to the Security
Council, dated 13 December 1995, the Secretary-General
wrote that

"the purpose of the transitional administration is to
achieve a peaceful reintegration of the region into
the Croatian constitutional system through the
implementation of the basic agreement."
(5/1995/1028*, para. 12)

The Council, in operative paragraph ll of the draft
resolution contained in document S/l996/23, ratifies this
sentence from paragraph 12 as the "objective" of the
mandate of the United Nations Transitional
Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western
Sirmium (UNTAES). Therefore, my Government
understands this draft resolution as an expression of the
Council's determination to go beyond passive protection
of Croatia's territorial integrity within its internationally
recognized borders and to actively restore - through the

 

work of the Transitional Administrator and UNTAES -
Croatian sovereignty to the region of Eastern Slavonia,
Baranja and Western Sirmium.

Most of the Croatian citizens from this region, both
those who are still living there and those living outside the
region as displaced persons and refugees, will greet this
decision by the Council with joy. They have suffered
enough losses from war and enough misery from the status
quo. They want to live normal lives again and enjoy all the
benefits and opportunities that the peaceful Croatian State
can and will offer them.

Without a doubt, the demilitarization aspect of the
UNTAES mandate is the most critical element for its
success. We believe that demilitarization can be achieved.
There might be some resistance to it, particularly in the
leadership ranks of the local Serbs, but this can be
overcome - first, by creating a programme of second-
country resettlements for local occupation leaders and,
secondly, through an active role on the part of the
Government in Belgrade. This can begin with an immediate
withdrawal of Yugoslav regular and paramilitary troops and
assets from the region.

The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) must also move towards recognition of
Croatia within its internationally recognized borders,
consistent with the Council's calls for such recognition,
included in this draft resolution as well. Croatia is prepared
to do the same, as demonstrated by my Foreign Minister's
recent Visit to Belgrade. Mutual recognition offers our two
countries numerous benefits and vehicles to successfully
resolve all the outstanding issues between us.

My Government firmly supports the nomination of
Major-General Jacques Klein as the Transitional
Administrator for the region. Croatia will closely cooperate
with him and stands ready to provide his mission with any
assistance that might be required. In just a short period of
time, General Klein has displayed precisely the
assertiveness and foresight needed for this type of
operation. We cannot support enough his views on the role
and impact of economic assistance for confidence-building
and reintegration of segregated communities. General Klein
will achieve the most that is possible in the region. Frankly,
if we are unable to achieve the Council's objective under
his guidance, it will probably mean that the objective
cannot be achieved peacefully.

The momentum created by the rapid and assertive
implementation of the Implementation Force (IFOR)
mandate can benefit the demilitarization aspect of the
UNTAES mandate. Only determined and timely efforts
will produce progress. The IFOR approach can be a
lesson for progress. A diverse and nationally balanced
force, with the core and command in the hands of North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) countries, similar
to IFOR in Bosnia, is also more likely to achieve the
desired results in Croatia. Therefore, my Government
welcomes any form of linkage between UNTAES and
IFOR.

I should also like to emphasize the importance of
operative paragraphs 5, 6 and 7 of the draft resolution
before us. My Government interprets these paragraphs to
mean that the Security Council will terminate the
UNTAES mandate if the demilitarization aspect is not
achieved, and at any other time in the future if any other
significant aspect of the mandate fails to be
implemented - especially if 126,000 non-Serb displaced
persons and refugees are unable to return to the region in
a timely and meaningful manner. We hope that the
Council will continue to seek and consider the Views of
my Government on the question of mandate progress and
on other relevant issues, consistent with the right granted
to all Member States.

UNTAES will be the third large United Nations
operation on Croatian soil in less than five years. My
country welcomes once again the Blue Helmets, this time
in the sincere hope that this operation will be shorter and
more successful than the previous two and, most
importantly, casualty-free.

Finally, let me briefly comment on the second draft
resolution that is on the Council's agenda today. We
support the draft resolution on Prevlaka, and my
Government is pleased that the issue of the Prevlaka
peninsula is addressed in a separate document. This draft
resolution opens a door for establishing a new monitoring
arrangement in the area and recognizes that the Prevlaka
peninsula is an integral part of Croatia. It also calls on the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro)
to recognize the internationally accepted borders of all
successor States of the former Yugoslavia, including
Croatia's border in the Prevlaka area.

In this regard, my Government emphasizes once
again that the question of the Prevlaka peninsula can in
no way be considered a border dispute. The delineation
and location of the international border in the area is well
known and has been confirmed by the Badinter
Commission. Nevertheless, Croatia is ready to continue to

 

explore all possible ways to peacefully resolve existing
problems in the area, centred not on Prevlaka, but on the
Boka Kotorska harbour in the area. Croatia supports the
View that access to the Boka Kotorska harbour in the
neighbouring Republic of Montenegro should be harmless.
