Mr. Biarn Lian (Norway): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Nordic countries - Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Sweden and my own country, Norway.

Allow me first of all, in my brief statement, to
express our appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting and to commend the Permanent
Representative of Argentina, Ambassador Emilio
Cardenas, for the initiative he took to bring about this
very timely follow-up to the mechanism established
through the presidential statement of last year.

The Nordic countries fully associate themselves with
the statement made by the Permanent Representative of
Argentina, summarizing the discussions which have taken
place among a number of interested countries and
outlining the features we believe should characterize a
strengthened and improved mechanism for consultations
between the Security Council and the troop-contributing
countries.

The Members of the United Nations have conferred
primary responsibility for the maintenance of international

 

peace and security on the Security Council. But it is a
shared responsibility for all Member States to make sure
that the Security Council has at its disposal the necessary
means as well as the necessary support to carry out its task.

The Nordic countries have been, and remain, among
the most important troop contributors to the peace-keeping
operations of the United Nations. It is the same, long-
standing comrnitment to this essential task which is
reflected when we stress the need to strengthen the
arrangements for consultations between the Security
Council and troop-contributing countries on peace-keeping
operations. We must aim at arrangements which will
contribute to a strengthened support for the Security
Council in the performance of its duties, to a more precise
formulation of mandates for the operations and to an
improved perception and understanding by troop
contributors of these mandates.

Allow me also to underline in this context the need we
feel, as very substantial contributors to the peace-keeping
operations of the United Nations, for a mechanism for troop
contributors to communicate, on a regular basis, their
concerns, ideas and experiences to members of the Security
Council and the Secretariat. This would bring us closer to
the decision-making of the Security Council, which in turn
would contribute to ensuring continued support from our
public opinion and from our home authorities in these
important matters.

The Nordic countries welcomed the steps that were
taken in this respect last year, and have certainly found
consultations that have ensued very useful. We trust that
this is also the View of the Security Council itself. It is now
time to review the mechanism and to look at ways to
further develop it, along the lines that have been drawn up
by the representative of Argentina.

Let me focus on two aspects which the Nordic
countries consider to be of particular importance. These two
aspects have already been touched upon by a number of
previous speakers in this debate.

First, the establishment of a forum for consultations
for troop contributors will, we feel, lead to more efficient
and effective decision-making and management with respect
to peace-keeping operations. We are of the View that this
mechanism should preferably be institutionalized as a
subsidiary organ under Article 29 of the Charter. This
would ensure regular and formalized consultations, which
is essential for this matter of crucial concern to the
international community.

Secondly, in addition to the arrangements already
decided by the Council, it is important that consultations
with potential contributors should also take place before
decisions are taken to launch new operations. Thus, we
feel, the Council as well as the potential troop
contributors will be in a better position to assess
realistically which options are available and to decide on
the course of action to be taken. The Permanent
Representative of New Zealand commented very
effectively, I feel, on the reservations expressed, in
particular, by France on this point.

It is our firm belief that an institutionalized
mechanism with these features, and taking care of these
concerns, is in the interest of the Security Council itself
and the troop-contributing countries, and that it will
contribute in a very positive manner to what must remain
our overall objective: the enhancement of the capacity of
the Security Council - and thus of the United Nations -
to maintain international peace and security.

