Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation has insurmountable difficulties
with the draft resolution and therefore voted against it.

Since the March elections in Zimbabwe caused a
political dispute, China has closely followed the
evolution of the situation in the country. We call upon
all parties in Zimbabwe to take to heart the overall
interests of the nation, keep calm and exercise
restraint, and settle their differences in accordance with
the law and through dialogue and consultation. We
support the active good offices efforts of the
international community, including those of the African
Union and the Southern African Development
Community (SADC).

The recent African Union summit held serious
discussions on the question of Zimbabwe and adopted
a resolution calling upon all parties in the country to
start a dialogue, seek to establish a Government of
national unity and support SADC's ongoing good
offices on the question of Zimbabwe. It also called
upon all parties to exercise restraint and not to take any
action that might have a negative impact on the
situation. China believes that the African Union
resolution on the question of Zimbabwe represents an
important position that reflects the consensus of
African countries on the current situation. The Security
Council should accord it great attention and full
respect.

In talks at the recently held G8 summit in
Hokkaido, Japan, several African leaders once again
clearly stated their opposition to imposing sanctions
against Zimbabwe at this stage. In recent days, during
the Security Council's consultations on the situation in
Zimbabwe, many countries, including China,
repeatedly called upon the Council to respect the
position of African countries on that issue and to allow
more time for the good offices and mediation efforts of
the African Union and the Southern African
Development Community. Regrettably, the sincere
appeals and reasonable proposals of those countries
were not taken on board. China deeply regrets that.

China has always believed that negotiation and
dialogue are the best approach to solving problems on
the international level. Lightly using or threatening to
use sanctions is not conducive to solving problems.
More important, the development of the situation in
Zimbabwe to date has not gone beyond the realm of
internal affairs. It does not constitute a threat to the
world's peace and security. The situation in Zimbabwe
is quite complex and sensitive at present. The relevant
negotiating process has begun. By adopting a
resolution imposing sanctions on Zimbabwe now, the
Security Council would unavoidably be interfering
with the negotiating process. That would lead to a
further deterioration of the situation.

At present, the situation in Zimbabwe is the focus
of broad attention in the international community.
Maintaining peace and stability in Zimbabwe is in the
interests not only of the people of Zimbabwe, but of
the countries of the region as well. China sincerely
hopes that the opposing sides in Zimbabwe will
maintain calm and exercise restraint, cease all violent
acts and avoid taking any action that may lead to a
further deterioration in or exacerbation of the situation
in the country, so as to establish favourable conditions
and enable the negotiating process to continue. China
calls upon all parties in Zimbabwe to cooperate with
the good offices efforts of the countries and
organizations in the region to find a way to achieve
political reconciliation as soon as possible in order to
peacefully settle the question of Zimbabwe through
consultation and dialogue.

