The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in
Prevlaka, document S/ 1997/311.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the report
of the Secretary-General of 14 April 1997
(S/ 1997/311) concerning the United Nations Mission
of Observers in Prevlaka and expresses its
disappointment at the general lack of improvement in
the situation in Prevlaka.

"The Security Council is concerned by the
assessment of the Secretary-General that, while the
situation generally has been stable, several
developments have led to an increase in tension in the
area. The Council is particularly concerned by the
descriptions in the report of continuing violations of
the demilitarization regime, including movements of
heavy weapons and of special police of the Republic
of Croatia, and the entry by a navy missile boat of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia into the demilitarized
zone, in disregard of the concerns and requests
previously expressed by the Council.

"The Security Council calls upon the parties to
refrain from provocative actions of all kinds, to cease
violations of the demilitarized zone and to cooperate
fully with the United Nations military observers.

"The Security Council also notes the
observations in the report of the Secretary-General
about the lack of any progress towards adopting the
practical options proposed to the parties by the
United Nations military observers in May 1996, as
referred to in the report of the Secretary-General of
31 December 1996 (S/1996/1075), to improve the
safety and security of the area. The Council
reiterates its call upon both parties to adopt these
practical options with a view to their early
implementation, to remove landmines from areas
patrolled by the military observers, and to stop their
interference with the freedom of movement of the
military observers and with the implementation of
the mandate of the observers.

"The Security Council calls upon the Republic
of Croatia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
to resolve the disputed issue of Prevlaka through
bilateral negotiations pursuant to the Agreement on
Normalization of Relations, signed by them in
Belgrade on 23 August 1996, and in the spirit of the
Charter of the United Nations and good neighbourly
relations.

"The Security Council emphasizes its
confidence in and support for the work of the United
Nations military observers. It expresses its
appreciation to the military observers and to the
Member States who have provided personnel and
other forms of support.

"The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1997/23.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.45 pm.
