Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in French): Peacekeeping operations, which are one of the
key functions of our Organization, have in recent
demonstrated their utility and effectiveness in the
maintenance of international peace and security. In that
regard, I would like first and foremost to thank Mr. Le Roy
and the Force Commanders for their briefings.

Gabon reiterates its great appreciation of the
commitment and professionalism of the Force
Commanders and the other peacekeepers who
undertake difficult work, often in a very hostile
environment and at times with limited resources. The
enlightening briefings that we have just heard reflect
the daily realities of all peacekeeping missions
represented here and are viable indicators of the real
difficulties facing peacekeeping operations. My
delegation also appreciates receiving such information,
which enables the Council better to take necessary
decisions and adapt to evolving situations on the
ground.

We commend the incorporation in the mandates
of peacekeeping operations of new multidisciplinary
approaches, such as the protection of civilians,

strengthening the rule of law, the implementation of
mechanisms to prevent the resurgence of conflict, and
post-conflict peacebuilding. We therefore reiterate the
need for the Council to give peacekeeping operations
clear, credible and executable mandates tailored to the
foreseen objectives and results, as well as the resources
necessary to achieve all the tasks assigned to them.

With respect to peacebuilding, I welcome the
progress achieved in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Liberia. In late 2011, those countries will
hold major, decisive elections, which will be a litmus
test for the missions there. Their success will determine
the eventual configuration of withdrawals from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Liberia, and
will thereby help us to elaborate strategies for
transferring security functions to the respective
Governments. In that respect, the Council must
continue to closely track the situations being addressed
by those two peacekeeping operations so that we can
incorporate appropriate changes in their mandates,
particularly in terms of logistical and operational
capacities.

I should like to ask a question of the Force
Commander of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. What is his assessment of the threat posed
by the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA)? How does he
envision cooperation among all the United Nations
missions in the region, particularly with respect to
fighting the LRA?

In conclusion, my country will continue to
support the United Nations peacekeeping operations.
We welcome interactive meetings such as today's with
the Force Commanders in order to keep the Council
abreast of developments in their missions on the
ground and to report to us on the challenges they face.

