Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the participation oins Excellency
Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo Garcia, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Colombia, in this briefing to discuss the
political situation in Colombia. His presence reflects
the special attention that his Government is giving
to that issue. We commend Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia, for his comprehensive briefing.

My country notes with satisfaction the progress
made, with the support of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia, whose mandate
was renewed on 12 September at the request of the
Colombian authorities, in the implementation of
the "peace with legality" strategy since President
Ivan Duque Marquez's took power one year ago. In
the context of the forthcoming local elections, my
delegation welcomes the signing of the National Pact
for Political Culture and Non-Violence during the
Electoral Campaign, which reflects the commitment
of the stakeholders to banning violence and holding
peaceful debates during the electoral campaign. In
order to ensure the success of the electoral process,
Cote d'Ivoire urges the Government to strengthen
security measures for all candidates.

We also welcome the efforts that have been made by
the Government and other parties, including the approval
of productive projects, the launch and implementation
of development programmes with a territorial focus and
the reaffirmed determination and commitment of the
Colombian authorities to reintegrating ex-combatants.
My delegation further commends the actions of the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace with a view to focusing
particular attention on the rights of victims and its
excellent work with regard to the transition process in
the territorial areas for training and reintegration. We
also welcome the spirit of cooperation of the former
Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-
Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) members.

My country notes with concern that, despite
significant progress, major difficulties remain with
regard to the implementation of the Final Agreement
for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and
Lasting Peace. Those include the climate of insecurity,
the lack of resources for the financing of projects
and the inadequacy of the social measures aimed at
reintegrating former FARC-EP combatants. In addition,
Cote d'Ivoire encourages the Government to redouble
its efforts to undertake resolutely the appropriate
political, socioeconomic, land and judicial reforms in
order to guarantee lasting peace. If the process is to be
successful, it will require the allocation of appropriate
financial resources to the various structures involved
in the implementation of the peace agreement, together
with the proper coordination of actions. It is also crucial
to ensure the dismantling of criminal group networks in
the most vulnerable areas and to initiate investigations
to determine the perpetrators of crimes, particularly
the perpetrators of targeted killings.

My delegation is concerned about the announcement
made on 29 August by Luciano Marin Arango, also
known as Ivan Marquez, former leader of the FARC-
EP, on behalf of a group of dissidents of former
FARC-EP combatants to return to arms. The effective
implementation of that decision would undermine
peace and reconciliation efforts in Colombia, deal
a serious blow to any peace process and send a bad
message a few weeks before the regional and municipal
elections of 27 October. Cote d'Ivoire believes that,
in a context of regional tensions, renewed fighting
between the military forces of Colombia and a dissident
group of former FARC-EP combatants would certainly
aggravate an already worrying security situation. We
therefore call on the leaders of that dissident group to
remain committed to the peace process and to sustain
the hope created by the various agreements that have
been reached. We also urge all stakeholders to redouble
their efforts in their respective commitments in order to
give peace a chance.

In conclusion, my delegation reaffirms its support
to the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
his actions aimed at restoring peace and stability in
Colombia. In that same vein, we reiterate our call on
the international community and, above all, to the
Council to provide further support to the efforts of the
Colombian parties in that legitimate pursuit.

