Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate. I
also align myself with the statement to be delivered
by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

The occupation of Palestine is the main root cause
of the conflicts in the Middle East. Consequently,
Israel must be compelled to end the occupation, to stop
its expansionist strategies and to put an end to all its
aggressive policies and criminal practices. That is the
only way to ensure a viable permanent solution to the
Middle East conflict, thereby restoring the inalienable
rights of the Palestinians.

Since the Council's last quarterly meeting on this
item (see S/PV.8244), the Israeli regime, confident due
to the unequivocal support of the United States and
emboldened by the Council's inaction, has intensified
its brutalities and illegal activities. So far, it has killed
more than 140 peaceful Palestinian protestors and
injured around 17,000 others. That includes killing and
injuring more than 1,300 women and girls, as well as
more than 3,100 children.

However, even those vast systematic atrocities
did not satisfy the Israeli Education Minister, who
insisted that "Israeli warplanes should drop bombs
over the heads of Gazan children". In his radically
extremist view, there is no legal impediment to
shooting directly at children. Israel has also continued
striking the civilian infrastructure of the Gaza Strip
and placed new restrictions on the only cargo crossing
the border. That will drastically deteriorate the already
grave humanitarian situation caused by the illegal and
inhumane blockade imposed there by Israel for more
than a decade.

Similarly, the regime has also continued the
establishment of illegal settlements. The latest official
data reveals that in the West Bank, 99.7 per cent ofIsraeli
public land grants go to settlers. Another example is the
Israeli plan to demolish the village of Khan Al-Ahmar,

expel its original Palestinian inhabitants and replace
them with illegal Israeli settlement units and settlers.
However, one of the worst developments is
the enactment by Israel of its so-called basic law,
which declares that only Jews have the right of self-
determination. It also strips Arabic of its designation
as one of the official languages. In practice, that means
Jewish supremacy over others; it means that others
who have been treated as second-class citizens for far
too long are now, legally, second-class citizens. It also
means racism, apartheid and the legalization of such
racism and apartheid. Ultimately, it means legitimizing
exclusion, segregation and systemic inequality.

The law runs counter to the 1963 United Nations
Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination, according to which

"any doctrine of racial differentiation or superiority
is scientifically false, morally condemnable,
socially unjust and dangerous" (General Assembly resolution 1904 (XVIII), fifth preambular para).

We recall General Assembly resolution 3379 (XXX)
of 1975, in which the Assembly determined that
"zionism is a form of racism and racial discrimination".
Unfortunately, in 1991, when Israel had made its
participation in the Madrid Conference conditional on
the revocation of resolution 3379 (XXX), the Assembly
decided to revoke that resolution.

Now, nearly 30 years after of the revocation of
that resolution, it is crystal clear that by doing so, the
General Assembly only emboldened Israel to legalize
racism. The enactment of this law once again proves
that racism is in the very nature of the Israeli regime.
Therefore, the General Assembly should not permit
itselfto be deceived and blackmailed by Israeli rhetoric
and victim-playing. The adoption of this racist law has
to be condemned in the strongest possible terms. Israel
should be compelled to revoke it, as it runs counter to
the Charter of the United Nations, international law and
the basic principles of international human rights law.

Moreover, the recognition of Al-Quds Al-Sharif by
a certain State as the Israeli capital gravely contravenes
international law and relevant resolutions of the Council
and the Assembly. The international community should
fulfil its responsibility in rejecting it, as its aim is to
legalize the occupation and to deprive Palestinian of all
of their inalienable rights, including their inherent right
to self-determination and to return to their homeland to
establish their own independent Palestinian State with
Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.

In conclusion, I hesitate to respond to the
Ambassador of Saudi Arabia. It is very sad for Iran
to see Saudis aligned with Israeli representatives in
accusing Iran of sponsoring terrorism. It is very sad
for our region. I would like to refer to the allegations
made by the Israeli and Saudi delegations against my
country. I reject them all and do not want to dignify any
of them with a response. The aim of such allegations
is to distract global attention from the atrocities they
continue to commit in Palestine and in Yemen. It is
in their common interest to make such allegations.
Nevertheless, no amount of smear campaigning can
cover up their atrocities. They must be held accountable
for all of their crimes in killing women and children in
Yemen and in Palestine.

