Mr. Dahinden (Geneva International Centre for Humanitarian Demining): I am grateful and honoured,
Sir, by your invitation to address the Security Council
today.

The Geneva International Centre for
Humanitarian Demining (GICHD) supports the efforts
of the international community to reduce the impact of
landmines and unexploded ordnance. It provides
operational assistance, is active in research and
supports the implementation of the Ottawa Mine Ban
Convention. The Centre provides a wide range of
services, such as advisory missions, training,
evaluation and technical support, to mine-affected
countries, donor Governments, the United Nations,
other international agencies and non-governmental
organizations.

Two areas of our work are particularly important
to peacekeeping. They are information management
and mine-action standards. Also relevant is a recently
completed study on the role of the military in mine
action, which was requested by the United Nations
Mine Action Service (UNMAS). Timely and accurate
information on the threat of mines and unexploded
ordnance is of vital importance for the conduct of
peacekeeping operations and for enabling the delivery
of humanitarian assistance, as well as for post-conflict
reconstruction. Typically, a wide range of different
actors, such as the military, local authorities,
international agencies and non-governmental
organizations, need such information to pursue their
tasks.

To be effective, it is critical to enable the
different actors to collect and exchange information on
the threat in a standardized way. It is also important to
handle and share this information across the different
phases of crisis management and reconstruction. Until
recently, this has rarely been done in a satisfactory
way. Over the past few years, working together with
the United Nations Mine Action Service, the Geneva
Centre has developed and made available the
Information Management System for Mine Action
(IMSMA). This is a computer-based tool for the
standardized collection, storage, analysis and
dissemination of data on the mine and unexploded
ordnance (UXO) threat. The system now runs in 36
countries or programmes and is mainly applied in post-
conflict situations. However, it is very important for
mine action that data handling be done in an
interoperable way from the beginning. This is why the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations at its
fifty-seventh session encouraged troop-contributing
countries to make use of the IMSMA system.

In the peacekeeping context, IMSMA is today
used by the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon,
the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea, the
United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus and the
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara. It is also in use by the International Security
Assistance Force in Afghanistan and, of course, outside
the peacekeeping context, in Iraq.

The Geneva Centre provides pre-deployment and
post-deployment support for the IMSMA system,
which is largely funded by the Swiss Government.
Support includes training, technical assistance for
system installation and set-up, the transfer of existing
data sources to IMSMA, if necessary, and follow-up
maintenance and support. As with any professional
software, there is continuous development work
underway, and the system is available in a range of
languages. The ownership and control of the data is, of
course, with the user.

It is encouraging to see that the military forces of
an increasing number of troop-contributing countries
are conducting IMSMA training programmes
themselves, such as France, the United Kingdom and
the United States. Likewise, most international mine-
action non-governmental organizations are familiar
with the system and use it.

Mine-action standards are another major and
relevant area of work of the Geneva Centre. They are
prepared, as members have heard from the Under-
Secretary-General, under a mandate from the United
Nations. The standards have two very important
purposes. First, they help to improve quality in mine
action and, secondly, they facilitate cooperation among
the different actors. Since the standards have become
widely applied, there is now a common terminology
and shared conceptual thinking, and training and
education have improved. In short, there is now much
better interoperability and mutual understanding among
the different humanitarian mine-action actors.
In his recent report to the General Assembly the
Secretary-General recommended that

"Countries contributing troops to
peacekeeping operations with expertise in
explosive ordnance disposal and mine clearance
should ensure that operations are conducted in
accordance with IMAS". (A/58/260, para. 60 (f))

The potential benefits for peacekeeping
operations of the International Standards would be to
improve interoperability among the engineering
contingents of troop-contributing nations and to ensure
that areas demined by them do not have to be cleared
again at a later stage. Peacekeepers clear mines mainly
in support of their mission. However, it is important
that this work be performed according to agreed
standards, and then recorded in a common format.

In the past, the mine action activities of
peacekeeping operations have often been the origins of
subsequent national mine action programmes, but those
transitions could have gone more smoothly had there
been agreed standards already in place. In cases such as
Eritrea and Lebanon, where mine action activities are
being conducted by a national authority in most parts
of the country while other tasks are being undertaken
by peacekeeping troops in a mandated zone, the need
for common standards is even more critical.

In addition to the technical elaboration of the
Standards, the Geneva Centre is about to expand its
outreach and training programme, with the main effort
directed towards helping mine-affected countries
continue to implement the Standards. The Geneva
Centre also works closely with the military to
disseminate the International Standards. As just one
example, next week the Centre will be holding a
workshop in Santiago at the request of the Government
of Chile. Training courses and workshops have been
held in the context of NATO staff officers courses, as
well as through the Partnership for Peace programme.
The Centre has recently conducted training on the
Standards with the armed forces of Ukraine, to support
their mine action efforts with the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). As with the
information management system, training on the
International Standards has been conducted by a
number of armies for their own use.

The most appropriate role for the military in mine
action has been the subject of debate in both civilian
and military circles for some time. At the request of
UNMAS, the Geneva Centre has recently completed a
study of that issue. The study found that military
expertise in breaching minefields is not easily
transposed to humanitarian demining, where nothing
less than 100 per cent clearance is acceptable if land is
to be returned safely to civilian populations. While the
military are able to provide warnings to civilians about
the dangers of mines and unexploded ordnance, they
are not well prepared to undertake ongoing
community-based awareness and education campaigns.
In general, military peacekeeping troops have not
carried out large-scale survey, marking or mine
clearance operations.

In many countries, the national mine action
response has been based around the military, although
this has been found to be most effective when aspects
such as priority-setting and quality control were under
civilian control. The destruction of stockpiled mines by
States parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of
the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-
personnel Mines and on Their Destruction has usually
been completed successfully by their own military
forces.

The recent global experience in crisis-
management and peacekeeping operations has shown
that all these emergencies involve a wide range of
different actors. It has also proven that the overall
success of an operation depends largely on the
capability to manage a smooth transition to the post-
conflict phase as the international military presence is
dismantled. Information-management and international
standards, and also a better understanding of the
capabilities and limitations of the military in such
situations, can significantly improve the effectiveness
of mine action and can contribute to a smooth
transition. That is what the Geneva Centre is
committed to achieve in partnership with the United
Nations, and we stand ready to assist as required.

