Mr. Fowler (Canada) (spoke in French): I
commended you, Sir, for providing us with this
opportunity to address international terrorism, a tangible
threat to international peace and security that defies basic
standards of human behaviour. Today's discussion,
coming on the heels of our resolute action last week to
bring an alleged major international terrorist to account,
is an important signal of the Council's engagement on
this issue. The Security Council can and must be a part of
international efforts to fight terrorism.

Terrorism cuts across national borders. While
Governments are often targets, more often civilians are
the victims. The common thread is the subordination of
human life to terrorism's objectives. No country has been
spared. Countless innocents have been injured or killed;
essential services have been disrupted; and property, both
private and public, has been destroyed.

We recall with horror recent terrorist attacks in the
Russian Federation in which entire apartment buildings

 

were destroyed and hundreds of their inhabitants murdered.
We recall the murderous bombings of the embassies of the
United States of America in Kenya and Tanzania in the
summer of last year. The list is, of course, much longer.
Canada itself has not been immune from terrorism: many
of the 329 passengers who perished in 1985 on Air India
flight 182 were Canadian. There is no justification for such
acts, and no concession can be made to those who commit
them.

(spoke in English)

In various regional and multilateral forums, including
the United Nations, we have agreed on important principles
in the fight against terrorism: the denial of support and
sanctuary for terrorists; the establishment of an international
legal network against terrorism through universal adherence
to the international conventions against terrorism; and
international cooperation and coordination at the policy and
practical levels. Other important measures are outlined in
various General Assembly resolutions. In Paris in 1996 the
G-8 made 25 specific recommendations, and it subsequently
adopted additional measures in Birmingham in 1998 aimed
at reducing and controlling the terrorist scourge.

The United Nations has taken further steps, with the
adoption of the International Convention for the
Suppression of Terrorist Bombings. And only a few weeks
ago a working group of the General Assembly elaborated
a convention to prevent the financing of terrorist acts.
Canada supports its adoption at this session of the General
Assembly and also supports the early adoption of the
convention against acts of nuclear terrorism - initiated,
Mr. President, by your delegation. Once adopted, these
conventions, along with the 11 existing international
counter-terrorism conventions, will go a long way towards
implementing a strong "extradite or prosecute" regime for
acts of terrorism, and thereby eliminate refuge for their
perpetrators anywhere in the world.

New terrorist threats continue to emerge. The Internet;
global communications systems; the interconnected
networks that provide electricity, telecommunications and
water to our homes and that enable our infrastructure to
function and keep our aircraft safe - all are vulnerable to
attacks. Cyberterrorism and malicious hacking must also be
addressed. On quite another level, the threat of the use of
weapons of mass destruction by terrorists remains acute.
States must be ever more vigilant in denying terrorists
access to such material and attendant delivery systems.

The multiplicity of international efforts to fight
terrorism reflects the importance that the international
community attaches to this issue. Our citizens expect no
less. They also expect that strong action against terrorism
will be consistent with broader commitments to human
rights and the rule of law. By respecting these principles,
the institutions entrusted to fight terrorism will attract
public support and deny terrorists the sympathy and the
support they crave. Protection of the innocent is, after all,
at the centre of this fight.

The Security Council has demonstrated the resolve
to play its part in the fight against terrorism, whether in
the Lockerbie case or, most recently, with regard to
Osama Bin Laden. Canada welcomes the inclusion of
terrorism in the Council's definition of what constitutes a
threat to peace and security. It is a recognition of a broad
concept of security which encompasses threats against
people as well as those against States and, as such, is an
important contribution to human security.
