Italy aligns itself with the statements submitted by the European Union (annex 38) and by the Chair of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security (annex 27), on behalf of a cross-regional group of countries, and would like to add a few remarks in its national capacity. We welcome the organization of this open debate on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), which highlighted how women and a gender perspective are relevant to negotiating peace agreements, planning and participating in peacekeeping operations, and reconstructing war-torn societies with a view to achieving sustainable peace. In other terms, the resolution defined how women's participation, at all levels, can be a basic element of resilient and stable societies. Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) and the launching of the women and peace and security agenda, the Security Council has adopted several other important resolutions, focusing on specific aspects of the agenda and its implementation. It is essential for the Council to keep promoting further advancement of the women and peace and security agenda and to resist any pushback. At the same time, the importance of the women and peace and security agenda requires that all relevant United Nations organs and entities constantly reaffirm their commitment towards its full implementation and contribute to mainstreaming it in their activities. Twenty years on, in spite of their meaningful contribution to conflict resolution, women are still heavily underrepresented in peace processes. It is a primary responsibility of Member States, alongside the United Nations, that this be corrected, and Italy is unwaveringly committed to that goal. Over recent years, we have stepped up our efforts to mainstream the participation of women in peace processes in all our relevant policies and activities. In December 2016, we launched Italy's third national action plan on women and peace and security, for the 2016-2020 period. The Italian Parliament allocated €4 million in support of the plan's implementation, which made Italy one of the very few countries devoting public funding to the implementation of its national action plan. The following year, in October, we launched the Mediterranean Women Mediators Network, which is a proud co-founder of the Global Alliance. While we are proud that our efforts have been paying off, we are resolved to engage further. We are sparing no effort to further develop the Mediterranean Women Mediators Network, through the opening of new local antennas. Two of these were recently inaugurated, in Turkey and Cyprus, and a third one will be opened, in Kosovo, on 19 November. Next month, within the framework of the Mediterranean dialogues, we will organize the fourth edition of the Women's Forum, in order to raise awareness on the women and peace and security agenda and to gather inspiring women for a fruitful exchange of ideas. At the same time, we are looking beyond 2020. We are currently engaged in the drafting of our fourth national action plan on women and peace and security, 2020-2024, with the active contribution of civil society organizations, academia, non-governmental organizations, the private sector and trade unions. These actors will also be heavily involved in implementing the plan. The road ahead of us is still long and winding. We need to join our efforts to face the challenges to the full implementation of the women and peace and security agenda. Italy will continue to play its part in this collective endeavour.
