Mr. Gokool (Mauritius): Allow me, first of all, to
heartily congratulate Mexico for a successful
presidency during the month of February. Let me also
congratulate Norway on its assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. I also extend
to you, Mr. President, our congratulations on presiding
over this meeting. My delegations extends its full
support and cooperation to you and your delegation.

We are pleased to have in our midst at today's
meeting Mr. Javier Solana, Secretary-General of the
Council and High Representative for Common Foreign
and Security Policy of the European Union. I also wish
to join other speakers in thanking Mr. Petritsch and
Mr. Klein for their comprehensive briefings on
developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We have
taken note of the important progress achieved since the
last briefing given to the Council.

The relentless efforts put forth by Mr. Petritsch
and his team in the implementation of the Dayton
Agreement have brought about promising results in the
overall development of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
warmly welcome and congratulate Mr. Petritsch for the
excellent manner in which he conducted his duties as
the High Representative for two and a half years. As he
decides to retire from his noble post, we wish him
plenty of success in his future endeavours.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
extend our best wishes to Lord Ashdown, who has been
appointed by the European Union as the successor to
Mr. Petritsch. We also congratulate Mr. Klein for
planning a clear-cut exit strategy from Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

As the European Union prepares to take Bosnia
and Herzegovina into its fold, my delegation considers
it appropriate at this stage that the European Union
takes over United Nations police training and
monitoring duties at the expiry of the latter's mandate,
in December 2002. However, all necessary precautions
should be taken to preserve the achievements of the
United Nations International Police Task Force mission
(IPTF), as well the existing levels of institutional and
personnel proficiency.

In that regard, we encourage all parties
concerned- the United Nations Mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina (UNMIBH), the European Union and
the High Representative - to collaborate closely to
ensure a seamless transition of responsibilities from the
IPTF to the European Union Police Mission. Here, I
wish to echo the good words that we have just heard
from the Secretary-General about the laudable works
performed by UNMIBH.

My delegation believes in the continued
involvement of the international community in Bosnia
and Herzegovina to help build a politically and
economically sustainable State that will fully integrate
into Europe, and in enabling it to meet its international
and regional obligations. The report before us
highlights the complexities that exist in the re-shaping
of the international community presence in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. In that respect, we note with satisfaction
the streamlining exercise envisaged by the High
Representative to avoid duplication in the work of
numerous international agencies. That exercise will
certainly help bring about more interaction in a
coordinated and complementary manner, for maximum
benefit for Bosnia and Herzegovina. We welcome the
importance of the role of the High Representative in
guiding and coordinating the activities of civilian
organizations and agencies involved in assisting the
parties to implement the Peace Agreement.

The elections in October 2002 are approaching. It
is in the best interest of local leaders to hold a dialogue
aimed at finding a compromise solution. Political
leaders should think of ways to move their country
further away from the war and towards closer
integration with the European Union. Bosnia and
Herzegovina still has a long way to go to fulfil the
conditions on the European Union road map. It is
therefore imperative that efforts are stepped up at the
local level to complete the outstanding points on the
list so that the benefits of being a member of the
European Union may be enjoyed. Given the
developments on the ground, it is high time that the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina take their destiny
into their own hands.

