Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, let me thank you, Mr. President, for having
organized this debate. I would also like to express our
gratitude to Ms. Frechette for her presentation. I would
also like in particular to thank the officials of the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the
World Food Programme (WFP), the World Health
Organization (WHO) and the United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF), as well as the President of
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC),
for their presence among us today. On the very day that
we have adopted a resolution that I believe underscores
the commitment of the international community to
address, in a unified and resolute manner, the
challenges in post-conflict Iraq, their participation in
this discussion has a great symbolic impact.

Like my colleagues have done, I would like to
underscore some of the points that were made in the
briefings. My first point - which is one that
Ms. Frechette has also made - is that, while there is
no humanitarian catastrophe per se in Iraq, the situation
is nevertheless extremely fragile. It is a situation in
which the health, nutritional and other needs of the
people were already enormous prior to the conflict.

Secondly, as all other delegations have pointed
out, we believe that the security situation continues to
be a key element, as well as one of considerable
concern. Like the representative of Mexico for
example, we too were particularly struck by the
information we have just heard about the kidnapping of
women and of young girls in schools. If such incidents
continue or worsen, it will lead to a climate in which
women are excluded. That would bode ill for what we
are seeking in Iraq, which is exactly the opposite.

My third point is that the statements that have
been made demonstrate the degree to which the
coordination of all the efforts of the various agencies in
the context of the current disorder is indeed crucial. It
should perhaps be linked to the appointment under
today's resolution of a Special Representative of the
Secretary-General.

My fourth point is that special attention will have
to be given to the linkage between the humanitarian
and reconstruction phases, as Mr. Malloch Brown
noted this morning. We believe that this issue must be
emphasized.

Like my colleagues, I have many questions to
ask, but most have already been raised. Nevertheless, I
wish to address several subjects. My first question is
specifically with respect to coordination. Are we
already in a position to make an initial assessment of
such coordination and, on that basis, to draw lessons
with respect to the role of the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General? Are there
expectations regarding the Special Representative's
mandate?

My second question, regarding the establishment
of parallel politico-religious structures that are
currently assuming certain social functions, has already
been raised by Ambassador Maquieira of Chile. My
question is addressed in particular to the
representatives of WHO and ICRC. It would appear
that such parallel structures are emerging in the health
system, and particularly in hospitals, to provide health
care and solidarity. How are WHO and ICRC dealing
with such structures? What kind of contact might they
have with them? What assessment can be made of their
significance?

My third question is addressed specifically to the
representative of UNDP. How does he perceive the
situation with regard to demining problems and the
degree to which they could affect the reconstruction of
infrastructure in Iraq?

Finally, I have one last question with respect to
Iraq's food autonomy. I believe that others have already
raised this question. Is there a possibility of United
Nations purchase of local produce, funded by the oil
for food programme? Is such a possibility already
being explored, discussed and elaborated?

Allow me to reiterate our high esteem, gratitude
and admiration to all the personnel of the various
United Nations agencies and of ICRC working in Iraq.
They are making an invaluable contribution to the
reconstruction of that country.

