Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): Reforming the working
methods of the Security Council, especially those of
its subsidiary bodies, warrants our particular attention.
That process should be expedited. As one of the main
initiators of the Informal Working group on General
Issues of Sanctions in 2000, during our previous
membership in the Council, Ukraine welcomes your
initiative, Sir, to convene this thematic debate aimed
at lending new dynamism to our consideration of
this important matter. I would also like to thank
today's briefers for their valuable insights, as well as
to welcome the results of high-level review of United
Nations sanctions. We believe that the following steps
should be taken in order to make the Security Council
subsidiary bodies more effective and efficient.

First, the process of the selection of the Chairs of
the subsidiary bodies requires our attention. The way it
is conducted presently can hardly be called balanced,
transparent, efficient or inclusive. Therefore, the
Security Council should stick closer to the formula
agreed upon in the presidential note S/2012/937, which
provides for an informal process with the participation
of all Council members. We look forward to a proper
review of that process.

Secondly, it goes without saying that the problem is
not in the vehicle but in the driver. Preparing incoming
Chairs to steer the subsidiary bodies therefore has a
direct impact on the committees' effective functioning.
Efficient chairmanship requires considerable amounts
of time and efforts from respective delegations. In that
respect, we support the idea, mentioned earlier today
by a number of delegations, of appointing the Chairs
of the subsidiary bodies as soon as possible after
their elections to Council, but no earlier than three
months before commencing the chairmanship. We
commend the Secretariat for its efforts to provide the
newly appointed Chairs and their experts with relevant
training and expertise. We call for the enhancement of
that practice. That brings me to the issue of cooperation
between outgoing and incoming Chairs. We encourage
outgoing Chairs to provide extensive written and oral
briefings to incoming Chairs that highlight the current
challenges before them, as well as to share their insights
into the lessons learned. In our case, we encourage such
cooperation and are grateful to our predecessors, in
particular Lithuania.

Thirdly, the subsidiary bodies of the Security
Council do not work in a vacuum. In order to be
effective, they require mutual dialogue and cooperation,
including among Chairs, in steering subsidiary bodies
with similar themes and geographical scope, as well as
with other United Nations bodies. Regular meetings to
discuss common concerns and best practices as part of
their coordinated efforts have proved to be productive.
The recent joint meeting of the Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) and
the Counter-terrorism Committee is a good example in
that respect. Of equal importance is the maintenance
of close interaction between the Chair taking the lead
on thematic issues or country-specific situations, in
particular penholders, in order to produce coherent
Council outcomes.

Increasing openness and transparency in the
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council should be
at the top of our agenda. In order to ensure that the
broader United Nations membership has a better
understanding of the work carried out by the subsidiary
bodies, the Security Council could consider holding
briefings by the Chairs of those bodies, as a rule and in
an open format, and to encourage them to interact with
non-Council members on a regular basis so as to receive
their valuable input. That would also serve the purpose
of avoiding any misunderstandings and promoting the
proper implementation of the United Nations sanctions
and respect for them. For that reason, we also support
the participation of the concerned non-Council Member
States in meetings of the subsidiary organs, inter alia,
during the consideration of the relevant country or
thematic reports. That would definitely be effective in
terms of saving time and resources, while also ensuring
that the outcome documents include up-to-date and
accurate data and that the interests of those States are
duly taken into account.

Great things usually start small. In that regard,
we consider today's debate to be an important element
of the ongoing process of the reform of the Security
Council's working methods. The ideas expressed
today by Council members and interested delegations
will inform Ukraine's chairmanship this year in the
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1521
(2003) and 2127 (2013).

