Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by congratulating you, Mr. President, and all of
your team on a successful presidency. From the first
day, when you started what I hope will be a new Security
Council tradition by organizing a flag ceremony to
welcome the new members, you have managed the
Security Council business in an inclusive, transparent
and very effective manner.

I will focus my intervention on three of the most
pressing threats to international peace and security that
the Council has tackled in January - Afghanistan,
South Sudan and Syria.

1 would first like to welcome the leadership
that Kazakhstan has demonstrated on Afghanistan.
The Security Council visit that you, Mr. President,
organized strengthened our collective understanding of
the conflict and established many areas of consensus
among Council members. However, as my Dutch
colleague has already highlighted today, the terrible
events of the past week, with multiple terrorist attacks
claiming many innocent lives, remind us of the scale
of the threat faced by the people of Afghanistan and
the need for the Council to work together to promote
security and stability.

As we all agreed, there can be no purely military
solution to the conflict. Long-term peace and stability
will be achieved only through a peace process
that is Afghan-led and Afghan-owned. Regional
cooperation is essential for that, and I would like
to commend Kazakhstan again for convening the
important ministerial discussion on building regional
partnership in Afghanistan and Central Asia (see S/PV.8162). Progress towards the holding of credible
and inclusive parliamentary elections this year and
presidential elections next year is another important
step towards stability.

Looking ahead, the mandate renewal of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan in
March presents a valuable opportunity to streamline
the Mission. That will allow us to concentrate on
the most crucial areas to support the Government of
Afghanistan's efforts to achieve a long-time peace.

This month we have also discussed the situation
in South Sudan. We all were clear and united in
our concern about the continued violence and the
actions of all parties to the conflict. After making
our expectations clear in last month's presidential
statement (S/PRST/2017/25), we now need to make
the consequences clear to violators of the cessation of
hostilities and to those who undermine the High-Level
Revitalization Forum. To prevent further violence, the
effective monitoring and attribution of violations will
be essential. Obstruction and criticism of the ceasefire
and transitional security arrangements for monitoring
must end immediately.

We reiterate our call today for an arms embargo. It
would apply equally to all parties and would not single
anyone out for blame. It would send a strong message
to spoilers and strengthen those attempting to bring
the South Sudanese parties to peace. It is in line with
what the region has called for - clear consequences
for violators.

Finally, let me turn to Syria. The sharp deterioration
in the already dire humanitarian situation occurs as
the Al-Assad regime continues to use aid as a weapon
of war and denies humanitarian access to those most
desperately in need. No progress has been made on
accessing the 2.5 million people in besieged and hard-
to-reach areas. The request of the Assistant Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs for agreement to
allow three or four United Nations and Syrian Arab Red
Crescent convoys each week across front lines to those
areas has been ignored. Children in eastern Ghouta
are dying as they wait for the regime's approval to be
medically evacuated.

This month, the continued indiscriminate aerial
bombardment of Idlib has caused countless civilian
casualties, targeted hospitals and displaced 270,000
people within Idlib itself, stretching the already
scarce resources beyond their limits. UNICEF has
reported that, in the first 14 days of 2018, more than 30
children were killed by escalating violence in besieged
eastern Ghouta.

The Council has agreed that we should put aside
our differences over the political situation in order to
tackle humanitarian issues. However, despite all the
rhetoric, we have not seen any progress and, more
important, nor have the people of eastern Ghouta. They
are still besieged, starving and cut off by the Syrian
regime from any help. As the Security Council, we
cannot allow that to continue for yet another month.
The Syrian regime must allow the delivery of essential
aid and medical evacuation for those who need it most.
The Council must be able to express itself clearly on the
matter and uphold its responsibilities.

