Ms. Jovel Polanco (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Guatemala congratulates the Dominican Republic on
its election to the Security Council, which is a historic
event of great consequence when we recall that, as a
founding member of our Organization, this is the first
time it forms part of the Security Council, and it is
doing so as the President. The region's leadership is
therefore strengthened by the Dominican Republic
creating space for critical dialogue on climate change
and its implications for international security and the
vulnerability of developing nations to the negative
effects of that phenomenon.

I thank the briefers, who provided us with a broader
view of the scope of climate change and its impact on
issues such as migration, conflicts and international
security overall.

Indeed, this Organization was created to maintain
international peace and security, which is why
Guatemala believes that the United Nations owes it
to its Member States to respond in their best interest,
without selectivity or vested interests and in respect of
their sovereignty.

Over the past 20 years, Guatemala has been one of
the countries that has been most affected by greenhouse
gases, and we are therefore aware of the serious reality
of climate change. That is why we must not ignore the
impacts of natural phenomena, especially if they are
caused by climate change, with a view to making more
effective and efficient decisions to prevent them.

It must also be taken into account that countries
like my own are more vulnerable, where people's
living conditions have worsened, especially those
living poverty and extreme poverty, not only because
of the lack of institutional resources to have a rapid
response system to mitigate damage and adapt to new
conditions, but because of human displacement and
the sad vicissitudes that afflict the victims of those
anthropogenic events.

We suffered the ravages caused by Hurricane Mitch
in 1998, Hurricane Stan in 2005, Tropical Storm Agatha
in 2010 and droughts in 2008 and 2009, 2014 and 2015,
among other events. Those all showed the unequivocal
level of exposure and vulnerability to which my country,
as well as the region, was subjected, which resulted in
the irreparable loss of lives and the consequent negative
impact on the economy and development opportunities.

As a result, my country has identified and defined
strategic actions for the recovery, conservation and
sustainable management of natural resources, as well
as adaptation and mitigation of climate change. Those
include strengthening our institutions and national
legislation. To that end, we have a law, a policy and
an action plan on climate change. Moreover, territorial
planning is linked to development planning and gives
special attention to rural areas, risk reduction and
orderly urban growth.

Similarly, we have strengthened the office of the
national coordinator for disaster reduction, which is the
institution in charge of carrying out inter-institutional
coordination immediately and efficiently. We have
establishedanationalroundtable fordialogue onnational
climate change and its environmental impact, whose
work focuses on reversing environmental degradation
indicators. We are also increasing investment in
reforestation and the restoration of forests, given that
33 per cent of our territory is protected, 70 per cent of
our energy matrix comes from renewable energy and
the country's agricultural profile is in forestry.

However, due to its location and geographic
circumstances, Guatemala is highly vulnerable to
the negative effects of climate change, despite being
one of the countries that emits the least amount of
greenhouse gases. Those conditions endanger and
limit development owing to the loss of infrastructure,
the increase in food insecurity, the reduction in the
availability and quality of water, the transmission of
disease and soil degradation.

Climate change also leads to forced migration
whereby the populations of our countries are forced to
seek better living conditions, which makes the issue all
the more relevant. As such, it requires comprehensive
solutions that take into account the migration cycle.

We are at a critical juncture where it is the
responsibility of every world leader to conserve
ecosystems, as we are not only talking about sustainable
development but also maintaining international peace
and security for future generations. We are therefore all
called upon not only to support the decisions adopted
in important forums, such as the Security Council and
the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, but also to
implement their basic agreements.
