Mr. Gillerman (Israel): Here we go again. In a
pattern that is as familiar as it is distasteful, we have
gathered for yet another meeting of the Council called
to censure Israel for its measures to prevent terrorism,
rather than to address the terrorism itself. Members
might pause to consider what message is sent to the
citizens of the world by this kind of Council activity,
especially after hearing from the Palestinian Observer
that the biggest war crime carried out in contemporary
history is not the murder of innocents, but the
defensive measures taken to protect them.

What message is sent by the Council when it
convenes to address Israel's measured defensive
response against a terrorist training facility, a response
in which there were no casualties, but does not convene
immediately to address the deliberate murder of 20
innocent civilians at a beachfront restaurant in Haifa on
the eve of the holiest day in the Jewish calendar?

What message is sent when the focus of a debate
is the building of a security fence by Israel to protect
against terrorism, rather than the murder of hundreds of
innocent civilians that made its construction
inevitable?

It is a message that the victims of terrorism, at
least if they are Israeli, cannot seek or find protection
in this Council from the rogue regimes that continue to
sponsor the deliberate murder of innocent civilians, in
violation of international law and the Council's own
resolutions. This is the true double standard at the
United Nations, and sooner or later it must be
addressed.

Many lies and misrepresentations have been made
about Israel's security measures, but no lie is so bold
and audacious as the one which pretends that Israel's
actions occur in a vacuum and are not in response to
years and years of terrorism of the most vicious and
brutal kind.

The decision to construct a security fence is one
which Israel has arrived at with great reluctance. Three
main factors have brought us to this conclusion. The
single most important factor has been Yassar Arafat
and the Palestinian Authority. Israel's policymaking
over the past 10 years has been guided by the belief
that measures agreed bilaterally by the two sides are
preferable to unilateral measures. Indeed, we still
believe that today. But 10 years and thousands of
victims later, we have painfully come to the realization
that wanting someone to be a partner does not make
him one. Yasser Arafat has proved beyond a shadow of
a doubt that he is incapable, unwilling and uninterested
in making peace with Israel. In the choice faced by the
Palestinian leadership - namely, between building a
partnership with Israel or with Palestinian terrorist
groups - the terrorists have won every time.

In choosing terrorists over Israel, and jihad over
salam, Arafat and the Palestinian Authority have
flouted numerous Security Council resolutions -
including resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1435 (2002) -
the provisions of the road map and repeated Palestinian
undertakings in our peace agreements. Those
documents clearly require that the Palestinian
Authority dismantle the terrorist infrastructure, prevent
terrorism and incitement, and bring those responsible
to justice. Yet, to this day the Palestinian leadership
continues to declare, brazenly and publicly, that it has
no intention of fulfilling the very first clauses of the
road map, which call, inter alia, for the dismantlement
of terrorist capabilities and infrastructure. As we can
see almost daily from the headlines, Yasser Arafat
continues to prevent the emergence of a Palestinian
leadership that will do something other than foment
hatred, sponsor terrorism or encourage and tolerate the
smuggling of sophisticated weapons into the hands of
murderers while using civilians as human shields.

To be sure, along with the continued incitement
and the glorification of murder as martyrdom, there are
occasional half-hearted condemnations of terrorist
atrocities offered by the Palestinian leadership to
placate the international community. But those merely
condemn terrorism as a tactic, saying that it is against
the interests of the Palestinian people. Were terrorism
to be an effective tool, those statements imply, it would
presumably be acceptable. We have yet to hear from
any Palestinian leader the simple moral truth that
deliberately killing the innocent is wrong.

For evidence of that duplicity, one need look no
further than the fact that the Palestinian Observer at the
United Nations occasionally offers muted criticism of
terrorism but, at the same time, considers it
unacceptable for a Council resolution to expressly
condemn the actions of Hamas, Islamic Jihad and the
Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade and to call for their
dismantlement, as required by the road map.
In short, had there been any concerted action by
the Palestinian side to confront and prevent the
terrorists - as they have repeatedly undertaken to
do - the security fence might not have been necessary.
But by deciding to remain passive, and even to support
terrorism, the current leadership has built that fence
with their own hands.

The second factor that has convinced Israelis of
the need to construct the fence has been the scarcity of
other options. There are no easy choices. In the
horrendous situation that we are faced with, in which
terrorists are operating with impunity in the heart of
civilian centres, there is no perfect way by which we
can obstruct the terrorists without having some impact
on the lives of the Palestinians they are hiding among.
Trying to find the appropriate balance between the
right of Israelis to live without being blown up on
buses and in restaurants and the right of Palestinians to
live and move freely is a dilemma that Israel, its courts
and its citizens anguish over daily.

There is no democracy that has found a perfect
solution to the problem of terrorism - especially
suicide terrorism, which was invented and perfected by
the Palestinians - and most especially when it
operates from within a society whose leadership is
passively and actively supportive of its goals. Among
States facing such a threat, Israel has been among the
most successful, preventing over 80 per cent of
attempted terrorist attacks. But as the terrorists develop
new and even more heinous means of murder, so must
we devise better methods of prevention.

The construction of a security fence is one of the
most effective non-violent methods of preventing the
passage of terrorists and their armaments from the
terrorist factories in the heart of Palestinian cities to the
heart of civilian areas in Israel. We have seen this in
the Gaza Strip, where since the construction of a
similar fence, under an Israeli-Palestinian agreement of
1994, not a single terrorist has succeeded in penetrating
into Israel from Gaza through the fence in order to
execute an attack. That fence garnered no dissent from
the Security Council or from the Palestinian side, and
has in fact contributed to enhancing the personal
security and welfare of Israeli and Palestinian
communities on both sides of the fence. Until now
there has been a stretch of some 300 kilometres across
which Palestinian terrorists have been able to infiltrate
Israeli population centres to murder civilians. Between
Israel and Palestinian Authority areas there is no border
or natural obstacle, and the distance dividing terrorists
emanating from Palestinian cities and targeted Israeli
population centres has sometimes been less than a ten-
minute walk. But in those areas of the West Bank
where a fence has been constructed, a reduction in
terrorist attacks is already evident.

The third factor supporting the construction of the
fence has been the knowledge that it will enable Israel
to markedly reduce its involvement in the daily lives of
Palestinians. The net effect of the construction of the
security fence will be a reduction in terrorism and an
overall improvement in the quality of life for both the
Israeli and the Palestinian peoples. By building the
fence, Israel will be able to significantly reduce the
presence of its forces in Palestinian areas and further
diminish the necessity for defensive action within
Palestinian cities. Importantly, the fence will also
enable the removal of roadblocks and checkpoints. The
result will be greater freedom of movement within the
West Bank without increasing vulnerability to
terrorism.

Moreover, it is hoped that the protection and
security that the fence provides will help create an
atmosphere conducive to peaceful and fruitful
negotiations. The security fence is a crucial measure in
taking terrorism out of the equation. When a
Palestinian leadership emerges that is ready to
negotiate a political solution, the terror weapon will be
less available to scuttle the efforts for peace. Could it
be that those on the Palestinian side opposing the fence
wish to ensure that the terrorist weapon remains a
decisive factor in their arsenal? Could it be that the
fence is particularly objectionable to extremists in
Palestinian society because they see it as thwarting
their long-term agenda of seeking Israel's destruction?

In determining the route of the fence, Israel has
sought to create a barrier between those areas from
which the terrorists originate and those that they seek
to target. But along with those security concerns, Israel
has taken into consideration other humanitarian and
environmental concerns, even at the cost of increasing
the risks to its civilians. The rights and interests of
local populations must be weighed against the rights of
civilians to protection from terrorism. Local Palestinian
residents have been engaged and consulted throughout
that process, with a View to providing individual
solutions and ensuring access to schools, health
resources and so on.

The use of public and unused lands has been of
the highest priority. In the circumstances Where that
has been impossible, dozens of agricultural gates have
been established along the route of the fence to enable
farmers to continue cultivating their lands. In addition,
new crossing points have been added for Israeli and
Palestinian pedestrians and vehicles, as well as for the
transfer of goods.

Any private land used in building the fence is
requisitioned for military purposes, in full conformity
with the relevant provisions of international
humanitarian law and local law that specifically
provide for that purpose. Indeed, there are a number of
precedents in which other States have made this kind of
requisition for security purposes, pursuant to the
applicable provisions of international humanitarian
law. There is no change whatsoever in the legal status
of this territory and it remains the property of the
owner. Compensation matching the properties' value is
provided for the use of the land and any damage to
trees and crops. In addition, owners of agricultural land
are also provided with compensation for the full value
of their crop yield for as long as the property will need
to be used. Farmers who cultivate olive and fruit trees
growing within the security fence area can designate a
new site to which the trees will be replanted.

All residents have the opportunity to submit
objections. In numerous cases, the authorities and the
complainants have reached mutual agreement regarding
alterations of the path. Complainants whose concerns
are not resolved also have the unprecedented
opportunity to file a petition directly with the Israeli
Supreme Court.

In seeking to divert attention from the fact that
the true architects of this fence are the Palestinian
leaders who have failed to take any measures against
terrorism, Palestinian representatives have used a
number of emotive and pejorative terms, which are
without foundation.

First, they have termed the fence a "wall", even
though they are fully aware that for well over 90 per
cent of its length it is a chain-link fence. Those short
sections that are actually a solid structure are only in
areas where Palestinian terrorists can and have shot at
Israeli civilians on roads or in nearby towns. Despite
blatant misrepresentations to the contrary, there is no
enclosure of the West Bank and no Palestinian town or
village is closed off. Passage and movement are
guaranteed between Palestinian areas throughout the
West Bank and into Israel. And, as I have stated, the
fence will enable a reduction of Israeli forces in
Palestinian areas, thereby facilitating greater freedom
of movement within the West Bank and an overall
improvement in the humanitarian situation for the vast
majority of Palestinian residents, without enhancing
the risks of terrorism.

The use of the term "wall" is a transparent
attempt by some to evoke memories of darker days,
when solid walls were used by certain States to divide
one people and prevent the flight to freedom. The
comparison is both false and offensive. This fence
seeks to separate two peoples who are in conflict, to
prevent suicide bombers from targeting innocent
civilians and thus to create a terror-free environment in
which finally we can move towards a peaceful
settlement, which is itself founded on the concept of
separation between the Israeli and Palestinian peoples.

Secondly, they have charged that the construction
of the fence is racist, though what is really racism is
their suggestion that one people does not have the right
to protection from murderers. What is really racism is
the mistreatment and persecution of Jews in Arab
lands, the prohibition of entry imposed upon Jews in
certain Arab countries, and the prohibition of the sale
of property to Jews on punishment of death. To build a
fence in order to provide security for the Jewish and
Arab citizens of Israel and ultimately to advance the
vision of peace between two peoples, Israeli and
Palestinian, is anything but racism.

Thirdly and above all, they have charged that the
fence is an act of de facto annexation and an attempt to
prejudice final-status negotiations, as though it were
Israel and not the Palestinian leadership that walked
out of those negotiations and adopted the path of
violence. The Israeli Government has repeatedly made
clear, and I reiterate again today, that the fence has no
political significance. Israel remains committed to
resolving all aspects of the conflict, including the final
status of the West Bank and Gaza, through political
negotiations. The sole purpose of the fence is to protect
the vital security of Israeli citizens targeted by
Palestinian terrorism. It does not annex territories to
the State of Israel nor does it change the status of the
land, its ownership or the legal status of the residents
of these areas. The Palestinian observer's accusations
in this regard are belied by the fact that certain sections
of the fence, for example near Modiin and Kibbutz
Maale Hachamisha, are actually being built within
sovereign Israeli territory.

In fact, not only has Israel repeatedly asserted
that there is no political significance to this fence; we
have demonstrated in practice and articulated in
negotiations that Israel is ready and able, at tremendous
cost, to adjust or dismantle a fence if so required as
part of a political settlement. In the context of its
withdrawal from Southern Lebanon in May 2000,
Israel moved a similar structure in order to comply
with Security Council resolution 425 (1978). After
having adjusted the fence, Israel moved portions of it a
further 95 centimetres, at a cost of millions of dollars,
to respond to requests by the Secretary-General.
Similarly, in the context of permanent-status
negotiations, Israel expressed a willingness to adjust
the fence established in Gaza as part of the permanent
territorial settlement.

In both cases, Israel has proven that security
fences are security fences. This fence is intended to
counter terrorism of the most brutal kind, not to dictate
a border that is and remains the subject of permanent-
status negotiations. It is our hope that, by our building
this fence, its very function will become irrelevant and
that one day it will be dismantled.

It has been suggested that, in order to avoid the
impression of having a political motive, Israel should
have constructed the fence along the so-called Green
Line. On the practical level, a fence along the Line
would create far greater humanitarian problems,
arbitrarily dividing certain villages and separating
others from access to water and other basic services on
a large scale. Moreover, it would ignore the aim of the
fence, which is to frustrate acts of terrorism directed
against Israeli population centres. It is the terrorists
who, by their murderous attacks, have dictated the
route, which seeks to protect as many civilians as
possible while seeking to minimize humanitarian and
environmental hardship.

Of equal importance, the so-called Green Line
has never represented an international boundary. The
1949 armistice agreements specifically refer to that
fact. There was never a recognized and legitimate
sovereign in the West Bank. The legal status of these
areas remains that of disputed territory to be resolved
through negotiations. It is this that is required by
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), which call for the parties to start negotiations,
inter alia, on secure and recognized boundaries, and
agreements reached between the parties specifically
refer to the need for there to be direct negotiations to
resolve this issue.

When the familiar rhetoric and misrepresentations
of the Palestinian observer are peeled away, the simple
truth is revealed. The fence is a response to Palestinian
terror, designed not to establish a border, but to create a
terror-free environment in which a border can be
agreed through negotiations. Many Palestinians who
oppose the fence simply want to continue killing
Israelis. The Israelis who built the fence simply want to
live.

Much has been said of the need to conduct the
war against terrorism in accordance with international
law. We agree, but international law is not a suicide
pact. International law recognizes that the measure of
the legitimacy of a State's actions is whether such
action is proportionate to the threat. This means
assessing the threat according to those attacks planned
and prevented, not just those that have succeeded. In
Israel's case, this has meant considering not just the
hundreds of civilians killed in terrorist attacks, but
those many hundreds of attacks successfully thwarted,
including mega-terror attacks planned against
skyscrapers, gas depots, fuel tankers and bridges.

International humanitarian law specifically allows
for territory to be requisitioned for security purposes.
Some who speak of international law seem to have
forgotten that there is in place a significant body of
established laws that provide support for the
confrontation against terrorism. They also seem to have
forgotten that in fighting terrorists we fight an enemy
that has no respect for life or for law. Yes, we must
respect the rule of law. But we cannot do so by
applying misconceived or blinkered interpretations that
no enlightened nation would apply to itself if faced
with such sustained attack and that effectively
strengthen the hands of those devoted to trampling the
law as they trample innocent lives.

Israel has no problem being - indeed, it is proud
to be - held to the highest standards. But at least let us
be permitted to value the lives of our civilians in the
way that any other democratic country would. If the
Council decides to call us to account, then surely some
of our neighbours should be the focus of equal
attention. If the Council were to devote only a fraction
of the time and resources it has spent considering
Israel's record to a fair examination of the destabilizing
and dangerous conduct of the rogue regimes in our
neighbourhood, does anyone doubt the conclusions that
would be drawn? If the United Nations voice is to be
taken seriously, this selective treatment must end.

Israel yearns for peace, and has proved that it is
willing to make the most painful compromises to that
end. We will continue to pursue every opportunity for a
peaceful settlement, with a view to realizing President
Bush's vision and the relevant Council resolutions. But
no State can allow its citizens to be murdered in the
hundreds by terrorists, with the support and tolerance
of the current Palestinian leadership, which has
virtually ceased to even masquerade as a peace partner.
The fence is to protect against terrorism, improve the
overall humanitarian situation on both sides and
contribute to an atmosphere in which peace
negotiations can proceed for the benefit of both
peoples.

This conflict, and this debate, is not just about
Palestinian rights. It is about Israeli rights as well.
Dead, injured and terrorized Israelis are also a
humanitarian problem, and until our neighbours and the
international community are willing to seriously accept
that fact and deal with it, we will have difficulty
advancing towards a peaceful solution. It is just not
enough for condemnations and expressions of
sympathy to be issued in capitals or in United Nations
speeches on the day an attack takes place, without the
sustained action and public support needed to
demonstrate that the international community will not
tolerate the deliberate murder of innocent civilians.

Those in the Palestinian leadership that have
turned Palestinian victimhood from a condition that
could be resolved by peaceful settlement into a
political strategy of immortalization in the pursuit of
personal power have a great deal to answer for. We do
the peace process no service by reinforcing a sense of
entitlement without affirming a sense of responsibility.

The road map can never succeed if we absolve
the Palestinian side of its obligations to end its morally
bankrupt and profoundly destructive terrorist strategy.
The security fence, like other Israeli defensive
measures, is a product of that strategy. And it is the
abandonment of that strategy that would obviate the
need for such defence measures, including the security
fence itself, and pave the way for peaceful negotiations
based on mutual recognition and mutual compromise.

If we confuse cause and effect, if we apply justice
selectively, and if we pander to more one-sided
initiatives that assert sweeping rights but ignore well-
founded responsibilities, we will only encourage a
strategy of terrorism and push the day of peace further
into the future.

Before concluding, I would like to ask
representatives and colleagues to pause for a moment
before deciding how to respond to this issue, and think
of the lives that can be saved by the security fence, and
the lives that could have been saved had it been
constructed earlier. I would like them to think of the
Almog family - Zeev Almog, aged 71; his wife, Ruth,
aged 70; their son, Moshe, aged 43; and their
grandsons, Tomer and Asaf, aged nine and 11 - a
whole family, three generations, wiped out, all
murdered, together with 15 other innocent victims, at
the Maxime restaurant in Haifa last week. I put it to
them: "Imagine if they were your children, and ask
yourself what would you expect your Government to
do to protect them? Would you not do anything -
literally anything - to save them?"

