The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.

I wish to thank all the participants in today's
debate. My thanks go, of course, to those who have
travelled a great distance - in particular, the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General, who came to
share their experience with us. My thanks go, too, to
those without whom the various phases of
peacekeeping operations would not be possible: the
contributors of the troops and police who carry out
activities on the ground; the Peacebuilding
Commission, which is called upon to play an
increasingly important role; the international
organizations that contribute directly to the
implementation of mandates; and, of course and
perhaps above all, the men and women who serve,
often in difficult conditions, in all United Nations
operations.

Why have we organized this debate? Our
fundamental aim, which is quite evident, is to make
operations successful. Today, we are, however,
confronted by two contradictory trends.

First of all, the operations that have been
established in recent years have relied entirely on a
Secretariat whose resources we know to be modest, not
to say limited. In addition, in recent months prospects
have emerged for reductions in several operations. We
should therefore be prepared to succeed in such
transitions.

We must succeed, because we are talking about
the condition for lasting peace on the ground following
the departure of our forces. And we must succeed in a
complex, progressive transition towards a situation in
which the host country fully carries out all the
functions normally performed by a sovereign State,
without a foreign presence on its territory. Several
operations have already served as the stage for overall
successful transitions, including Cambodia and Sierra
Leone, to which Mr. Von der Schulenburg has referred.

In the concept paper that we distributed prior to
this meeting (see S/2010/67), we identified the factors
that seem to us to explain the difficulties we sometimes
encounter in trying to carry out successful transitions.
In that regard, we think that there are numerous
elements that are crucial for success, and we should
consider them.

First - and I am far from being the first to
mention it - there is the issue of the quality of
mandates. How can we ascertain if United Nations
efforts have achieved their goals and must now
gradually be brought to an end while benefiting the
host country, if the desired objectives and end state are
not clear? It goes back to a mandate that is clear and
concise. It was Ms. Loj who referred to the real
"Christmas tree" that our resolutions often are. I recall
the resolution on the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
41 missions.

It is then up to the Secretariat, on the basis of its
mandates, to carry out careful planning and to report in
a way that makes it possible to clearly understand
where a mission stands with regard to the completion
of its mandate.

It is very important to maintain an ongoing
exchange between missions and the Council.

Clearly, the availability of resources is a crucial
element. We all know that resources are limited in
several key areas - including in security sector
reform, which is undoubtedly essential in a transition.
Anything that can contribute to increasing resources is
to be welcomed.

Lastly, many times the Secretariat rightly reminds
us of the need to strengthen peace processes.

On the basis of those common-sense
considerations, the Council has arrived at an agreement
on a draft presidential statement that sets out our desire
to improve our efforts in the area of transition by, as
we say in French, getting our own house in order. In
particular, we will endeavour to better define the
expected outcome in our mandates, set out tasks
hierarchically and strengthen dialogue between the
Council and the Secretariat by improving the reciprocal
provision of information and better utilizing such tools
as strategic frameworks and plans that make it possible
to measure progress in carrying out a mission. As a
consequence, the Secretariat will be able to plan for the
various stages of a mission and develop timetables. In
order to better take post-conflict reconstruction into
account at earlier stages of a mandate, the Council will,
among other things, turn to the Peacebuilding
Commission. Lastly, the Council will make every effort
to support peace processes.

With those commitments we are not going to
change either the essentially political character of the
situations brought before the Council, or the long
period of time required for peace and reconciliation
processes. But we do hope to contribute to a process
that is more thought-out and more responsible, both in
the Council itself and in our dialogue with the
Secretariat.

I believe that the decisions that we are prepared
to take are both simple and make good sense. We have
agreed to carry out an assessment of these efforts at the
end of 2010. As members of the Council are aware, my
country is committed to maintaining the reform
momentum and to tirelessly work to strengthen the
valuable partnership that links us to the Secretariat and
the main peacekeeping stakeholders.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Peter
Wittig, Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission
and Permanent Representative of Germany.

