The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Malaysia.

At the outset, Ijoin other colleagues in thanking
Under-Secretary-General Ladsous and the Generals
for their respective briefings, which my delegation
followed with much interest. At the same time, Malaysia
wishes to express its appreciation to all of the Force
Commanders and Heads of the military components
of United Nations operations and of the African Union
Mission in Somalia, for joining us in the Security
Council today.

We believe that this briefing is timely, particularly
in light of the completion of the review work of the
High-Level Independent Panel on Peace Operations and
the submission of its report to the Secretary-General
just yesterday. As much ground has been covered by
previous speakers, with views and comments with
which we can associate ourselves, my remarks will be
fairly brief.

Malaysia concurs with the assessment that over
time the protection of civilians has emerged as a central
purposeandcoremandateofcontemporarypeacekeeping
operations. We note that, at present, 10 of the existing
16 peacekeeping missions are mandated to undertake
protection-of-civilians mandates. The challenges to
civilian protection are vast, ranging from needs on
the ground and a challenging security environment,
to a lack of infrastructure. Peacekeepers are often
responsible for protecting large populations spread out
over vast areas, but they usually lack material resources
to effectively execute the mandate.

We strongly believe that, in order to implement the
mandate to protect civilians, peacekeepers themselves
must be held to the highest standard. In that regard, any
allegations of impropriety on the part of peacekeepers
or the civilian components of United Nations missions
must be addressed in a timely, transparent and impartial
manner with a view to maintaining, among other
things, the integrity and credibility of the institution as
a whole. A zero-tolerance policy must be observed and
adhered to fully.

We take this opportunity to once again express our
deepest sympathies and condolences to the loved ones
of the peacekeepers who have sacrificed their life.

The ongoing conflict in Mali clearly outlines the
complexity of the crisis, in which the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali has been placed at the forefront, particularly with
regard to addressing intersecting challenges, including
the nexus between local conflict dynamics, organized
crime andjihadist extremism.

The United Nations has been able to take innovative
steps in other conflict situations to better improve the
deployment of peacekeepers on the ground and to adapt
to a hostile environment, such as in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. At a technical level, the
deployment of intelligence units and the procurement
of improvised explosive device-resistant equipment,
including armoured and mine-protective vehicles, has
helped to enhance the capabilities of peacekeepers to
operate more safely in an asymmetrical environment.

With regard to the briefing on caveats, we concur
with the observation that the inclusion of so-called
national caveats could complicate or hamper the smooth
running of United Nations peacekeeping operations
and missions with regard to issues such as parallel
chains of command, the linking of field contingents to
national headquarters main command, and personnel
performance. We are fully aware that effective command
and control is paramount to the successful pursuit of a
mandate. In our view, this parallel command structure
should be dealt with by addressing troop-contributing
countries well before formulating a mandate. We also
understand that the High-Level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations has also seriously considered this
issue in its recent report to the Secretary-General and
has made certain recommendations for addressing it.

As a troop- and police-contributing country,
Malaysia looks forward to working closely with
other Council members and all interested partners
and stakeholders on improving the efficiency and
effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping, as well
as on safeguarding the safety, security and well-being
of our peacekeepers.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to Lieutenant General Tesfamariam
to respond to the comments and questions raised.

