Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I would like to join
others in welcoming High Representative Inzko back to
the Council. At the outset, I would like to reiterate the
United Kingdom's full support for his role and I thank
him for his briefing today.

Since we last met on this issue (see S/PV.7555),
we have witnessed historic developments in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We have marked 20 years of peace;
we have seen one of the worst war criminals of the
conflict brought to justice; and we have seen Bosnia
and Herzegovina take steps to move beyond its painful
history and seek a better future in the European Union
(EU). But for all the progress of recent months, Bosnia
and Herzegovina's path is not yet set. The United
Kingdom sees two challenges ahead. The first is
coming to terms with the past; the second is seizing the
opportunity of the future.

In any post-conflict environment, coming to terms
with the past is vital to building a peaceful future.
One way of doing so is by ensuring accountability for
past crimes. The landmark Karadeie' ruling last month
brought some welcome closure to one of the darkest
chapters in post-war Europe. The verdict will never
erase the suffering of the victims and their families, but
it sent a powerful message to the world that perpetrators
of atrocities will be held accountable for their actions,
no matter how much time has elapsed.

Coming to terms with the past also means
refraining from actions that reopen old wounds and
deepen division. We recognize that others will be
deeply disappointed at the Seselj verdict, but we
respect the independent judicial process and the judges'
decision. As the High Representative has made clear,
all parties and all peoples in Bosnia and Herzegovina
must do their utmost to advance reconciliation. In that
regard, just like the High Representative, we welcome
the fact that the Republika Srpska referendum on the
State-level judiciary is off the table for now, though we
regret that the decision to hold the referendum has not
yet been formally withdrawn. Such challenges belong
in a bygone age.

The same can be said of the continuing impasse in
Mostar. For nearly eight years, the people of that city
have been denied their democratic right to elect their
local representatives, and no agreement has been reached
on changes to the law that would enable elections to
take place in October. With elections fast approaching,
the time has come to make a breakthrough. The people
of Mostar need to see positive leadership from all the
parties in order to reach agreement as soon as possible,
so that they can begin to look to the future. That is
true across the country. After years of inertia, Bosnia
and Herzegovina has a chance to look to the future, a
future in the European Union and NATO. To make that
a reality, all its leaders must now work together.

We welcome Bosnia and Herzegovina's renewed
commitment to its EU path, as demonstrated by its
application for membership earlier this year. We support
the High Representative's call to leaders to intensify
their efforts to advance reforms aimed at achieving
that goal. They will need to work quickly to solve two
issues in particular. The first is adapting Bosnia and
Herzegovina's stabilization and association agreement
to take Croatia's accession to the EU into account;
the second is establishing a functioning coordination
mechanism that will enable Bosnia and Herzegovina to
speak with one voice to the EU on accession matters.
We also believe that the population and housing census
should be finalized and its results published without
delay. We attach crucial importance to the census, not
only because of its relevance to the integration process
but also because of its instrumental role in economic
and social planning. That is particularly urgent in the
context of the reform agenda.

Ultimately, to seize the opportunity of the future,
the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina need stability
and security. That means overcoming the threat posed
by terrorism, and the United Kingdom expresses its
condolences to the families of those who lost their
lives in the attack in Sarajevo in November. That attack
highlights the challenge facing the Bosnian authorities
in the fight against terrorism. We call on all those
with authority and in positions of leadership at all
levels to cooperate closely in order to prevent further
incidents. More broadly, it is clear that stability in
Bosnia and Herzegovina is still not yet entrenched, and
we remain concerned about the political and security
situation. A serious breakdown in law and order
could be catastrophic. We therefore share the High
Representative's assessment that the European Union
military mission, with an executive mandate, remains
vital. We will therefore support the retention of that
crucial asset when its mandate comes up for renewal
in November.

I would like to end with this reflection. After a week
spent discussing some of the world's most intractable
conflicts in this Chamber, Bosnia and Herzegovina
should give us hope that there can be a better future
for those living in conflict today. But we cannot afford
to take our eye off the ball. Let me therefore close
by reiterating the United Kingdom's commitment to
Bosnia and Herzegovina's future stability and its future
membership of the European Union and NATO. We
stand ready to support progress towards those goals.

