Mr. Riecken (Austria): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for Portugal's commitment and efforts in
the preparation of this debate, including organizing a
very fruitful workshop on accountability for violations
of international humanitarian and human rights law and
the Council's role therein. Let me also express our
appreciation to the Secretary-General, High
Commissioner Pillay, Assistant Secretary-General
Bragg and the representative of the International
Committee of the Red Cross for their very instructive
briefings.

Austria aligns itself with the statements made or
to be delivered on behalf of the European Union, the
Group of Friends on the Protection of Civilians and the
Human Security Network.

We very much welcome the focus of today's
debate on accountability for serious violations against
civilian populations. In the light of her Office's role in
an impartial monitoring of human rights violations and
fact-finding, we are particularly pleased about the
participation of High Commissioner Pillay in this
debate.

As the Council is aware, the protection of
civilians was one of Austria's priorities during our
membership in the Security Council. Resolution 1894
(2009) clearly recognizes the role of the Council in
11-58661
ending impunity. As outlined in the Secretary-
General's latest report (S/2009/277) on the protection
of civilians, the mandating of commissions of inquiry
by the Council is an important step towards ensuring
that perpetrators are held to account, either at the
national or international level, while drawing on the
full range of justice and reconciliation mechanisms. We
call on the Council to ensure a systematic and firm
response in cases of serious violations and, to that end,
to use the full range of tools at its disposal. Also, we
would like to underline the importance of reparations
for victims of violations of international humanitarian
and human rights law, which might take various forms.

Let me say that international mechanisms for
monitoring compliance with international humanitarian
law and providing reparations for victims of violations
will also be dealt with at the thirty-first International
Red Cross and Red Crescent Conference, to be held in
Geneva at the end of this month. We look forward to
that discussion.

Let me take this opportunity to thank the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations for their
consistent work and support in enhancing the
implementation of protection mandates. The training
modules on the protection of civilians, as well as on
sexual violence, will be crucial for better preparing
United Nations peacekeeping personnel for those tasks.
Furthermore, we look forward to the guidance on
reporting on the protection of civilians for United
Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions. It
will contribute to ensuring systematic and
comprehensive reporting on the protection of civilians,
and thus allow for appropriate action and firm
responses by the Council in cases of serious violations
committed against civilian populations.

On our part, we in Austria have taken first steps
to design adequate training modules for our peace
workers in the field. An interdisciplinary training
programme on the protection of civilians will be
finalized in 2012. The programme will be designed for
management and key personnel in various fields of
responsibility and should allow those actors to better
translate protection mandates into operational reality.

In conclusion, allow me to address two issues of
particular concern for Austria. First, with regard to the
threat posed to civilians by explosive weapons,
explosive remnants of war such as cluster munitions
3
continue to endanger the lives and well-being of
civilians, even decades after their use. The adoption of
the Convention on Cluster Munitions was therefore a
landmark in international humanitarian law with regard
to the protection of civilians. In that light, Austria is
deeply concerned about the draft text for an alternative
legal instrument on cluster munitions to be considered
by the upcoming Review Conference of the
Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons. As
currently drafted, that protocol on cluster munitions
would clearly undermine the existing international
norms against cluster munitions and would contradict
the humanitarian objective of the Convention on
Certain Conventional Weapons aimed at the protection
of civilians.

Secondly, with regard to attacks against
journalists, the increase in the targeted killing of
journalists in recent years - both in conflict situations
and in times of peace - is a worrying development.
Impunity for those responsible for attacks constitutes
the biggest obstacle for effective protection. As
suggested by the Secretary-General in his latest report
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict, we
believe that the Human Rights Council has an
important role to play in strengthening the protection
of journalists. We have therefore decided to make the
protection of journalists one of our priorities during
our membership in the Human Rights Council. Our
objective is to strengthen the protection framework for
journalists through concrete initiatives, which will
focus on the fight against impunity as well as on
preventing future crimes against journalists. We look
forward to closely cooperating with interested Member
States, civil society and other stakeholders in preparing
the initiative.

