Mr. Michon (France) (spoke in French): I, too, would like to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Carlos Ruiz Massieu Aguirre, and the civil society representative, Clemencia Carabali Rodallega, for their briefings. I would also like to welcome the participation in this meeting of the Colombian Minister for Foreign Affairs, Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi. I wish first to express France's solidarity with the Colombian Government and people in the fight against the coronavirus disease. Unsurprisingly, the pandemic also weighs heavily on the implementation of the peace agreement, especially on the most vulnerable communities. In that context, the Colombian Government and the various stakeholders have made serious efforts to ensure that the gains made in the implementation of the peace agreement are preserved. They have our full support in that effort. As we well know, the long-term success of the peace agreement depends on the coherent implementation of all its parts. We note that the reintegration efforts have continued in recent months despite the pandemic and the impact of the lockdown on productive projects. Efforts to reintegrate ex-combatants into the health system are particularly important in that context. Unfortunately, however, killings of former combatants, social leaders and human rights defenders have also continued in recent months, as Ms. Carabali Rodallega poignantly described in her personal testimony. Not only has the pandemic not decreased the pace of the killings, but illegal armed groups and criminal organizations have taken advantage of the situation to expand their territorial control. We believe that it is more necessary than ever to strengthen the response in that regard, including in the areas of protection and the prosecution of perpetrators of such acts. In that regard, progress by the National Commission on Security Guarantees is expected. The Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition is a cornerstone of the peace agreement, as we have regularly stressed in the Security Council. We have noted with interest the desire of the parties in Colombia to entrust the United Nations with a role in verifying compliance with the sanctions of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, which are one of the most innovative aspects of the peace agreement and should therefore be strengthened and legitimized to the maximum extent possible. We share the hope that the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia will contribute to the legitimacy of this transitional justice process. The peace agreement has also provided original solutions on many other points to address the root causes of the conflict in Colombia, in particular through the illicit crop substitution programme, which should be strengthened, the principle of rural reform, greater political participation and responses to ethnic issues, including the situation of persons belonging to the Afro-Colombian minority, and the issue of gender equality. We support the efforts of the Government and of all peace stakeholders to strengthen their work in those areas. We are also aware that the pandemic is not the only challenge facing Colombia. The presence of internally displaced persons and refugees, particularly from Venezuela, is a burden on Colombian society and its economy. Those people must not be sidelined, especially in terms of access to health services in the context of the pandemic. We would like to pay tribute to Colombia's generosity in welcoming the migrants and refugees. We also recall the support of the European Union, notably as demonstrated at the Brussels conference of 26 May. Finally, we hope that the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire, which the Council endorsed on 1 July in resolution 2532 (2020), will contribute to the further entrenchment of peace in Colombia, wherever armed groups continue to use violence. The peace process in Colombia might be facing challenges, of whose significance we are well aware, but France, in its national capacity and as a member of the Security Council and of the European Union, will continue to lend its support to all those in Colombia who strive to overcome those challenges every day.
