Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Recently, the situation in Yemen has further deteriorated
with the stalled political process, a protracted military
conflict and the dire humanitarian situation. China is
deeply concerned about the current situation in Yemen.
We call on the international community to step up its
mediation efforts in order to impel the Yemeni parties
to cease hostilities and to resume the negotiations for a
political settlement so that peace, security and stability
can be restored in Yemen as soon as possible.

The renewal of the Security Council targeted
sanctions on Yemen and the extension of the mandate
of the Panel of Experts on Yemen can help to advance
the political resolution of the issue, strengthen the
international effort to facilitate peace, and serve the
interests of both Yemen and the countries of the region.
China therefore firmly supports the renewal of the
targeted sanctions and the extension of the mandate of
the Panel of Experts.

Resolution 2402 (2018), which was submitted by
the Russian Federation and has just been adopted by
the Security Council, decides to renew the targeted
sanctions and to extend the mandate of the Panel of
Experts for one year. China welcomes the adoption
of the resolution, for which it voted in favour. The
resolution reflects the broadest possible consensus
within the Security Council. It can help to advance the
political resolution of the issue and to strengthen the
efforts of the international community. It serves the
interests of both Yemen and the countries of the region.

Draft resolution S/2018/156, submitted by the
United Kingdom, proposes renewing the targeted
sanctions and extending the mandate of the Panel of
Experts for a year. That reflects the consensus among
the members of the Council, which we welcome.
Meanwhile, there remain significant differences and
disagreement among the members of the Council on
some elements of the draft resolution. We believe that
the matter under consideration is extremely complex
and delicate. It is inadvisable for the Council to reach a
hasty conclusion in the absence of adequate evidence.
We believe that the members of the Council should
patiently continue consultations, meet each other half
way, strive to achieve consensus and maintain the unity
of the Council so as to give full play to the sanctions
mechanism and to advance a political solution.

China has always held an objective and impartial
position on the question of Yemen. We do not have a
hidden agenda. We support the unity, sovereignty,
security and territorial integrity of Yemen. We believe
that a political solution is the only way to achieve lasting
peace in Yemen. We call on all parties to support the
United Nations mediation efforts and to promptly reach
an inclusive solution through dialogue and negotiation
on the basis ofthe relevant Security Council resolutions,
the initiative of the Gulf Cooperation Council, its means
of implementation and the outcome of the National
Dialogue Conference. We hope that the countries of the
region can overcome their differences through dialogue
and negotiation.

China voted on draft resolutions S/2018/156 and
S/2018/157 on the basis of the consistent position that
I have just outlined. We were actively engaged in the
consultations, having played a constructive role through
our tireless efforts towards building consensus.

We regret that some countries have made unfounded
accusations against the principled positions of other
countries, despite the facts. Such practices, which
will not help to resolve the issue under consideration
or to preserve the unity of the Council, are totally
unacceptable to us.

