Mr. Insanally (Guyana): There can be no more
monstrous crime against humanity than the use and abuse

 

of children in times of armed conflict. Most animals, even
the lowest forms, instinctively protect their young from
harm. Yet man, despite his supposedly superior level of
intelligence and the ability to distinguish between right and
wrong, has been known to subject his progeny to
unimaginable horrors. Children die daily as a result of
being dragooned into war. Every day and everywhere, we
see televised images of the young maimed and made old by
constant exposure to abduction, forced labour and violence.

Concerned as we are with this terrible scourge, the
Government of Guyana joins the resounding call that has
been made today for an end to what has been properly
termed the modern-day version of child sacrifice. We are
grateful to you, Sir, and your delegation and all the
members of the Council for sponsoring this timely debate
aimed at promoting a greater awareness of this problem.
We are especially heartened to see you personally
presiding, and so selflessly, over our deliberations, even at
this late hour.

I also wish to pay tribute to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Mr. Olaru Otunnu, for successfully raising the profile of
this issue in the world's attention, and more particularly for
his compelling presentation earlier today. At the same time
we express our profound admiration to the wide array of
United Nations agencies such as the United Nations
Children's Fund, the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, as well as the many non-
governmental organizations which, despite many
constraints, labour in service to the children of the world.
We urge their continuing coordination and cooperation so
as to maximize the impact of their collective efforts.

As we have been made painfully aware, the new genre
of intra-State conflicts has altered both the nature and the
scope of war. Today, the battle lines encompass the civilian
population, including defenceless women and children. The
reports produced by the Special Representative,
Mr. Otunnu, and by Mrs. Graga Machel provide graphic
testimony of the impact of armed conflict on children.
These documents attest to the disastrous consequences of
conflicts and, more importantly, to the need for urgent
measures to be taken by the international community to
deter the further involvement of children. Among such
measures could be firm action to bring those who are
responsible for such crimes to justice so that they might
feel the full weight of international opprobrium and
condemnation. Rape and other forms of sexual violence in
the context of armed conflict should be deemed - as the
Special Representative suggests - as criminal acts
subject to harsh punishment.

Similarly, we should seek within the international
legal system to prohibit the use of children as military
pawns in conflicts. More strenuous efforts are needed to
enhance respect for accepted standards of behaviour and
to devise more effective means to insulate children from
the impact of war. Guyana reiterates its call for a concrete
ban on anti-personnel mines and for continuing efforts to
expand mine clearance. As for the many victims who
have been made to suffer this type of brutality, the
international community must afford them every chance
for physical and psychological comfort and rehabilitation.

As we also realize, we cannot fully address the
impact of armed conflicts on children without an
examination of the sources of these conflicts. Repeated
studies have shown that persistent economic, social and
political crises contribute to the breakdown of law and
order in all societies. The attendant economic
marginalization of many developing countries in the
world economy, as well as the social impact of structural
adjustment programmes, have been clearly cited by
Mrs. Machel and others as conditions which create
instability and conflict. Whether in Africa, Asia, the
Americas or Europe, conflict eventually erodes the
infrastructure of all countries involved, making it difficult
if not impossible for them to have productive economies.

In this context, my delegation, like others, would
like to draw attention to the negative effects that
economic sanctions can have on the more vulnerable
groups of society. In many cases, if not most, sanctions
can lead to deprivation of adequate food supplies and
basic social services, resulting in great hardship,
especially for children.

The hopes of every nation for future development
depend on its youth. Instead of being used as cannon
fodder, a nation's youth should be nurtured and trained to
become agents of construction, rather than of destruction.
They should be schooled in the art and science of nation-
building instead of learning to become killing machines.
For once so used, it is difficult for them to return to
normality. As refugees or internally displaced persons,
they are denied the customary opportunities of education,
training and family stability which they need if they are
to become useful citizens.

In the face of this distressing situation, it is
imperative that we seek to strengthen the international

 

legal instruments that have been forged to protect the rights
of civilians in conflict, particularly the young and the
innocent. The Fourth Geneva Convention and its additional
protocols, as well as the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, clearly set out principles and standards for the
protection and empowerment of children. Today, those
conventions continue to be routinely flouted by savage and
unscrupulous warmongers. Such barbarism cannot be
tolerated by our civilization, since in the end, as one of our
country's poets has said, "We are all involved, we are all
consumed." We must therefore strive to give these legal
instruments more teeth, going beyond ratification to full
implementation.

As the primary guarantor of international peace and
security, the Security Council has a clear and present
obligation to deal condignly with the inhumane use of
children in armed conflict. It is thus my delegation's fervent
hope that out of this debate will come a strong resolution
that will reflect the international community's determination
to protect those who are unable to protect themselves and
who instead must rely on us to champion their cause.
