Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): I would like
to thank Mr. Angelo for his briefing. My delegation is
deeply concerned about the tense security situation in
eastern Chad, especially after the military operations
by rebel groups against Government forces last May.
We are also troubled by the deteriorating security
situation in the area of operations of the United
Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and
Chad (MINURCAT) in the north-eastern part of the
Central African Republic, as well as the rising tensions
in relations between Chad and the Sudan.

On the other hand, we are pleased with the
progress made in the implementation of the agreement
of 13 August 2007 between the Chadian Government
and political opposition parties with regard to the
legislative framework for elections and the census. We
wish to call on all parties concerned to build on this
positive momentum to promote an inclusive and
comprehensive political process in Chad, facilitating a
lasting solution to the current conflict there. We also
urge Chad and the Sudan to exercise the utmost
restraint, defuse the current crisis, and seriously
implement the Dakar agreement, as well as other
relevant accords.

We wish to reiterate our full support for
MINURCAT's discharging of its mandate in
accordance with Security Council resolution 1861
(2009). In view of the resource constraints facing
MINURCAT, we call upon the donor countries and
troop-contributing countries to extend the necessary
resources and provide military enablers to expedite
MINURCAT's full deployment.
Despite enormous challenges, MINURCAT has
made considerable contributions not only to the
management and resolution of conflicts in Chad, but
also to facilitating humanitarian assistance in its areas
of operation. We note positively the assistance
MINURCAT has extended to the Chadian Government
in training and deploying the Detachement integre de
securite, which has helped improve the humanitarian
situation on the ground.

We are pleased with the close cooperation and
consultations between MINURCAT and the
Governments of Chad and the Central African
Republic, especially with regard to the conclusion of
the status of mission agreement. We believe that, if
MINURCAT is to implement its mandate successfully,
such cooperation should be strengthened further.

Finally, we support the strategic workplan
developed by MINURCAT, and we share the Secretary-
General's observations on the benchmarks for the
Mission's future exit strategy. We hope that
MINURCAT and the Governments of Chad and the
Central African Republic will work closely with each
other in preparing for this goal and in further
improving peace and stability in eastern Chad, north-
eastern Central African Republic and the region as a
whole.

