Mr. Capelle (Marshall Islands): My island nation
wishes to align itself with the statement delivered by
Papua New Guinea on behalf of the Pacific Island
developing States.

It is well known to the global community that
small island developing States such as the Marshall
Islands are already experiencing the earliest ecological
impacts of climate change. The fate of my nation is not
merely an isolated moral concern, but part of the first
chapter of a complex chain of events which will
weaken the structure of global peace. In addition to
consideration by other forums, the issue of climate
change deserves the ongoing attention of this body as a
continuing agenda item.
Population relocation due to rising sea levels is
already a reality in my region; with limited available
land, this issue will quickly reach critical mass. Certain
low-lying island nations, including the Marshall
Islands, are at serious risk of becoming an entirely new
class of global environmental refugees. The vanishing
of entire nations is simply without historical precedent;
with an average height of only two metres above sea
level, my nation is among the most vulnerable in the
world. Faced as we are with the foreseeable loss of our
islands, our struggle to redefine our Marshallese
identity and homeland will compound existing political
and social stresses already prevalent in the Pacific
region.

The threat of climate change to security is very
much a stark reality, not a theoretical possibility.
Recent research indicates that two impacts associated
with climate change - ocean acidification and
increased water temperatures - are already affecting
marine ecosystems. While my nation's land mass and
population may be small, our large exclusive economic
zone is home to some of the world's richest fisheries.
As our coral reefs continue to vanish due to bleaching
and our marine ecology is altered by increasing
greenhouse gas emissions, we must emphasize to the
Security Council the severe and growing threat posed
by climate change to our fish stocks - a critical global
food source. The diminishment of food supplies in the
face of rising populations not only threatens our own
national subsistence, but will also intensify
international competition for increasingly scarce
essential resources. Such future rivalries will create an
invitation to global conflict.

We have the opportunity still before us to reduce
the threat that climate change poses to regional and
global security. While much lip service has been paid
to climate change, the global community has too often
disregarded the severity and broad reach of its impacts.
International action in both developing critical
adaptation strategies and in successfully implementing
greenhouse gas emissions reduction goals has been a
sad and grave disappointment.

My nation realizes the complex challenges and
costs that face the global community in reducing
greenhouse gas emissions and in adapting to climate
change impacts. However, the challenges and cost of
inaction or of inadequate action will be far greater.
Climate change will undermine our regional and global
stability, in addition to threatening the very survival of
certain small island developing States, such as the
Marshall Islands.
