Ms. Mejia Velez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank you, Sir, for convening this open debate on a
topic of the greatest importance for the international
community. This provides an opportunity for us to seek
support as we attempt to understand how the Security
Council and the United Nations system can make a
meaningful contribution to conflict prevention, a topic
of special relevance to my country.

Through its experience over more than five decades,
Colombia knows all too well the ravages that conflict
can cause. For that reason, I personally welcome the
words of United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights Pillay and her reference to her Office's
efforts to establish a climate of respectful dialogue.
We know how important dialogue is. We also know
that, unfortunately, when the necessary measures are
not taken in a timely manner to prevent crises, the
ensuing crises can go on indefinitely, exacerbating
the institutional instability and economic and social
vulnerability of many of our States. Such conflict
scenarios grow even more pronounced over time and
become ever more complex, making an appropriate
response that much more difficult. It is clear that,
when a war becomes prolonged, it also deteriorates,
so that its cause and origin are lost, and people forget
that, even in times of war, there are established norms
under international humanitarian law that require the
protection of civilians - a principle unfortunately
overlooked.

For a number of decades, Colombia has undertaken
a variety of efforts to establish dialogues that would
allow for a rapprochement with armed outlaw actors
in order to bring about, in a constructive manner, an
innovative solution to the ongoing crisis. Now, for the
first time, we are seeing a real possibility of achieving
a negotiated peace in the near term by applying an
innovative process, using our own methodologies,
that includes measures for preventing the relapse into
violent action in the post-conflict period. We know
that the nature of contemporary conflict is ever more
complex and that there is a high likelihood of relapse
if, as a number of today's speakers have pointed out,
timely preventive measures are not taken that allow
for greater equity and equal opportunities. I take this
opportunity to thank the international community for
its support and contribution to this peace that Colombia
has yearned for over such a long time.

My country has already begun to prepare the
necessary conditions for lasting peace. For that reason,
the post-conflict period has emerged as a pre-eminent
stage in securing stability and must be accompanied by
the economic and social development that will allow
for an inclusive society as well as by the promotion and
defence of human rights to ensure that peace will be
sustainable in the medium and, we all hope, the long
term.

For that reason I reiterate our support for the
invocation by the Security Council of the mechanisms
and tools established by Chapter VI of the Charter of
the United Nations in order to promote a culture of
prevention. The United Nations has the duty to make
them available, the States to use them and societies to
make them their own.

At the same time, Sir, I congratulate you for
including women as fundamental agents for conflict
prevention in your concept note for this debate
(S/2014/572, annex). We should not forget that women
and their families, their children and their societies
are those most affected by conflict. Great importance
should therefore be attached to their active participation
in all decision-making processes with respect to peace
and its post-conflict sustainability. Women's networks
in my country have been vital channels for protecting
agreements and limiting the return to scenarios of
violence. That is why I call for their full inclusion
in the process of decision-making and their active
participation in the search for peace.

Finally, Sir, as you yourself have mentioned, along
with several others, regional organizations can play a
significant role thanks to their cumulative experience,
which includes creative practices that have on numerous
occasions shown themselves to be effective in both
conflict prevention and conflict resolution. In Latin
America, a region with a traditionally pacifist calling,
we have acquired extremely valuable experience in
that sphere through the establishment of regional
organizations such as the Union of South American
Nations, which has enabled us to contribute through
a number of initiatives to the pacific resolution of
conflicts.

I would like to assure you, Mr. President, and the
Security Council of our firm support.

