Mr. Gomersall (United Kingdom): The Council has
just voted unanimously to continue its work to alleviate
the suffering of the Iraqi people by extending the oil-for-
food programme for a further six months. We deplore the
fact that the Iraqi regime chooses to let this suffering
continue. It could be swiftly ended if Iraq complied with
the relevant United Nations resolutions.

 

Although the Government of Iraq may be indifferent
to the plight of the Iraqi people, this resolution
demonstrates that the international community is not. As
one of the sponsors of resolution 986 (1995), the United
Kingdom attaches great importance to the success of the
oil-for-food programme as a temporary measure. The
Secretary-General's report clearly highlights why the oil-
for-food programme must continue. Reports that 31 per cent
of Iraqi children under the age of five are chronically
malnourished are indeed alarming.

The Secretary-General's report, however, reveals
significant delays in the delivery of essential humanitarian
supplies. We welcome the examination of the programme
which is now being undertaken by the Secretary-General
through the Executive Director of the Office of the Iraq
Programme. It is important that we have a thorough
analysis of the reasons for the delays and proposals for
remedying them at all relevant points in the chain.

With regard to food and medicines, in particular, we
do not believe that the bulk of the problems lie with the
sanctions Committee. We also need an equally careful
analysis of the adequacy of existing resources. We look
forward to receiving the results of the Secretary-General's
review and are ready to consider positively all
recommendations for improving the implementation of the
programme, including possible increases in the quantity of
oil to be sold.

The Government of Iraq also has an essential role for
which it should be held accountable. It must produce a
distribution plan on time and it must demonstrate its own
efforts to give priority to feeding its people. The purposes
of this resolution are not to substitute for the efforts of the
Government of Iraq or to provide them with the luxury of
building palaces, as described with unaccountable pride by
Mr. Tariq Aziz in his letter of 26 November. We hope that
the Secretary-General's team can put these points clearly to
the Government of Iraq so that we maintain the credibility
and purpose of the programme.

My Government also urges the Government of Iraq
not to delay exports of oil under this resolution, as it did
last summer. The Council has made provision in this
resolution to roll over the provisions of the distribution plan
in order to compensate for the fact that Iraq has not yet
submitted a new distribution plan. As is clear from the
Secretary-General's report, any delay in oil sales will only
result in further delays in the arrival of humanitarian goods.
We hope that Baghdad will not again neglect the welfare of
its own people in this manner.

We conclude with our initial point, that this
temporary mechanism and the suffering of the Iraqi
people would be unnecessary were it not for Iraq's
constant evasion over the last six years of its obligations
under resolution 687 (1991) and other related resolutions.
The Council has made clear both its determination to
achieve Iraq's full compliance with those resolutions and
the benefits which will flow from compliance. We hope
that this message is being received by the Iraqi people.
We hope, indeed, that this message will be transmitted to
the people by the agencies of the United Nations present
in Iraq, and we hope that the message will be acted on by
the Iraqi Government.

