Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): It is a special
pleasure for Bangladesh to see you, Madam President,
presiding over the Council's meeting this morning. I
agree with the Secretary-General that we should have
women presidents more often.

The presence in the Council today of the Vice-
Prime Minister of Guinea-Bissau, Mr. Faustino Imbali,
is very much welcomed by us, as is his statement.

We thank the Secretary-General for his important
statement and his specific recommendations relating to
the situation in Guinea-Bissau.

In his last report, the Secretary-General identified
the progress made towards post-conflict peace-building
in that country, as well as the challenges to that
process. Those challenges were quite apparent during
the past week, when the former military junta - or at
least a part of it led by General Ansumane Mane -
challenged the democratically elected Government,
flouting constitutional order and threatening to plunge
the country back into chaos and violence.

We are happy that the moves orchestrated by
General Mane and his supporters have failed.
Democracy and constitutional order have been upheld
in Guinea-Bissau. This has to be consolidated by
furthering cooperation and reconciliation in the country
so that a smooth transition from conflict management
to post-conflict peace-building can take place. We are
encouraged by the statement made by the Vice-
President of the World Bank that covered this and
related areas. We would like to highlight five critical
areas among the urgent tasks facing Guinea-Bissau in
this transition.

First, strengthening democratic institutions and
practices would prevent any relapse into violence. All
parties concerned, and especially the former military
junta in Guinea-Bissau, must therefore continue to
uphold the results of the elections held last December
and respect civilian rule in the country.

Secondly, without a successful process of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR),
permanent peace will elude Guinea-Bissau. The
Secretary-General has noted in his report that a pilot
DDR project is to start in January 2001. This matter
needs urgent attention. All constraints on successful
DDR have to be addressed - not least of which is the
question of timely funding - for there to be successful
implementation of the peace process in Guinea-Bissau.

Thirdly, during the recent incidents a large
number of people were internally displaced. They need
the urgent attention of the international community.

Fourthly, sustainable development makes peace
sustainable. Lasting peace in Guinea-Bissau depends
on economic regeneration. The efforts of the
Government can be successful only with significant
international assistance. We hope that the resources
needed will be forthcoming at the next round table,
scheduled for February 2001 in Geneva.

Fifthly, and finally, peace in Guinea-Bissau
depends on peace in the region. Bangladesh welcomes
the timely initiatives towards stabilization of the border
region between Guinea-Bissau and Senegal. We also
welcome the efforts of the Economic Community of
West African States and its Chairman, President
Konare, to achieve peace and stability in the region and
in Guinea-Bissau. Our special appreciation also goes to
the Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Samuel Nana-Sinkam, for his continuing efforts in
Guinea-Bissau on behalf of the United Nations.

