Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank you, Sir, for having taken the initiative of
organizing this debate. It is the first time that the Security
Council has devoted a meeting to the International
Criminal Court (ICC). The welcome that the proposal
has received is directly reflected in the large number
of delegations that have decided to take part in the
debate. I also thank the delegation of Guatemala for the
very comprehensive concept note (S/2012/731, annex)
prepared for the purpose, which raises very interesting
ideas on various aspects of the functioning of the ICC.
We trust that, on future occasions, the Council will
return to the issue, which is of great relevance within
the framework of strengthening the rule of law in the
maintenance of international peace and security.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
introducing today's topic, and Judge Sang-Hyun Song,
President of the ICC, and Mr. Phakiso Mochochoko,
the representative of the Office of the Prosecutor of the
ICC, for their briefings.

Colombia is a State party to the Rome Statute.
As such, it has repeatedly expressed its clear support
for the International Criminal Court and the cause of
international criminal justice.

We have addressed the crimes under thejurisdiction
of the Court in our national legislation, adopted specific
laws on cooperation with the Court, and were among
the first countries of the western hemisphere to reach
agreement with the Court on the execution of sentences.
We participated actively in the Kampala Review
Conference of the Rome Statute, and we are currently
studying the amendments adopted there with a view to
incorporating them into our legislation. We therefore
ascribe the greatest importance to the holding of this
debate as we mark the first 10 years of the Court's
work, as was noted by the Council during Colombia's
presidency in July.

I will focus my statement on some current issues
that have arisen with regard to the interaction between
the Security Council and the International Criminal
Court.

First of all, we believe that the Council should
take the greatest care when considering referrals new
situations to the Court in application of the provisions
of article 13 of the Rome Statute. We must recall that
the possibility of triggering the court's jurisdiction
through this mechanism was enshrined in the Rome
Statute in order to prevent the need to establish new ad
hoc jurisdictional bodies. What the Rome Conference
participants sought was to provide the Council with
a viable alternative to which to turn when it has
concluded that criminal trials of certain individuals at
the international level would contribute to maintaining
international peace and security.

Naturally, my country assigns the greatest
importance to the principle of complementarity, which
is the very backbone of the international criminal justice
system enshrined in the Rome Statute. In this regard,
it is worth stressing that complementarity is called on
to play a fundamental role in all cases submitted to
the Court, including those referred by the Council, as
was clearly demonstrated in the case of Libya and the
criminal trials resulting from resolution 1970 (2011).

We believe that one of the factors the Council
should assess when considering the potential referral of
a situation to the ICC is the existence of legal standards
and institutions in the country concerned, based on
which it would be possible to consider referral to the
Court on the basis of complementarity.

The broad powers vested in the Council under
article 13 of the Statute are limited in practice because
of other provisions of the Statute that seek to put into
practice the principle of complementarity, as is the
case with norms relating to the admissibility of cases
and challenges thereto. An essential component of
this mechanism is the premise that relevant decisions
of the Council will be rigorously implemented if
adopted under Chapter VII and after the Council had
determined that there was a threat to international
peace and security. Therefore, when the Court issues
arrest warrants and they are not carried out, what is
at stake is the credibility of the Council's decisions
and authority. It may be wort considering alternative
formulations for inclusion in the particular resolution
referring a given situation to the ICC.

In the cases of Darfur and Libya, the solution
adopted consisted ofimposing two series of obligations.
On the one hand, the main obligation of the stakeholders
directly involved - the Government of the Sudan and
all other parties to the conflict in Darfur, in the first
case, and the Libyan authorities, in the second - is to
cooperate with the Court and to provide the offer of the
Prosecutor all necessary assistance. On the other hand,
all States and regional and international organizations
are called on to cooperate with the Court.

Another issue related to Council referrals that has
arisen recently is that of the financing of trials. The
situation that has arisen on both occasions when the
Council has resorted to this mechanism has led to
various concerns for States parties to the Statute, which
affect the application of the Relationship Agreement
between the ICC and the United Nations. We believe
that these concerns are valid and should be considered
frankly and openly by both the Security Council and
the General Assembly, as well as by the Assembly of
States Parties to the Rome Statute.

Furthermore, the alternative mechanism provided
for in article 16 of the Rome Statute has been made
little use of. Again, given what was decided at the
plenipotentiary diplomatic conference that gave rise to
the ICC, Chapter VII of the Charter must be invoked
and the evaluation by the Council of the potential merit
of requests for the application of this provision must
involve a decision to apply Article 39 of the Charter.
This should be kept in mind by those States approaching
the Council to request use of the deferral procedure
provided for under article 16.

When a conflict situation threatens international
peace and security and the Security Council is called on
to act and exercise the responsibilities entrusted to it by
the Charter of the United Nations, situations may arise in
which accountability has become a necessary measure
for overcoming crises and restoring international peace
and security. In such situations, the Council can use the
instrument of international criminal justice established
in the Rome Treaty and already provided an invaluable,
not only in pursuit of international justice and the fight
against impunity, but also and above all in the search
for international peace and security.

