Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): Today
I am speaking as coordinator of the troika of observer
States to the Lusaka Protocol: the United States, Portugal
and the Russian Federation. We are grateful to Minister for
External Relations Miranda for attending this meeting and
look forward to his contributions to this discussion. We also
welcome the arrival of Ambassador Jose Patricio, who will
soon present his credentials to the Secretary-General.

We welcome the report of the Expert Panel and
commend Chairman Mollander and his Panel members for
their sustained efforts. The work of the Panel has enhanced
the role of the international community in the search for
lasting peace in Angola, and it has also focused new
attention on the link between the illegal exploitation of
Angola's natural resources and the continuation of the
conflict. We recognize the creative and energetic work of
Ambassador Fowler as Chairman of the sanctions
Committee, believing that his commitment to the
implementation of sanctions served as an important
catalyst for this report.

Sanctions remain a key tool in the international
community's efforts on behalf of peace in Angola. The
report of the Expert Panel has highlighted in stark and
dramatic fashion a systematic pattern of violations by the
UNITA leadership and with the collusion of foreign
actors. Whether the foreign actors are motivated by greed
or by political conviction, their support for UNITA's
military machine has prolonged the suffering of the
Angolan people. While we believe that the overall impact
of sanctions has been beneficial to the search for peace,
this report clearly demonstrates a need for continued
strengthening of such measures, particularly in the areas
of diamond sales, arms purchases and foreign travel. We
note that the cumulative impact of the three sets of United
Nations sanctions has been to gradually erode UNITA's
ability to resupply its forces and to capitalize on its
external links. However, the key elements of the report
are its recommendations for future action. We look
forward to working with the Council and others to turn
this highly informative document into a reinvigorated plan
of action.

The Expert Panel and the Committee have, in our
assessment, increased the cost and difficulty of UNITA's
continued military campaign. It is very difficult to
speculate on UNITA's present military capacity.
However, the information available to us indicates that the
renewed vigour that Ambassador Fowler and the Expert
Panel brought to the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 864 (1993), 1127 (1997) and 1173 (1998) has
had a positive impact.

In addition to making a contribution to the search for
peace in Angola, the sanctions Committee and Expert
Panel have also done pioneering work, under challenging
circumstances, on the difficult question of applying
sanctions regimes to non-State actors.

The Security Council has long maintained the
position that the primary cause of the continued conflict
in Angola is the failure of UNITA to abide by its
commitments under the Lusaka Protocol. Sanctions
remain a tool to be used in pursuit of the goals of the
Lusaka Protocol, still the most viable blueprint for peace,
continued democratization and national reconciliation.

 

The international community's expectation of UN ITA
is its full demilitarization, the full extension of State
administration and its full participation in the democratic
political life of the country. The Security Council's
sanctions must remain in effect until all elements of
UNITA have taken full, irreversible and verifiable steps to
completely implement the Lusaka Protocol.

UNITA sanctions have always been targeted at the
leaders of the organization who have remained outside the
Lusaka process and at its military capacity, not at those
leaders who have participated in the institutions established
by the Lusaka Protocol, and not at the overwhelming
majority of UNITA's supporters, whom we believe to be in
favour of peace.

The revelations and recommendations of the Expert
Panel require careful consideration, and we look forward to
a discussion in the Council on next steps. For now,
however, the report paints a picture - one which is largely
corroborated by our own information - of continued
international support for UNITA's military leadership. At
this point, we strongly urge the leaderships of those parties
cited in the report to re-examine their policies vis-a-vis
UNITA and to commit themselves to comply fully with all
Council measures in effect.

