Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to take this opportunity to congratulate
you, Sir, and the friendly country of Egypt on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. We wish you every success.

I also thank your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of China, for his effective and wise
leadership of the Council last month.

Today the Security Council adopted resolution 2287
(2016), extending the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) for six
months. We value the positive role played by UNISFA
since its establishment. Its efforts have complemented
those of the Government and the community, and
we have begun to see the fruits of the establishment
of security and stability in the peaceful coexistence
and progress made between the Ngok Dinka and the
Misseriya. The efforts of the Sudanese oversight
committee have also borne fruit, as the Misseriya
herding tribes have been able to gain access, without
friction or conflict, to areas that had been inaccesible to
them for five years. These movements of the Misseriya
herding tribes follow their traditional routes through
the Abyei Area, in accordance with the 1956 borders,
in search of grass and water in the dry season. This
access is provided for in the Abyei Protocol and the
Agreement of 20 June 2011, in particular paragraph 39,
as follows:

"[P]astoral nomads shall enjoy rights of migration
and access to pasture and water in accordance with
traditional migration routes in the Abyei Area."
The Government of the Sudan seeks to establish
civility in Abyei, and is therefore committed to all
agreements signed with South Sudan, including the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement that led to the
foundation of the Republic of South Sudan, as well
as the 2005 Abyei Protocol and, most recently, the
Agreement of20 June 2011, which established the Abyei
Joint Oversight Committee. The Committee has yet to
be operationalized due to the fact that the institutions
provided for in the Agreement - the legislative council,
the executive council and the police - do not yet exist.
Moreover, the Committee has not met on a regular basis
because of the endless excuses and delays put forward
by South Sudan and its failure to participate.

I commend the efforts ofthe African Union facilitator
of the Committee in his recent communications calling
for a meeting on 4 May. The meeting did not take place
because the delegation of South Sudan demurred,
although it did request a meeting for 10 May, which
it also failed to attend. The most recent meeting of
the Committee was held in March 2015. We therefore
call on our brothers in the Government of South
Sudan, following the establishment of the Transitional
Government of National Unity there, to engage seriously
with the Sudanese Government and the African Union
in expeditiously establishing the institutions of Abyei
provided for in the Agreement of 20 June 2011. That
would help us to identify the final status of Abyei,
which remains the sole prerogative of the Presidents
of the Sudan and South Sudan, in accordance with the
signed agreements.

Until that time, we reaffirm that Abyei is Sudanese
territory and that the Republic of the Sudan enjoys
full sovereignty over Abyei, in accordance with the
provisions of international law and the decision of the
Permanent Court of Arbitration in The Hague, and
as stipulated in the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
and the 2005 Abyei Protocol. That status can be
amended only by referendum mutually agreed with the
Government of South Sudan. That is also true for any
other measure to which both parties must consent.

As the UNISFA mandate has been extended for
six months, I should like to reassure the Council that
the Government of the Sudan will cooperate with
the Interim Force in discharging its obligations. That
has been the Government of the Sudan's consistent
approach since the Force was established and will
help to achieve peace, security and stability in Abyei.
It is also important for UNISFA to adhere to its
mandate under resolution 1990 (2011), whereby it was
established. That will create an environment conducive
to achieving the desired goals. I should therefore like
to refer to certain paragraphs of resolution 2287 (2016)
that contradict the mandate.

First, the twenty-seventh preambular paragraph
refers to the appointment of a civilian head of mission.
That runs counter to the nature of the Force and
its mandate, as well as to the letter and spirit of the
Agreement of 20 June 2011, which stipulates that any
change in UNISFA must be approved by the three
signatories: the Republic of the Sudan, the Republic
of South Sudan and Ethiopia. We have forwarded the
outcome of our communications with Ethiopia in that
regard in a letter from the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Sudan to the Secretary-General dated 25 October
2015. The letter communicates a crystal-clear message
that no provision of the Agreement can be amended
without the consent of the three parties, as clearly
stated in the Agreement.

Secondly, I refer to those provisions of the resolution
referring to the establishment of the Abyei Police
Service. That would run counter to every agreement
signed since 2005, most recently the Agreement of
20 June 2011, because such institutions can be created
only by the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee and by no
other entity. Since such a police service does not exist,
we find it necessary to protect our oil facilities, which,
Council members will recall, were the target ofan attack
that destroyed all the oil-producing infrastructure in
Heglig.

Fortunately, the two countries have undertaken
no unilateral action, generally speaking, or measures
on the final status of Abyei, with the exception of
one unilateral referendum in 2013 that was rejected
by the Security Council. The final settlement that we
desire remains pending. Until then, Abyei will remain
an integral part of the Sudan and all its citizens will
remain Sudanese citizens, with all the rights enjoyed
by Sudanese citizens, including the rights to vote
and to stand for election. We therefore hope that the
Secretariat and relevant departments will support the
Security Council by adopting a positive stance in that
regard.

The meeting rose at 10.20 am.
