Mr. Grandi: I will be very brief, Mr. President, as
you have already effectively summarized many of the
themes that emerged from the discussion today.

I would like to thank all delegations, which
unanimously expressed support for refugees and for the
work ofmy organization, including, in some cases, with
very specific examples of support. I would also like to
thank the Security Counicl for once again recognizing
that refugee problems and problems of forced
displacement can be resolved only through political
action. I would like to encourage all of the members of
the Council to remain focused on such action so that,
when I meet the Council again, there will perhaps be
a smaller number than the 66 million I reported today.

I would like to reassure all members, many of
whom have encouraged me and asked me to continue to
improve the effectiveness of the work of my organization
through internal reforms and participation in broader
United Nations reforms led by the Secretary-General,
that I can guarantee that that commitment to reform is
very real and is already being enacted in practice.

As many said here today, the process leading to
the establishment - hopefully next year - of a global
compact of refugees, parallel to a global compact on
orderly and safe migration, will be a further opportunity
to improve the type of work that we do and the responses
to the refugee crisis through what the New York
Declaration for Refugees and Migrants last year termed
the comprehensive refugee response framework.

As I reported yesterday to the General Assembly,
which is more the forum for this type of discussion, we
are conducting important applications of this framework
in many countries hosting large numbers of refugees,
such as Ethiopia, Uganda and many countries in Central
America. What we learn from that application and
what we are learning through informal consultations
with Member States will be brought back to Members
through a zero draft of a global compact early next
year, for more formal consultations throughout the year
in Geneva and eventually here in New York.

I will therefore ask the Council once again - and
members have expressedthat sentiment themselves - for
support for this important process, through which we
really have an opportunity to expand the range of actors
involved in refugee responses, especially development
actors and the private sector, and to improve the
effectiveness ofthose responses and give impetus to the
drive to find solutions to the refugee problem.

I should like to stress that many Council members
have raised, and rightly so, the gravity of the refugee
crisis presently affecting Bangladesh, with the refugee
flow from Myanmar. 1 also should like to join those
who have thanked Bangladesh for keeping its borders
open to receive more than 600,000 refugees in the
space of a very short period of time - two months.
We should not forget that Bangladesh is already hosting
200,000 to 300,000 refugees from previous influxes,
so it will soon be hosting almost a million people in
a very overcrowded part of the country, which I have
recently visited.

We are, of course, engaged with other humanitarian
and development actors in responding to the crisis in
Bangladesh. I would like to reiterate that with respect to
my request for support for our offer to Bangladesh and

Myanmar to have a role in the discussion - leading,
hopefully, to the voluntary and dignified return of
refugees to Myanmar - that offer is put forward in a
completely non-political spirit, as is always the case
with our actions, in the spirit of being constructive,
as mentioned by some delegations, so as to improve
effectiveness when the return happens and to ensure
that it is conducted on a voluntary basis and according to
principle, and that it has international legitimacy. That
is the role that my agency can play in that important
development if and whenever it happens.

I would like to conclude once again by thanking Italy
and the Council for having invited me to this meeting
and thanking you in particular, Mr. Under-Secretary,
for presiding over this meeting. I am very grateful for
the fact that several members have invited me to return
and brief the Council regularly. I remain available to do
so any time the Council deems it necessary.

