Mr. Cabral (Portugal): I would like, at the outset,
to welcome High Representative Valentin Inzko and to

thank him for his informative briefing and report (see S/2012/813).

Portugal aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

The year 2012 saw very positive political
developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as countries
around this table recognized in the last Council debate
on this topic, in May (see S/PV.6771). As the current
year reaches its end, we should not forget positive
internal developments, such as the formation of the
Council of Ministers and, more recently, the municipal
elections of October, which were a broad success.

We should also note that the road map for accession,
signed on 27 June, is a significant and mutually agreed
step towards Bosnia and Herzegovina's European
integration. The compliance of the federal Constitution
with the European Convention on Human Rights is
indeed key to the entry into force of the Stabilization
and Association Agreement and to a better working
relationship with the European Union.

It is incumbent on Bosnia and Herzegovina's
political leadership at all levels to foster a political
environment that is stable and conducive to
constructive decision-making. Portugal calls upon all
national stakeholders to spare no effort towards the
goal of making Bosnia and Herzegovina a stable and
prosperous State heading towards European Union
membership in the briefest possible time frame, and
overcoming the difficult circumstances on the external
and internal fronts that Bosnia and Herzegovina and its
neighbours still have to face.

In this context, Portugal condemns vehemently the
continued use of divisive rhetoric and regrets the doubts
that are needlessly cast upon Bosnia and Herzegovina's
future by narrowly defined interests that relate only
slightly to the fundamental concerns of Bosnians
and their international partners. It is imperative that
common ground be found in internal politics so that
progress can be achieved in the crucial reforms that
the country needs to address not only in the social and
economic sphere, but also regarding its international
aspirations and obligations. In that regard, the efforts
that the European Union has undertaken in the past
year also deserve particular mention.

As we are well aware, we are set to adopt tomorrow
the authorization for the renewal of the European Union
Force-Operation Althea (EUFOR Althea). Recent gains
in the area of national security should be noted, as
should the secure and stable environment the country
has enjoyed in recent years. Portugal supports the
continuation of EUFOR Althea as a relevant element
in Bosnia and Herzegovina's security with a significant
role in capacity-building and training, as well as its
executive military role in supporting the country's
security.

I would like to end on a positive note. Portugal has
been deeply involved in peacekeeping in Bosnia and
Herzegovina since 1995. European security depends
on renewed and strengthened ties of alliance and
cooperation between nations so that we can all enjoy the
peace and the stability that the Western Balkans and the
rest of Europe have so painstakingly restored. Bosnia
and Herzegovina can count on Portugal's continued
support and friendship in the future.

