The President: After consultations among
members of the Security Council, I have been
authorized to make the following statement on behalf
of the Council.

"Recognizing the complex nature of threats
to international peace and security, the Security
Council underlined the need for a broad strategy
for conflict prevention and pacific settlement of
disputes in line with Chapter VI of the Charter of
the United Nations.

"The Security Council stressed that the
essential responsibility for conflict prevention
rests with national Governments, and that the
United Nations and the international community
can play an important role in support of national
efforts for conflict prevention and can assist in
building national capacity in this field and
recognized the important supporting role of civil
society.

"The Security Council reaffirmed the need
for this strategy to be based on engagement with
Governments, regional and subregional
organizations as well as civil society
organizations, as appropriate, reflecting the
widest possible range of opinions.

"The Security Council underlined the
potential contributions of a vibrant and diverse
civil society in conflict prevention, as well as in
the peaceful settlement of disputes. They noted
that a well-functioning civil society has the
advantage of specialized knowledge, capabilities,
experience, links with key constituencies,
influence and resources, which can assist parties
in conflict to achieve peaceful solution to
disputes.

"The Security Council noted that a vigorous
and inclusive civil society could provide
community leadership, help shape public opinion,
and facilitate as well as contribute to
reconciliation between conflicting communities.
The Security Council also underscored the role
that these actors could play in providing a bridge
to dialogue and other confidence-building
measures between parties in conflict.

"The Security Council underscored and will
strengthen its relationship with civil society,
including as appropriate, through, inter alia, the

use of 'Arria-t'otmula' meetings and meetings There are no further speakers inscribed on my
with local civil society organizations during list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
Security Council missions. present stage of its consideration of the item on its

"The Security Council agreed to keep this agenda.

item under review." The meeting rose at 1.35 pm.
This statement will be issued as a document of

the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2005/42.
