Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Secretary-General for
his report on small arms and light weapons, and we
also wish to thank Under-Secretary-General Dhanapala
for introducing the report.
We have carefully studied the Secretary-General's
report on small arms, as well as the recommendations
contained therein. We are grateful for the fact that it
contains a number of proposals put forward by our
delegation.

To a large extent, we agree with what has been
said at today's meeting and with the concerns
expressed and the assessments and proposals made.
The Russian Federation calls for the strengthening of
the coordinating role of the United Nations in the quest
for solutions to the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons.

Recently we have focused our attention on a
range of related issues. A great deal of research has
been done with the assistance of governmental experts
in elaborating recommendations in this area, and the
General Assembly has adopted a number of important
resolutions. This was highlighted by the holding in
2001 of the United Nations Conference on the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, at which a Programme of Action was adopted.
We expect that the meeting scheduled for 2003 on this
issue will constitute the next important step in this
area.

We are convinced that the fundamental work done
on this track must continue to be carried out within the
framework of the prescribed formats.

With respect to the role of the Security Council, it
is our conviction that the Council must focus its
attention primarily on those instances in which the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons is directly
linked to conflict situations that are on the Council's
agenda. We believe that the presidential statement
adopted in August 2001 during a meeting of the
Council chaired by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Colombia accurately reflects this.

The Russian Federation has consistently called
for the introduction of tough measures in those cases in
which arms are being delivered to illegitimate regimes
or to armed groups. At the time, together with the
United States, we initiated the imposition of an
embargo on arms deliveries to the Taliban. As events
have shown, that measure was fully warranted and
helped to bring about the fall of the terrorist regime in
Afghanistan.

We see a similar positive impact in cases such as
those of Angola, Sierra Leone and a number of other
conflicts. This experience has shown once again that
the Security Council is well placed to take effective
measures. At the same time, we must step up the
monitoring of Security Council embargoes on arms
deliveries and, if reliable information emerges
regarding violations of such embargoes, the relevant
sanctions committee must immediately oversee an
investigation of the facts.

In the context of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, peace agreements among parties need to set
out clearly the parameters of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes for ex-
combatants, and peacekeeping mandates must include a
practicable and adequately resourced component by
which to collect and destroy illegal small arms and
light weapons in close interaction with the parties to
the conflict. We fully agree with and support the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General's
report on this matter.

We believe it important to continue to focus
particular attention on finding specific and practicable
measures to combat the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons on a preventive basis and in the post-
conflict phase of conflict settlement. In that regard, we
believe that the accumulated experience of regional
organizations in resolving this issue would be very
helpful. The Security Council should call on all
Member States to engage in closer cooperation in this
sphere, with the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the Commonwealth of
Independent States, the Organization of American
States, the African Union, the League of Arab States
and other organizations, and should ensure their
practical interaction and the coordination of their
action on specific regional problems. A good example
of such interaction would be the opening in Belgrade of
a centre, under United Nations Development
Programme auspices, for information exchange on
small arms and light weapons under the Stability Pact
for South-Eastern Europe.

The Council must pay particular attention to
mobilizing external resources so that the international
community can provide technical and financial
assistance to the countries most affected by the
problem of the excessive spread and destabilizing
stockpiling of small arms and light weapons. The
absence of or deficiencies in domestic legislation to
curtail the illegal circulation of small arms and light
weapons substantially complicates the achievement of
a regional or global solution. We must do all we can to
encourage action to refine and codify national export
control regimes with a view to organizing wide-ranging
exchanges of information among States regarding
existing legislation and practices in this sphere.

