Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for
his briefing on the situation in Abyei and the mandate
of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA). We also welcome the recommendations of
the Secretary-General for its reconfiguration.

We also wish to thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sudan
and South Sudan, for his briefing.

My delegation will comment on the security and
political situation; the implementation of UNISFA
support measures for the Joint Border Verification
and Monitoring Mechanism (JBVMM), pursuant
to the provisions of resolution 2412 (2018); and the
recommendations of the Secretary-General for the
reconfiguration of UNISFA.

On the political front, cote d'Ivoire notes with regret
the meagre progress made in the implementation of the
2012 cooperation agreements between the Sudan and
South Sudan. It is our view that, pending the settlement
of the final status of the Area and in order to enhance
stability and ensure the prosperity and development of
the Abyei region, joint institutions must be established
in accordance with agreements between the parties on
the region and their shared border.

C6te d'Ivoire recognizes the complexity of the
political, economic and security situation within each
of the two countries. In that regard, we welcome the
role played by the Sudanese President in resolving the
conflict in South Sudan. However, the stability of the
Abyei Area and peace between the two countries remain
dependent on the genuine political involvement of the
Sudanese and South Sudanese leaders, who should pay
due attention to the area given its significance.

On the security front, my country welcomes the
efforts of the United Nations Interim Security Force
for Abyei to ensure security and stability in the
Area. My delegation also welcomes the efforts of the
Interim Force and various United Nations agencies to
promote dialogue as a means of resolving conflicts
between the various communities living in the area.
Nevertheless, as is rightly pointed out in the Secretary-
General's letter (S/2018/778), the unstable situation in
the Area - which remains a source of concern for my
country - could deteriorate in the absence of a Viable
political settlement on the final status of Abyei.

With regard to the implementation of the measures
contained in resolution 2412 (2018), Cote d'Ivoire
welcomes the continued support by the Governments of
the Sudan and South Sudan for UNISFA air and ground

patrols, thereby giving the Force greater freedom of
movement in carrying out its mission. My delegation
is also pleased to see the resumption of discussions to
address issues relating to the demarcation of the shared
border. We regret, however, the limited progress made
on the resolution of the political issues included in these
measures, notably the finalization of the agreement
on the three remaining three operating bases of the
Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism
and the holding of meetings of the Joint Political and
Security Mechanism.

In this regard, Cote d'Ivoire shares the Secretary-
General's view on the need to maintain the support
provided by UNISFA to the Mechanism, given
the stabilizing role it plays in Abyei. We therefore
encourage the authorities of both countries to take
advantage of this support and make further efforts
to implement the various agreements and measures
prescribed by resolution 2412 (2018) and other relevant
Security Council resolutions. My country also believes
that it is incumbent on the Security Council to urge all
parties to become more involved in the expeditious and
full implementation of the border agreements and the
full operationalization of the Mechanism.

cote d'Ivoire commends the Government of
Ethiopia for its ongoing support in the stabilization
of Abyei, and the commitment of UNISFA, whose
importance in the area is well established. Its impact
in terms of stabilization is undeniable and it has
also contributed to the prevention of clashes among
local populations, as well as between the respective
Sudanese and South Sudanese armed forces for the
past seven years. However, it is important that the
mandate of UNISFA be adapted not only to reflect the
changing situation on the ground but also to enhance
its efficiency in implementing its obligations to protect
civilian populations.

My delegation therefore takes note of the
recommendations of the Secretary-General for
the reconfiguration of the mission's mandate and
welcomes his clarifications on the harmonization of
the roles to be played by the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel for Sudan and the Office of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General. We welcome
the recommendations for the implementation of specific
recovery and development programmes for the people
of the Area, in coordination with the United Nations
country team.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire will continue to lend
our full attention to these recommendations, which
will undoubtedly prove enlightening to Council
members in their discussions on the renewal of the
UNISFA mandate.

