Mr. Cohen (United States of America): Welcome
you to New York, Mr. President. It is good to have you
with us in the Security Council this morning. I thank
Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing and his
tireless efforts.

I want to start by expressing our deepest
condolences to the family and friends of Rina Shnerb,
who was brutally murdered in an improvised explosive
devise attack while hiking in the West Bank with her
family. Our thoughts and prayers are also with her
father and brother, who were seriously wounded in the
attack. That attack occurred just weeks after the murder
of Israel Defense Forces Corporal Dvir Sorek. Attacks
such as those undermine attempts to find a solution to
the conflict and build trust between the parties. The
perpetrators of those brutal murders must be brought
to justice.

I also want to highlight Hamas' praise for those
attacks, which is deeply disturbing. Speaking about the
death of Rina Shnerb, a Hamas leader said, "I bless this
operation and greet the hands of those who executed it".
How can that be tolerated? And how can so many here at
the United Nations refuse to condemn an organization,
Hamas, whose leaders make such statements?

This month we also continued to see rocket
attacks launched from Gaza into Israel by Hamas and
other terrorist factions, as well as armed infiltration
attempts. That represents an alarming escalation,
and we condemn those attacks. It is beyond time for
Hamas to put the interests of the people of Gaza first
by rejecting violence, instead of seeking to extract
concessions through attacks and threats.

In that vein, I recently met with the family of
Hadar Goldin, whose body is being held by Hamas as
a bargaining chip, along with the body of Oron Shaul.
As we tragically recall, Hadar was killed during a
ceasefire at the end of the 2014 Gaza conflict, and it
has been almost five years exactly since his family
began their struggle to have Hadar's remains returned.
As the Special Coordinator noted, the return of those
remains is an issue of serious humanitarian concern,
and we urgently call for their return, which is long
overdue, to take place now. We also cannot forget
Avraham Mengistu and Hisham Al-Sayed, who
continue to be imprisoned by Hamas. Their families
must recover their loved ones. Those are the acts of a
brutal terrorist organization, whose actions should and
must be condemned.

To conclude, I note that for years this body has
come together to discuss this contentious topic; but we
have seen little success in making progress towards a
solution that creates a lasting, secure and prosperous
future for both Israelis and Palestinians. The United
States remains committed to pursuing a comprehensive
peace through direct negotiations. We encourage
all those present to keep an open mind regarding the
United States efforts and to remain constructively
engaged with our team as we move forward.

