Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like at the outset to extend to you, Sir, our
thanks and appreciation for convening and presiding
over this important meeting, which comes at a time that
is witnessing a number of developments on the African
scene - some positive and others discouraging - and
thus requires an assessment of the expected role of this
Council vis-a-vis Africa and an assessment of that role
against the efforts currently being made to resolve the
continent's conflicts and to assist it in overcoming the
difficulties and obstacles it faces.

I would like in this context to express in
particular our appreciation for the initiative of the
Permanent Representative of Mauritius, Ambassador
Jagdish Koonjul, that led to the establishment of the
Security Council's ad hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa and the
elaboration of its terms of reference and programme of
work.

In light of my delegation's interest in the subject
under consideration and our anticipation of a positive
outcome from this meeting, allow me to address a
number of specific points that we feel deserve to be
highlighted.

The delegation of Egypt agrees with the broad
outline contained in the terms of reference of the
Working Group, including its mandate and the
programme of work agreed to following its first
meeting on 22 March. While it is hoped that the Group
will be able to propose concrete, realistic and workable
recommendations to the Security Council, the
delegation of Egypt would like to stress above all a
central and primary point: the need to consider the
points of View to be expressed today by the non-

members of the Council - especially the African
countries, which are supposedly the parties directly
concerned - if we are to attain the objectives of

monitoring the results of the Council's previous
interests in Africa, enhancing cooperative relationships
with the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the
subregional organizations in the continent, and
developing the relationship between the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council on
issues related to Africa.

Secondly, I find it important to refer here to a
similar open debate in the Council in January last year.
That debate, like this one, was held under the
presidency of Singapore. It addressed the issue of
enhancing cooperation between the Security Council
and countries contributing troops to United Nations
peacekeeping operations. It appears to us that many of
the constructive views and suggestions put forward by
the troop-contributing countries at the time - which
were compiled by the delegation of Singapore in a non-
paper, for which we are grateful to the delegation of
Singapore - were, unfortunately, not incorporated into
operations on the ground nor were they reflected in the
mechanism for consultation with the troop-contributing
countries that was established by the Security Council
at a later stage. The Council has taken it upon itself
today to listen to the views of non-members and the
necessary objective of this meeting should be to
strengthen our conviction that our positions will be
considered and that our concerns will be taken into
account.

Thirdly, concerning the issue of enhancing
cooperation between the Security Council on the one
hand and the OAU and African subregional
organizations on the other, the delegation of Egypt
acknowledges that the subject has indeed recently
received the increased attention it deserves. Everyone
now recognizes that the Council cannot act on its own
or in isolation from the political and security
arrangements already in place in the continent.

We should like to propose a number of specific
methods for enhancing this relationship. For example,
an institutionalized channel for consultation and the
exchange of information could be established between
the Central Organ of the OAU Mechanism on Conflict
Prevention, Management and Resolution and the
Security Council's ad hoc Working Group that would
allow the Council to be accurately apprised of the
positions taken by the OAU on the issues under
consideration. The Permanent Observer of the OAU in
New York and the Permanent Representative of the
country chairing the Central Organ could serve as the
contact points so as to enable the Working Group to
listen to Africa's common voice on African issues
under consideration by the Council. We would also
suggest considering convening regular meetings,
perhaps once every year, between the Security Council
and the Central Organ, similar to those that the Council
has become accustomed to holding during the last two
years with the members of the Political Committee of
the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement in the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo.

Finally, the delegation of Egypt has previously
suggested that the Council seek to involve a
representative of the secretariat of the OAU in the
missions dispatched by the Council to various regions,
such as those that visited the Great Lakes region, Sierra
Leone and Ethiopia-Eritrea. Here, as a first step, the
Council could demonstrate its interest in responding to
this suggestion by involving a representative of the
OAU secretariat in the working mission that it agreed
to send to Somalia in accordance with the presidential
statement it adopted on 28 March.

Fourthly, we hope that these suggestions will be
translated into specific actions to strengthen the
relationship between the Council and the African
continent and subregional organizations. It is most
important, therefore, that the Council pay due attention
not only to ascertaining the common positions of
Africa but also to responding to African requests as far
as possible before proceeding to take any decision or
action regarding the maintenance of peace and security
in the continent. In the past, we have seen a number of
cases in which the Council - or more specifically,
some of its more influential members - has taken a
path contrary to the one proposed by the OAU or by
the subregional organization directly concerned with
the issue. In the past, for example, the Economic
Community of West African States adopted a position
during the outbreak ofthe crisis in Sierra Leone in May
2000 but that position received no response. The States
of West Africa had previously taken a common
position on how to address the situation in Liberia; that
situation was not addressed. More recently, the
Community of Sahelan Saharan States - on whose
behalf the Ambassador of Libya will speak later -
adopted tangible initiatives to prevent the situation in
the Central African Republic from escalating. Not only
did the Council fail to respond to those initiatives but
some of its major members worked to hinder and abort
them. What is needed here is for the Security Council
to appreciate that Africa and its organizations have
their positions and interests with respect to the
maintenance of peace and the resolution of conflicts in
the continent.

Fifthly, while we consistently reaffirm the need to
respect the competencies and jurisdictions of the other
primary organs of the United Nations, there are a
number of other ideas contained in the programme of
work of the ad hoc Working Group for which the
delegation of Egypt would like to express its support.
Among those ideas is enhancing coordination with the
Economic and Social Council. That can be
accomplished, in particular, by holding
institutionalized consultations with the ad hoc advisory
group that is currently being established for African
countries emerging from conflict, as well as by tasking
the chairman of the Security Council's ad hoc Working
Group with holding regular consultations with the
President of the Economic and Social Council on
actions needed with respect to specific African
countries in order to prevent the eruption of conflicts or
to prevent their resumption during the post-conflict
peace-building phase.

We would like to stress the primary role that the
General Assembly must play in election monitoring by,
inter alia, supervising the activities of the Electoral
Assistance Division of the Department of Political
Affairs. If the Security Council were to play a role in
election monitoring, we would suggest that such a role
be confined solely to the Council's announcing its
political support for the conclusions of United Nations
election observers and their requesting all national
parties concerned to respect the recommendations of
observer missions.

Finally, the meeting today will undoubtedly result
in the presentation of innovative ideas and varied
suggestions on how to enhance the role expected of the
Security Council with regard to Africa. Once again I
feel obliged to express our appreciation for the
increased political will that the Council has been
displaying to shoulder its responsibilities towards the
continent, as it has done with regard to Sierra Leone
and Angola and as it is doing now with regard to the
Great Lakes region and Ethiopia and Eritrea. I should
also stress that the most valuable contribution that the
ad hoc Working Group can make is to review all the
resolutions, statements and declarations adopted by the
Council, starting perhaps with the resolutions on
Somalia adopted since 1991, moving on to those
adopted pursuant to the report of the Secretary-General
on the causes of conflict in Africa and ending with the
presidential statement of 31 January. The Working
Group could then assess which pledges the Council has
kept - and they are many - and which promises did
not materialize - which are also many. The
investigation that the Council requested into violations
of the sanctions imposed on the rebels in Sierra Leone
and Angola and into the plundering of the resources of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo has led to the
naming and shaming of those parties and entities
involved in violating those sanctions. The Working
Group's review of the Council's pledges will, perhaps,
increase the Council's own enthusiasm to redouble its
efforts to implement what it has promised and to
follow-up on what it has previously pledged with
regard to Africa.

