Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to thank
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo and Mr. Lamberto Zannier for
their insightful briefings.

The population of Ukraine has just elected a
new President, Mr. Volodymyr Zelenskyi, through a
democratic electoral process. The outgoing President,
Mr. Poroshenko, has ensured a constructive transition.
Those are two important achievements in a complex
political, economic and security environment. In
addition, Mr. Zelenskyi, has expressed openness
towards the entire Ukrainian population, including
zones not controlled by the Government. In recent
days, Mr. Zelenskyi has reached out to the Russian
Government to hold consultations. Belgium encourages
Russia to participate constructively with the new
President, and we call on the Russian authorities to
consider this political momentum in Ukraine as an
opportunity not to be missed.

The implementation of the Minsk agreements is the
only way to achieve a lasting political solution to the
conflict. Ukraine should, for example, take fully heed
the Venice Commission's recommendations on the law
on education, in accordance with its commitment, and
the law on the use of languages should be in line with
the obligations of the Minsk agreements. We therefore
expect all parties to refrain from taking unilateral
measures that could exacerbate tensions, to implement
those agreements promptly and fully and to honour
their commitments.

All actors must respect the ceasefire and uphold
international humanitarian law, including the
protection of civilians and civilian structures. They
have a responsibility to improve humanitarian access
by ensuring the safety of humanitarian workers and
removing bureaucratic obstacles. The parties must
guarantee the freedom of movement of OSCE observers
throughout Ukraine, including along the Ukrainian-
Russian border and in Crimea. We are particularly
concerned that the technical instruments of the
OSCE Mission are being targeted and blocked on an
ongoing basis.

I take this opportunity to reaffirm our unwavering
commitment to the sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity of Ukraine within its internationally
recognized borders. We reiterate our support for the
efforts of the Trilateral Contact Group, the OSCE
and the Normandy format. We hope that the new
President will continue on the path of the political and
economic reforms that the country needs, particularly
in the context of the implementation of the European
Union Association Agreement. Belgium will continue
to offer its support to that process, as well as to the
Ukrainian people.

We reiterate our deepest concern over the escalation
in the Kerch Strait and the Sea of Azov, as well as
over Russia's violations of international law. In that
regard, we regret that Russia has yet to comply with the
International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea's order,
dating back to May 25. We call on Russia to uphold that
legally binding decision and to release without delay
the 24 military personnel captured in November 2018,
as well as the three vessels.

We condemn any obstruction of navigation and
free passage in the Kerch Strait. The militarization
of Crimea and any illegal use of force could further
destabilize the region and escalate tensions. We urge
Russia to ensure free passage through the Sea of Azov
without hindrance, in accordance with international
maritime law.

As other colleagues have recalled, tomorrow will
mark five years since Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-
17 was shot down over the southern part of Ukraine.
That tragic event claimed the lives of 298 people,
including several Belgians. The Joint Investigation
Team, of which Belgium is a member, recently made
public the names of four suspects allegedly involved.
Their identification does not end the investigation, and
Belgium continues to call on all countries to lend their
cooperation, in accordance with resolution 2166 (2014),
so that all those responsible can be prosecuted and
justice can be rendered in an independent, honest and
transparent manner to the victims and their families.

