Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Mr. President,
I wish to thank you for having organized this debate
on the working methods of the subsidiary bodies
of the Security Council, addressing and improving
transparency and efficiency in the work of these bodies,
in particular the sanctions committees.

Since this is also the first time that I am taking
the floor under your presidency, let me congratulate
you, Sir, on having assumed the presidency and wish
you and your delegation much success in your work
for this month, as has been already demonstrated.
We wish to express our support for the concept note
by the President on the work of the subsidiary bodies
of the Security Council (S/20l6/102, annex) and
for the pertinent suggestions that you have offered
regarding improvements in the areas of transparency;
selecting and preparing committee Chairs; interaction
and coordination among the subsidiary organs and
the Council itself; and the need for the mechanism
to oversee the implementation of the proposals put
forward in the note.
Considering that the Security Council makes
extensive use of sanctions regimes in its attempts to
restrict, impose a change in behaviour or deter certain
States, individuals and entities regarded as threats
to international peace and security, the sanctions
committees play and will continue to play a substantive
role as a strong political tool ofthe Council. This implies
the permanent need to improve them, namely with
respect to the decision-making process, the adoption of
sanctions and their imposition, enforcement and lifting.

Transparency and outreach are identified in the
draft note as key issues to be carefully addressed by
the Security Council. It is the current perception of
the elected members and the wider United Nations
membership that the issue of transparency is closely
linked to the legitimacy of imposing sanctions due
to its extreme political sensitivity. Thus transparency
is crucial at all stages of the process leading to the
imposition ofsanctions, starting from its design, through
the drafting of the ensuing decisions, its enforcement
by the international community and, finally, the
assessment of its effectiveness and compliance.

Compliance by the international community
requires that information be provided to Member
States, which must reciprocate, implying a need to
increase understanding of the essence of sanctions
regimes, their objectives and the requirements for their
implementation. The draft note suggests substantial
changes in the way in which the sanctions committees
operate, so as to curtail the perception that much of
the committees' work is carried out without the full
knowledge of all Council members, even though the
committees are normally chaired by elected members.
This issue, I think, has to be seriously addressed.

The holding of more frequent, open interactive
briefings by the Chairs of the sanctions committee with
non-Council members, as well as with the countries
under or affected by sanctions regimes, is therefore
strongly encouraged.

Still on the topic of the implementation of changes
in the sanctions committees, we attach relevance to the
process of the selection and preparation of Chairs before
they assume their duties. While the Security Council
agreed that the appointment of the Chairs of subsidiary
bodies should be balanced, transparent, efficient and
inclusive, in practice this has not materialized, as elected
members have consulted informally and separately,
being appointed on too short a notice to allow adequate
preparation for this important duty. As such, we are
of the view that the Chairs of the subsidiary bodies
should be appointed in a timely manner, allowing their
prior attendance at meetings of the subsidiary organs
concerned.

To conclude, we wish to reiterate our support for the
draft note and also hope that it will definitely be used as
a tool for improvement in and the better implementation
of our work on this issue. The proposals will surely
improve cooperation between Council members and
the sanctions committees, a relevant political tool of
the international community to force States, entities
and individuals to respect international law and abide
by the Security Council's decisions.

Ambassador Skoog of Sweden refreshed the
Council's memory concerning a significant sanctions
regime that contributed to the end of a regime that
had been regarded by the international community
as needing to be changed so as to bring about an
improvement in peace and the international order, not
just in southern Africa, but in the world at large. In times
of great threats and challenges, the Security Council
needs more than ever to maintain its clear stance by not
allowing political differences or particular interests to
undermine sanctions regimes. As such, it must ensure
that divisions among Council members do not have a
negative impact on the committees' ability to fulfil
their mandates.

