Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): Like
others, I am grateful to Assistant Secretary-General
Kane for her briefing.

At the outset, I should like to align myself with
the statement to be made shortly by the representative
of Austria on behalf of the European Union.

Like others, the United Kingdom is deeply
concerned at the current situation in Gaza, and in
particular at the escalation in violence, so we urge both
sides to show the utmost restraint. The urgent priority
is the immediate and unconditional release of Corporal
Shalit. That is in everyone's interests.

We condemn the killing of two Israeli soldiers at
the weekend and the murder of Eliyahu Asheri, but it is
important that Israel abide by international law. It
should seek to avoid civilian casualties and any action
that adds to the suffering of the Palestinian people. As
the G-8 foreign ministers said in Moscow yesterday,
"the detention of elected members of the Palestinian
Government and legislature raises particular concerns".
Those detained should be accorded their full legal
rights.

Most importantly, politics should be allowed to
take hold over violence. Every effort should be made to
maximize the chances of finding a diplomatic solution
to the present situation. We urge all parties to find a
way back to negotiations, which are the best way of
ensuring a lasting peace, and to restore calm for the
sake of the Palestinian and Israeli peoples.

We share the concerns expressed about the
humanitarian situation and note that Israel is planning
immediately to take steps to ease that situation.
Restoring electricity and water supplies and access for
humanitarian organizations must be a priority.

Given those humanitarian concerns, it might be
appropriate to say something now about progress in
establishing the temporary international mechanism.
We have repeatedly emphasized the wish of the United
Kingdom to see help given to the basic needs of the
Palestinian people. We are not in the business of
punishing Palestinians for the way they voted, but nor
are we prepared to put our funds through a Hamas-led
Palestinian Authority that has yet to demonstrate
commitment to the Quartet's three principles. That is
why the United Kingdom has been leading
international efforts to find other ways of helping the
Palestinians, including through the establishment of the
temporary international mechanism.

Following endorsement by the Quartet on
17 June, the European Commission now has teams on
the ground working to set up the mechanism. The
Commission is particularly focused on delivering
allowances to front-line health workers, and expects to
make the first of those payments by the middle of July.
The mechanism is already paying some utility bills.
The other parts of the mechanism, paying for health
supplies and social security payments for the poorest
Palestinians, are in the process of being established as
a matter of urgency by the Commission and the World
Bank.

Finally, let me repeat the firm British view that a
return to negotiations represents the best way to ensure
lasting peace. Negotiations are manifestly the best way
to move the process forward. It is the role of the
international community and the responsibility of this
Council to encourage negotiations and give them the
best chances of success. We cannot do that while
violence continues at its current level and while one
party refuses to accept the right of the other to exist.

