Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): Allow
me, first of all, to thank Prosecutor Moreno-Ocampo
for his report. His statement prompts me to make six
comments.

First, serious crimes continue to be committed in
Darfur today. The information provided by the
Prosecutor in that regard is alarming. We encourage
him to continue his investigations into the situation.

Secondly, the arrest warrants issued for
Mr. Haroun and Mr. Kushayb have not yet been
executed. To the contrary, Sudanese officials have once
again reiterated that the Government of the Sudan does
not intend to cooperate with the Court and that, in
particular, in violation of a resolution of the Security
Council, that it has no intention to surrender those two
persons to the International Criminal Court (ICC).

Thirdly, the report contains detailed information
about the second matter at hand, namely, the charges
against President Omer Al-Bashir, against whom the
Prosecutor has requested an arrest warrant. My
delegation is deeply concerned about information
regarding the systematic involvement of the State
apparatus in a plan to destroy ethnic groups, which is
the basis for the charge of genocide being made by the
Prosecutor. In particular, the allegations of systematic
rape aimed at annihilating populations, and policies
whose purpose is to methodically starve the same
populations, must be either confirmed or disproved
through a judicial process. Persons being investigated
by the Court, now and in the future, as well as the
Government of the Sudan, must reply seriously to
those accusations, rather than verbally attacking the
ICC and the Prosecutor. Given the extreme seriousness
of the matter at hand, my delegation is more than ever
convinced that the judicial process must continue in
total independence. The populations of Darfur will not
be able to enjoy lasting peace as long as impunity
reigns.

Fourthly, my delegation takes note of the opening
of a third investigation of war crimes allegedly
committed by three rebel commanders. Intentional
attacks against peacekeeping staff and materiel are
unacceptable and must be prosecuted in conformity
with the Rome Statute.

Fifthly, we thank the Prosecutor for explaining in
his report and briefing the issues relating to
admissibility and complementarity. These clarifications
are welcome because a degree of confusion often exists
around these central notions of the Rome Statute. As
the Prosecutor says in his report:

"The Office is not mandated to assess the
Sudanese judicial system as a whole, or to
monitorjudicial proceedings in the Sudan

"The complementarity test is whether or not
the Government of the Sudan has genuinely
investigated or prosecuted, or is genuinely
investigating or prosecuting the cases selected for
prosecution by the Office

"Furthermore, it is the responsibility of the
Government of the Sudan, or the individual
concerned, should they assess that such national
investigation or prosecution exist, to come to the
ICC and challenge the admissibility of the case.
This cannot be done through the media or through
the reports of intermediaries. It can only be done
through proper legal channels. Finally, the
decision rests with the ICC Judges."

Sixthly, my delegation is pleased to note the
many meetings between the Prosecutor and the
representatives of States and organizations, particularly
in Africa. This communication is indispensable and can
help to dissipate a number of misunderstandings and
confusion with regard to the issue of complementarity,
the basis for the jurisdiction of the Court in Darfur, as
well as misunderstandings with regard to the role of the
Prosecutor. In this regard, it is useful to recall, as the
Prosecutor did at the conclusion of his briefing, that

"[t]here is no immunity on account of rank or
official position before the International Criminal
Court for persons against whom warrants of
arrest have been issued by the Judges of this
Court".

A number of conclusions should be drawn from
what I have said. First, we must reaffirm the need to
allow the International Criminal Court to do its work in

complete independence and oppose all political
interference.

Secondly, the Government of the Sudan must
cooperate with the Court and the Prosecutor, as
required by resolution 1593 (2005) and as was recalled
in the presidential statement of 16 June 2008. In
particular, the Government must arrest and hand over
the two individuals against whom arrest warrants have
been issued - one of whom is still a Government
minister - so that they can present their defence
before the Court.

Thirdly, we must also urge all parties to the
conflict to abstain from all violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights.

Fourthly, the Security Council must not tolerate
and must hold the Sudanese authorities responsible for
any threat or reprisal against the peacekeeping forces,
humanitarian workers or civilians in Darfur that might
be organized following the issuance of an arrest
warrant against the President. These threats should -
and once again I quote the Prosecutor - "be seen for
what they are - a confirmation of criminal intentions
and not rewarded with promises of impunity. The
Security Council would discredit itself if it were to
allow itself to be manipulated by blackmail.

Finally, Belgium supports the call of the
Prosecutor to consider imposing sanctions in the form
of a travel ban or an assets freeze against persons or
groups protecting persons against whom arrest
warrants have been issued.

