Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
the United States for convening this debate and for the
personal commitment that Secretary of State Kerry has
shown by presiding over it. It is vitally important that
the Security Council maintains its focus on the region
at this critical time. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General, his Special Envoy Mary Robinson,
World Bank President Kim, Commissioner Lamamra
and Foreign Ministers Tshibanda N'tungamulongo and
Kutesa for their briefings this morning.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo has been
a crucible of conflict for more than two decades.
Brutal cycles of violence threaten both national and
regional peace and stability. We have seen yet more
horrors in the latest cycle of violence as the Mouvement
du 23 mars (M-23) militia commit rapes, carry out
summary executions and recruit child soldiers. The
Forces democratiques de libe'ration du Rwanda (FDLR),
while its threat is much reduced, has also continued to
carry out abuses, exploiting the instability created by
the M-23 rebellion.

Despite the latest outbreak of violence, we have an
opportunity now to begin a new chapter in the troubled
region that ends the people's suffering and brings peace
to the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. In
February, countries of the region came together and
committed to building peace under the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region. Special Envoy
Robinson is supporting their efforts.

Resolution 2098 (2013) authorizes the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) to
neutralize and disarm all those armed groups that pose
the greatest threat to civilians, not the least the M-23 and
the FDLR. Together, those different elements represent
a unique opportunity to address the root causes of the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
to end the cycle of violence once and for all.

We must seize this opportunity with determination
and vigour. First and foremost, countries in the
region must implement their commitments under the
Framework agreement. The Democratic Republic of the
Congo has made a positive start with the development
of a national oversight mechanism. Major challenges
remain on security-sector reform and extending
Government authority to the eastern part of the
country. Both these steps are necessary to bring peace
and prosperity to the Congolese people. But the wider
region must also deliver on its commitments. That
means, above all, that all countries show respect for
their neighbours' territorial integrity and stop any and
all assistance to armed groups. It is a matter of great
concern to my Government that the latest report of
the Group of Experts on the arms embargo against the
Democratic Republic of the Congo refers to continuing
external support to rebel groups in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The meeting of the
signatories at the General Assembly in September must
produce clear benchmarks to measure progress on all
the commitments made in the Framework agreement.

MONUSCO should play its role in support of
national and regional efforts. The Council has given
the Mission a more robust mandate that will put greater
pressure on armed groups. MONUSCO will soon carry
out offensive operations informed by the latest military
technology, including unmanned aerial systems. That
pressure must be accompanied with a demobilizational
plan that offers combatants an alternative to fighting.
MONUSCO is adapting to developments on the ground
and demonstrating a flexibility in responsiveness that
other United Nations peacekeeping missions would do
well to emulate.

The United Kingdom stands ready to support all
those efforts. We are already providing training to
some of the United Nations peacekeeping troops that
will soon deploy in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. On our "preventing sexual violence" initiative,
we are assisting with the collection and preservation of
forensic evidence to help bring to justice perpetrators
of crimes of sexual violence. And we are providing
support to peace initiatives in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which are fully integrated with
the Framework agreement. All donor support should
be aligned with the regional and national benchmarks
of the Framework to establish a basis for mutual
accountability.
We must stay strong in our pursuit of peace. Gains
made are fragile and need unyielding support from
within the Democratic Republic of the Congo, from
the immediate neighbours in the region and from the
international community. We must not squanderprogress
with blame or retribution. Accusations by countries in
the region not backed up by evidence only undermine
our efforts. When the Council adopted resolution 2098
(2013), the representative of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo said that his country was daring to hope
(see S/PV.6943). I can assure him that we are all hoping
with him. The Council, the international community
and, above all, the countries of the region must dare to
do all that they can for the people of the Great Lakes
and work together to keep our hopes of peace alive.

