Ms. Soderberg (United States of America): On 7
August 1998, operatives of Usama bin Laden bombed
United States embassies in Kenya and Tanzania, killing
224 citizens of America, Kenya and Tanzania and
wounding thousands more. Usama bin Laden continues to
threaten the safety not only of Americans all over the
world, but also of other citizens in countless countries
who may become victims of his terrorist policies. With
the adoption of the draft resolution today, the United
Nations - indeed, the world community - will be
taking a courageous step in combating international
terrorism. It will send a direct message to Usama bin

 

Laden, and terrorists everywhere: "You can run, you can
hide, but you will be brought to justice." I commend the
Security Council for this milestone against international
terrorism.

The United States attaches the highest priority to
disrupting Usama bin Laden's terrorist organization and
bringing him to justice for his involvement in terrorist
activities. Today's action brings new pressure on the
Taliban to turn over Usama bin Laden to authorities in a
country where he will be brought to justice. The Taliban in
Afghanistan continue to provide bin Laden with safe haven
and security, allowing him the necessary freedom to
operate, despite repeated efforts by the United States to
persuade the Taliban to turn over or expel him and his
principal associates to responsible authorities in a country
where he can be brought to justice. Our information
confirms that his organization, working with other terrorist
groups, continues to actively plan attacks on Americans and
others. We have reliable evidence that his network seeks to
acquire weapons of mass destruction, including chemical
weapons.

The United States has consistently expressed its
concern with the policies of the Taliban. As this draft
resolution makes clear, the Council shares our deep concern
over the continuing violations of international humanitarian
law and of human rights, particularly discrimination against
women and girls. We are also disturbed by the significant
rise in illicit opium production under areas of Taliban
control and the deplorable treatment of Iranian diplomatic
personnel and journalists. The Taliban's actions pose threats
to their neighbours and to the international community at
large.

On 5 July President Clinton issued an executive order
imposing economic sanctions on the Taliban because of the
threat to our national security posed by their actions and
policies. Today the Security Council is sending another
strong message to the Taliban: "Your continued harbouring
of Usama bin Laden poses a threat to international peace
and security. The international community demands that he
be brought to justice."

The draft resolution gives the Taliban a clear choice.
It has 30 days to turn over bin Laden. If the Taliban do not
turn him over within that period, the sanctions will take
effect. Those sanctions will restrict foreign landing rights
on aircraft operated by the Taliban, freeze Taliban accounts
around the world and prohibit investment in any
undertaking owned or controlled by the Taliban. The draft
resolution also establishes a Committee to monitor the
implementation of sanctions. It is important to remember
that these sanctions are limited and that they are targeted
very specifically to limit the resources of the Taliban
authorities. These sanctions in no way harm the people of
Afghanistan, and we will work with the sanctions review
Committee to implement them in a way that does not
hinder the provision of humanitarian assistance to the
Afghan people.

It is the earnest hope of the United States that the
Taliban will cooperate with the international community
in bringing bin Laden to justice within this period and
that we will not need to implement these sanctions. The
choice between cooperation and confrontation with the
international community rests with the Taliban.

