Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): I have the pleasure to
address the Security Council on behalf of the Non-
Aligned Movement, and to start by expressing the
Movement's appreciation to you, Sir, for having
organized this debate. I also wish to thank Baroness
Valerie Amos, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Ms.Navanethem Pillay, High Commissioner for
Human Rights, and Mr. Yves Daccord, Director-
General of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, for their briefings today.

Despite all the efforts exerted by the United
Nations, including the Security Council, civilians
around the world are still suffering in massive numbers.
The measures adopted so far have proved to fall short
of addressing the wider implications of attacks against
civilians, their impact on international peace and
security and their humanitarian impacts. The Secretary-
General's report (S/2010/579) prepared on this topic
and submitted pursuant to resolution 1894 (2009) also
highlights ongoing and emerging concerns regarding
the state of the protection of civilians, such as the
proliferation and fragmentation of non-State armed
groups, the displacement of civilians within and across
borders, the continued violence and hardship that
women and children face during conflict and the
continued existence of a culture of impunity.

In that regard, the Non-Aligned Movement
believes that due priority should continue to be given
to promoting knowledge of, respect for and observance
of States' obligations assumed under the United
Nations Charter and international, international human
rights and international humanitarian law, in particular
the four Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their 1977
Protocols. We call upon all parties to armed conflicts to
redouble their efforts to comply with their legal
obligations by, inter alia, prohibiting the targeting of
civilian populations, Civilian property and certain
special property during armed conflict, and by obliging
parties to any conflict to ensure general protection
against threats to civilian installations, hospitals, relief
materials, means of transportation and the distribution
of such relief materials arising from military operations.

The Movement reiterates its condemnation of the
increasing attacks on the safety and security of
humanitarian personnel, and urges the Governments of
United Nations Member States to ensure respect for the
protection of the personnel of humanitarian
organizations, in conformity with the relevant
provisions of international law. In the meantime, we
reaffirm that humanitarian agencies and their personnel
should respect international humanitarian law and the
laws of the countries where they operate, the guiding
principles of humanitarian assistance set forth in
General Assembly resolution 46/182 and its annex and
the principle of non-interference in the cultural,
religious and other values of the population in the
countries where they operate.

Furthermore, in the peacekeeping context, the
Non-Aligned Movement stresses that the protection of
civilians under imminent threat of physical violence is
the primary responsibility of each host country of any
peacekeeping operation. It further stresses that relevant
peacekeeping missions with such a mandate should
conduct their tasks without prejudice to the primary
responsibility of the host Government to protect
civilians. The successful conduct of tasks relating to
the protection of civilians, wherever a United Nations
mandate exists, requires a holistic approach that
encompasses the provision of timely and adequate
resources, logistical support and the required training,
as well as clearly defined and achievable mandates.

The principle of consent of the host State as a
founding principle of peacekeeping must be fully
respected. That requires open political discussions
between senior mission leadership and national
authorities, as well as follow-up on how to implement
all mandated tasks, including the protection of civilians.

Moreover, the Movement raises doubts regarding
a number of the recommendations of the November
2009 independent study, entitled Protecting Civilians
in the Context of United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations, jointly commissioned by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Department for Peacekeeping Operations. The
Movement underlines that any suggestions or
recommendations in that area must be addressed in a
comprehensive and holistic approach, taking into
account the need to provide all necessary capabilities
and resources for the implementation of protection
mandates given by the Security Council to United
Nations peacekeeping operations in a timely and
efficient manner. That must also be done while
refraining from using the concept of the protection of
civilians as a pretext for military intervention in armed
conflicts by the United Nations, especially considering
the limited resources that are currently available to
peacekeeping operations to fulfil their original
mandates and the existing legal challenges in
identifying who the civilians that peacekeepers would
protect are and how to differentiate between them and
insurgents in some areas of operations.

In that context, the role of peacekeeping missions
as protection actors needs more clarification, including
from the conceptual and operational aspects. Further
in-depth political discussion on how to enable
peacekeepers to better fulfil their protection tasks is
needed, bearing in mind that peacekeepers cannot
protect everyone everywhere.

The Non-Aligned Movement condemns Israel's
continued violations against Palestinian civilians in the
occupied Palestinian territory in breach of international,
international humanitarian and international human
rights law, as well as United Nations resolutions. The
Movement stresses the need to provide protection for
Palestinian civilians in the West Bank, the Gaza Strip
and Jerusalem against grave human rights violations by
Israel, including the use of excessive and
indiscriminate force, which has killed or injured
thousands of Palestinian civilians, including children,
and has caused vast destruction of property,
infrastructure and agricultural land.

Also in that context, the Secretary-General's
report expands, in an unjustified manner, the definition
and scope of the term armed conflict to include in that
definition situations that are not considered armed
conflicts according to the United Nations Charter and
international law. In the meantime, the report ignores
some other situations that are internationally
recognized as clear violations of international and
international humanitarian law, such as the tragic
incident of the humanitarian flotilla attacked on the
high seas despite its humanitarian nature.

Let me conclude by reiterating the importance of
the role of the Security Council, with regard both to
more effective involvement in the protection of
civilians in conflict situations and to focusing on the
importance of accountability and the need to
investigate violations of international humanitarian law
and putting an end to impunity. The Non-Aligned
Movement believes that the Council should alter its
practice and attach priority to providing protection to
civilian populations in imminent danger in conflict
situations at an early stage, and separate those actions
from Council discussions on the controversial political
dimensions of the conflict. In that way, as many lives
of affected civilians trapped between combatants in
conflict areas as possible could be saved.

