Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): I warmly thank Mr. Rama for his briefing. Albania can count on the full support of France in implementing the ambitious work programme that it has set out for its chairmanship of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). There are three matters that merit our particular attention. Almost six years after the hostilities began, finding a solution to the conflict in eastern Ukraine must remain a top priority. The conflict constitutes one of the gravest and bloodiest violations of the Helsinki principles, upon which the OSCE was founded. I commend the decisive role that the OSCE has played ever since the crisis broke out and, in that regard, I welcome the fact that Mr. Edi Rama, Prime Minister of Albania, made his first official visit to Ukraine as Chairperson-in-Office of the OSCE. The OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine continues to observe, on a daily basis, developments in the security situation in all regions of Ukraine and throughout the conflict zone. It also supports the parties in the implementation of the Minsk agreements. In that regard, we welcome the efforts made by the Special Monitoring Mission to observe disengagementin the three pilot areas of Stanytsia Luhanska, Petrivske and Zolote. We commend the bravery demonstrated by the men and women engaged in the field and resolutely condemn any actions aimed at jeopardizing their security or hindering their mission. The mandate of the Special Monitoring Mission must be fully implemented throughout the entire territory of Ukraine, including near the Russian-Ukrainian border. The OSCE also plays an essential role in facilitating dialogue between the parties within the framework of the Trilateral Contact Group. That process is advancing in conjunction with political discussions in the Normandy Format, which are now benefiting from an increased momentum since the 9 December summit in Paris - the first held at the Heads of State level since 2016, which France and Germany worked actively to convene. We now await new operational progress within the framework of the Trilateral Contact Group so that the next Normandy Format summit can be organized in spring. We cannot mention the Russia-Ukraine crisis without returning to Russia's illegal annexation of Crimea. That violation of Ukraine's internationally recognized borders must continue to be vehemently condemned. In that connection, we deplore the increasing militarization of the peninsula, as well as the human rights violations against persons belonging to minorities, in particular Crimean Tatars. Secondly, with regard to our line of action, France welcomes the OSCE's contribution to the resolution of the protracted conflicts that continue to threaten peace and stability in Europe and weigh heavily on the daily lives of civilian populations. The recent visit by the OSCE Special Representative for the Transniestrian Settlement Process to Moldova should be welcomed. France hopes that it will help to give new impetus to the negotiations. On Nagorno Karabakh, France is continuing its mediation efforts as co-Chair of the Minsk Group, alongside the United States and Russia. The recent meeting of the two Foreign Ministers is encouraging and attests to the desire for dialogue between the two parties. Turning to Abkhazia and South Ossetia, France reiterates the need for the international discussions in Geneva to produce tangible results, as well as itscommitment to the territorial integrity of Georgia within its internationally recognized borders. In the case of all of those conflicts, it must be underscored that the political will of the parties is critical in order to reach a long-term settlement and strengthen security on the European continent. Thirdly, and finally, our common objective must be to strengthen the efficiency of the OSCE. France welcomes Albania's decision to make gender equality and the women and peace and security agenda a key part of its chairmanship. We also wish to reiterate our commitment to the multidimensional approach to security that prevails within the OSCE and to the human dimension commitments. With regard to the human dimension, allow me to acknowledge the work done by the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights and by Mr. Harlem Desir as OSCE Representative on Freedom of the Media. We must also commend Albania for making space on its agenda for the question of environmental issues and their impact on security. Forty-five years after the conclusion of the Helsinki Final Act and 30 years after the signing of the Charter of Paris fora New Europe, the OSCE remains the model of an effective grassroots form of multilateralism that emerged on the basis of common values at a time where political antagonisms were particularly striking. The implementation and strengthening of the OSCE's achievements are among the priorities we share with the Albanian chairmanship, including close cooperation between the United Nations and regional organizations like the OSCE. Such cooperation, under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, will enable us to invent a renewed and revitalized multilateralism that is capable of responding to the major challenges of our time.
