Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I thank you, Madam President, for convening
this meeting following the urgent request of the
Government ofmy country to consider the consequences
of the unilateral decision taken by the President of the
United States concerning the occupied Syrian Arab
Golan. Before I read out my statement, I would like to
make several comments.

First, I will send a detailed letter tomorrow to
the delegations of the members of Security Council
reflecting my Government's position on the reality ofthe
situation concerning the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF) in the occupied Syrian
Golan. We revisit that position every six months.
Members will therefore receive detailed information on
the renewal of the mandate of UNDOF in the Golan. I
am raising this issue as today's topic does not concern
UNDOF, but rather the consequences of a thoughtless
step taken by the United States Administration against
an occupied territory, based on what we have heard
from the majority of Council members.

Secondly, I would like to make a correction
concerning a term that some, but not all, of my
colleagues used. The "occupied Syrian Golan" is the
official term that we find in the records of the United
Nations and the relevant Security Council resolutions,
not the "Golan Heights". The latter is an Israeli term
created by Israel after 1967 and dates back to medieval
times, when armies occupied hills, mountains and
strategic sites. At the time, the Israelis meant that the
Golan was a strategic plateau, or strategic heights, that
needed to be controlled so that Israel could conduct
manoeuvres at the Syrian front. Therefore, the Golan
is not Heights. It has rivers, valleys, mountains, plains
and cities.

Thirdly, since the very moment we started our
meeting - at around 5 pm. - Israel has been
conducting aerial aggression on the Sheikh Naj jar area
in Aleppo city, 500 kilometres away from the Golan.
Material damage has been incurred, and the Syrian
air defence forces were able to intercept some of the
missiles that were launched by the Israeli planes.

Those were the three comments with which I
wanted to begin my statement.
I should now like to read out part of a message that
I received a little while ago this afternoon, addressed to
the members and the presidency of the Security Council
written by a little Syrian girl from the Golan. This
is her photograph. I will show it to my United States
colleague in case he cannot clearly see it. Herewith is
the message of the little Syrian girl from the Golan,
whose photo Ijust showed the Council:

"My name is Dimashq Imad Al-Marai. I am
10 years old. I am from the town of Majdal Shams
in the occupied Syrian Golan. I was born under
the Israeli occupation. I say to the world that, as
children of the occupied Syrian Golan, our future
will not be determined by Trump or the occupying
Israeli entity, but by our history and our present as
well as our innocent dreams to live in the occupied
Syrian Golan - the land of our fathers and our
grandfathers. We will always dream of freedom
and of returning to our dear fatherland, Syria".

My country, the Syrian Arab Republic, condemns
the illegal announcement by the President of the United
States of America, on 25 March, concerning the legal
status ofthe occupied Syrian Arab Golan. My country's
Government considers the piece of paper signed by
President Trump and offered as a gift to the Prime
Minister of the Israeli occupying Power as a mere
unilateral measure by a party that enjoys neither the
political, legal or moral authority to decide the destinies
of the peoples of the world or dispose of territories that
constitute an integral part of my country, the Syrian
Arab Republic. Such United States practices are
dangerous because they represent the current American
Administration's reckless and unprecedented tendency
to undermine international law, humiliate the United
Nations and ignore all terms of reference, legal heritage
and the relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions on the Arab-Israeli conflict, as well as the
unavoidable need to end the Israeli occupation of Arab
lands and Israel's return to the 4 June 1967 borders.

In resolution 497 (1981), to which all members
referred in their statements, the Security Council
recognized that the Golan is an occupied Syrian
territory and that any measures taken by the Israeli
occupying Power concerning that occupied territory
are null and void and have no legal validity.

Everyone on the Council, including the
representative of the United States, acknowledges that
the peace process in the Middle East was launched at
the Madrid Peace Conference in 1991 on the basis of
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 497 (1981), all
of which stipulate the illegality of seizing land by force
and do not recognize Israel's authority or sovereignty,
as an occupying Power, over any of the lands occupied
since 5 June 1967. Those resolutions also mention the
need to put an end to the Israeli occupation of those
lands as a sine qua non condition for establishing ajust
and comprehensive peace in the Middle East.

That is a legal issue that no United States
Administration in the past has denied, I repeat, that no
American Administration in the past has denied until
the current Administration. As Ijust said, a piece of
paper signed by the United States President and offered
with a pen to Benjamin Netanyahu before the eyes of
the world is merely a unilateral conduct that has no
legal or political validity. However, that unilateral
conduct clearly demonstrates that the United States
Administration does not respect the United Nations
and that it withdrew its recognition of the international
resolutions. Today the Administration underscored its
rejection and opposition to all efforts to achieve just and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East and the world.
That means that the United States Administration has
ended its role as a mediator for any peace process in
the Middle East and is making that known, thereby
increasing escalation and confrontation in the region
and the world.

That official proclamation by the United States puts
the United Nations and the international community at
a crucial crossroads. It is either an affront to the entire
world or a real historic challenge to the United Nations
and the Security Council, since the Council has the
primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security, defending international legitimacy
and the Charter of the United Nations, as well as for
defending the terms of reference and international legal
legacy accumulated over decades based on the refusal
to recognize the Israeli occupation of the Golan and the
condemnation of that occupation, as well as calling to
put an end to it once and for all.

My country highly appreciates the international
and United Nations positions following the unjust
proclamation of the United States Administration. My
country would also like to thank all the countries that
supported the holding of this important meeting. We see
in the positions taken and the statements made by the
majority of Governments in the world, as well as most
members of the Council, a serious and significant step
in the right direction, showing that world public opinion
is isolating the United States and Israel, that they are
operating outside international law and that they are a
direct threat to international peace and security.

Let me be clear and direct. Through the illegal
proclamation made by its President, the United States is
violating its obligations under the Charter, the principles
of international law and Security Council resolutions
given that the United States is a permanent member of
the Council. Since the United States delegation likes to
always talk in its statements about accountability for
violations of international law, the crucial question that
we ask today is the following: who is going to ask for
the United States to be held accountable for violating
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 497 (1981)? Is not
the United Nations supposed to deal with such flagrant
violation of its resolutions and terms of reference by
reassuming its role and legal mandate, which were taken
away by the United States, with a view to implementing
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 497 (1981)?

In the eyes of the people of the Syrian Arab
Republic, the United States is a country that is now
an enemy. It is an outlaw country that occupies part of
our land following its direct involvement in the killing
of thousands of Syrians and the destruction of our
economy, our natural resources, our bridges and silos,
as well as our infrastructure. It did so by supporting
terrorism or imposing an economic embargo or
through direct military aggression against our country.
The United States has led the so-called international
coalition to combat Da'esh. The Syrian people see the
piece of paper signed by President Trump as a threat
to international peace and security. That was a failed
attempt to manipulate history and geography, as the
deceased former President Charles de Gaulle used to
say. The United States President and the extremist of
the new conservatives believed mistakenly that the
terrorist war against Syria would be enough to break the
will of the people of our country or that eight years of
fighting against extremism and terrorism would change
the priorities of Syria and those of its Government, its
people and its army.

The questions I pose to the very conscience of
humankind, States Members of the United Nations
and those that look to 2030 for achieving sustainable
development that leaves nobody behind is the following:
have they closely considered the real consequences of
the acknowledgement of the occupation by the United
States, a permanent member of the Council and a host
country to the United Nations, which was established
by signing the Charter in San Francisco? Have they
considered the real reasons behind the violations by
President Trump's Administration of international
treaties and conventions that aim to uphold international
stability? Who was behind its withdrawal from
international councils and bodies, such as the Human
Rights Council and UNESCO? Who was behind ending
funds to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East? All these
questions are posed to the members of the Council.

The United States Administration is trying to
protect the Israeli occupying Power by diverting
attention away from the real threats to international
peace and security due to the Israeli occupation and by
fabricating conflicts based on unfounded, dangerous
religious and sectarian lies and falsehoods. That could
further undermine the stability of the region, or cause
wars and chaos, which would lead to a complete lack of
control in the region?

Today we are describing indisputable facts.
Members know that the one that fabricates and fuels
wars and conflicts in the world is a party that does not
respect international law and to which we cannot trust
responsibility for international peace and security. If
the Security Council had dealt with the invasion and
destruction of Iraq in 2003 from the very beginning,
we would not be in the current unprecedented situation
of contempt for international law and for United
Nations resolutions relating to international peace and
security. Ultimately, the inaction of the United Nations
in response to that dangerous United States position
will leave the countries and people under occupation
with only one choice, that is, the principle of "what was
taken by force can only be restored by force".

The message of the Syrian Arab Republic, its
people and its leadership to the American and Israeli
sides is that the Syrian Arab Golan is ours. It will return
to us. Do not be misguided by thinking that someday
our land will be part of a hypocritical deal or a pawn
in an electoral game, in which those two sides support
each other so that the extremists in Israel can succeed
in the elections and the American Administration can
gain the support of the Israeli lobbying groups in the
United States. The United States Administration may
want to show some generosity towards the Israelis. If
they wish to do so, we would invite them to not put
their hands on what does not belong to them. The
United States is endowed with lands that extend far and
wide. It can give a couple of states - North and South
Carolina, for example - to the Israelis if it needs to
win their satisfaction. Why not? South Carolina is a
great piece of land. In fact, it is the state of Senator
Graham Lindsey, who encouraged President Trump to
issue his proclamation.

In conclusion, my country's delegation rejects all
attempts by the representative of Germany - and I
say Germany instead of the German regime, because
it would be shameful to use the term regime under the
dome of the international legitimacy - to steer this
meeting away from its objective. I will not respond to
his non-diplomatic way of addressing the subject of my
country, especially in light of the fact that Germany is
a non-permanent member of the Council. My country
is a founding Member of the United Nations, meaning
that we were victorious against the Nazis. The United
Nations arose from the ashes of the Second World War,
which caused the death of 80 million people, due to a
wrong political reading by his country at the time. That
is similar to my German colleague's incorrect political
reading of what is going on in my country today and the
purpose of this meeting.

I will not extend my remarks, but simply wish to
say that my German colleague has brought shame on
his own country. This is my advice to him. I have spent
scores of years in the Organization and it is shameful that
we cannot communicate with each other based on the
established legal rules and proper way ofcommunication
under the dome of international legitimacy.

