The President: I will now make a brief statement
in my capacity as representative of the United States.

I have been struck by the degree of consensus and
the commonality of views expressed today on almost
all the issues that have been touched on - elections,
security, the transition after independence, justice and
accountability. We think we are moving into a crucial
period for East Timor. The United States fully supports
the tight electoral schedule proposed by the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) and the National Council, and we were
pleased to hear Mr. Annabi report that registration
continues, with more than 40 per cent of the population
already enrolled, and that five political parties have
officially come forward. This is welcome news to us.

The Secretary-General's report also focused on
security conditions in the run-up to the election. We
acknowledge his assessment, as others have. The
situation remains unpredictable, and we support his
recommendation to maintain the military component in
its present form while keeping developments under
constant review.

Like others, the United States also looks forward
to the Secretary-General's report in July. We hope that
that report, which should provide detailed
recommendations on the international presence after
independence, will contain a better-elaborated exit
strategy with benchmarks. That strategy should include
plans for transition from a primarily peacekeeping
operation to a longer-term development assistance
programme provided by a wider range of agencies, in
consultation with the East Timorese, with peacekeepers
progressively downsized as security conditions permit.

But I want to make it clear that we, like others,
believe also that too much has been invested in East
Timor to allow a precipitous withdrawal to destabilize
the situation. To get this balance right and to have the
best programme we will need close consultations
among the Secretariat, the Council and troop
contributors, and my delegation welcomes the
formation of task forces in New York and Dili to
achieve that result. We also look forward to the June
donors conference in Canberra, where the East
Timorese leadership will have the opportunity to
present a budgetary plan showing projected sources
and uses of funds over the coming years. A well-
thought-out and realistic budget is vital to ensure
continued international donor support.

I was glad to hear from Mr. Ramos-Horta about
the concept of a national pact. We think that internal
stability in East Timor can be fostered only if all
political parties reject violence and urge tolerance and
flexibility, with the recognition that divergent views are
welcomed and accepted in a democracy, and we took
note of Mr. Gusmao's and Mr. Ramos-Horta's
comments in that regard.

On a final and unhappy note, the United States
issued a statement expressing our deep disappointment
with the highly inappropriate sentences recently
handed down by an Indonesian court in the case of the
murders of United Nations humanitarian personnel. As
President of the Council, on behalf of members of the
Council, I raised the matter with the Indonesian
Mission. We have all welcomed the news that the
prosecutors have appealed the sentences, but I would
like to emphasize the United States conviction that
accountability for past crimes is a crucial part of
moving forward. Indonesia's ad hoc tribunal,
UNTAET's investigation of serious crimes and
successful prosecution of criminal cases against people
like Eurico Guterres and Jacobus Bere are all part of
that equation. We would like to see more progress.
Nearly two years after the August 1999 violence, we
must remain vigilant to achieve it, and I think we all
agree that the East Timorese people deserve a
reckoning.

I resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The next speaker is the representative of Sweden.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.

