Mr. Gallegos Chiriboga (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation wishes to congratulate the
delegations of the Dominican Republic, Germany,
Belgium, Indonesia and South Africa on recentlyjoining
the Security Council as non-permanent members
for the period 2019-2020. We wish them success in
performing their duties. We particularly congratulate
the delegation of the Dominican Republic, as its first-
time membership of this organ is historic. We are
convinced that its dedication and ability will positively
contribute to the work of the Council, especially during
this month of its presidency.

We are also grateful for the convening of this
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question. This is an issue ofvital importance
for the international community and the Council,
which has the primary responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security, as only an atmosphere
of peace and security can foster the cooperation and
development of nations.

Since the previous open debate convened by
the Council on the matter, on 18 October 2018 (see S/PV.8375), we regret that the events of the two
final months of last year continued to aggravate and
deteriorate the humanitarian situation, with human
rights violations and breaches of international
humanitarian law in the occupied Palestinian territory.
Deaths, attacks, arrests, violence and confrontations
continue unabated.

According to reports by Mr. Jamie McGoldrick,
United Nations Humanitarian Coordinator, since
9 December 2018 Israelis and Palestinians have been
killed as a result of the violence in the West Bank.
Moreover, more than 400 Palestinians and at least
13 Israelis have been injured, while more than 200
Palestinians have been arrested. Palestinians continue
to encounter obstacles in accessing health services,
clean water and sources of livelihoods and education,
among other amenities, and humanitarian workers face
unprecedented challenges, including a lack of funding
and an increase in attacks aimed at delegitimizing
humanitarian action. The reality on the ground is a
high-risk warning for international peace and security.
Now more than ever, it is imperative that the Council
take action to fully apply the fundamental principles of
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.

It is important to highlight the report covering
the period of September to December 2018 on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), which
was presented on behalf of the Secretary-General
by Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process. In general terms,
he reported that Israel is not stopping its settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem; on the contrary, Israeli
authorities approved plans for approximately 2,200
homes in West Bank settlements, and progress is being
made in the construction of 31 units in Hebron, which
would be the first new construction in 16 years. He also
reported that demolitions and seizures of Palestinian-
owned structures by the Israeli authorities continued
throughout the occupied West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, and that the overall situation is dominated
by negative trends.

Likewise, other actions, such as the decision by the
Ministerial Committee for Legislation to move forward
with draft laws, including so-called Regulation Law
2, which seeks to regulate hillside communities built
beyond the Green Line in the past 20 years, and the
announcement by Israeli authorities of the opening of
Route 4370 in occupied Jerusalem, which consists of
an eight-metre-high wall separating Israeli traffic from
Palestinian traffic, shows the persistent, exclusionary
and discriminatory settlement and expansion policies.
They are in contravention of the provisions of
resolution 2334 (2016) andjeopardize the possibility of
the two-State solution. His report also revealed that no
immediate measures have been taken to prevent all acts
of violence against civilians, including acts of terror,
provocation and destruction. Provocative actions and
statements encouraging violence and inflammatory
rhetoric are ongoing.

Resolution 2334 (2016) sets out the most viable path
to restoring peace in the region. The implementation
of the resolution is vital to resolving the Israeli-
Palestinian issue and cannot be divorced from the
Security Council's action to ensure compliance with,
and observance of, resolution 1322 (2000), which urges
Israel, the occupying Power, to scrupulously comply
with its obligations and responsibilities under the
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949. Moreover,
our delegation once again places value on, and reiterates
its support for, the various international initiatives that
have taken place with the aim of restarting negotiations
and peace talks between Israel and Palestine.

Our delegation reiterates its call on the international
community to make tangible progress to support the
advancement of a political, peaceful, definitive and
just solution for the parties, based on the existence of
two States: Palestine and Israel. It is imperative that
the two-State solution be maintained as the only way
to achieve peace and stability in the Middle East,
restore rights to the Palestinian people and finalize the
independent establishment of Palestine, incorporated
into the United Nations as a full Member.

