Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Allow me to thank the leadership of both
Tribunals for their briefings and for the reports they
have submitted to the Security Council on their
completion strategies.

We note that the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR), notwithstanding existing
difficulties, has worked fruitfully over the past six
months. During that period, four judgments have been
rendered with respect to seven accused and, in six
cases featuring 14 accused, hearings have been
concluded. The Tribunal is also planning by the end of
2009 to complete the most labour-intensive and
protracted phase - the submission of evidence - in
all outstanding trials of first instance with one
exception.
Regrettably, the results of the work of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) are unimpressive. In the reporting
period, only one judgment has been rendered, and that
was in a trial that ended in August 2008. In the ICTY
case files, there remain four cases in respect of six
accused for which hearings have not even begun. The
accused in these cases have been at the disposition of
the Tribunal since June 2003 - six years in custody
and yet hearings have not even begun. We consider that
situation unacceptable and a violation of civilized
standards of justice and commonly accepted human
rights norms. It is all the more difficult to understand
given that the ICTY has the legal option of transferring
cases to national jurisdictions.

We are also bewildered by the emerging practice
of suspending the main court proceedings until
contempt cases are resolved. The Tribunal put on a
heightened display of principle concerning the safety
of witnesses in the case of Vojislav Seselj, in
connection with a book he published, whereas, in the
case of Ramush Haradinaj, the former Prime Minister
of Kosovo, in which the physical elimination of some
witnesses and overt intimidation of others were
involved, the Tribunal effectively turned a blind eye to
those problems. Protracting the main trials until
contempt of court hearings are completed has an
adverse effect on the implementation of the ICTY
completion strategy.

We cannot fail to be concerned by the
assessments in the report of the President of the ICTY
on tentative dates for completing first instance hearings
and appellate proceedings, extending to mid-2013.

At this stage, the task of ensuring a suitable
degree of cooperation between States - first and
foremost those of the region - and the Chief
Prosecutors of the Tribunals is of particular
importance. We have observed some progress in
maintaining interaction between the ICTY and Serbia.
This was borne out not only by the assessment of Chief
Prosecutor Brammertz, but also by the factual material
on the matter provided by the Serbian side to members
of the Security Council on the eve of our meeting.

One can detect a certain dynamic in relations
between the ICTR and the State and judicial
institutions of Rwanda. At the same time, the Russian
Federation continues to be concerned by the instances,
referred to by the Chief Prosecutors, of the failure of
States to properly comply with their obligation to
cooperate with the Tribunals, including in the provision
of documents needed for investigation and tracking the
accused. Those factors not only hold up proceedings on
specific cases, but have a negative effect in general on
the Tribunal's ability to reach objective verdicts.

In conclusion, I wish once more to reaffirm the
position of the Russian Federation that both Tribunals
should be guided by the time frames laid down by the
Security Council and do everything possible to ensure
that the bulk of their work is completed by the end of
2010. The failure to bring a number of accused before
the ICTR and the ICTY cannot be viewed as
justification for the unlimited extension of the
activities of those organs. Given the looming deadlines,
we will seek the best options for the proposed
mechanisms for the Tribunals' residual functions. In
that context, we wish to thank Ambassador Thomas
Mayr-Harting for the effective Austrian chairmanship
of the Security Council Working Group on
international tribunals. We note progress in the
discussion of issues related to the forthcoming
completion of work of the Tribunals. My delegation
expects that by the end of the year, the Council will
manage to draft an agreed text of a resolution on the
parameters of the residual functions of those temporary
organs of international justice.

