Mr. Valdes Pulido (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the Secretary-General and the President of the
Financial Action Task Force (FATF) for their statements,
and the United States and the Russian Federation for
having put together resolution 2253 (2015).

Chile welcomes the convening of this meeting by
the President of the Security Council, and we take this
opportunity to reaffirm our unwavering determination
to cooperate with collective efforts to combat terrorism.
We would like to once again reiterate our condemnation
of all terrorist acts, methods and practices and of the
operations that finance them, in all their forms and
manifestations, regardless of their motivation, wherever
they occur, and by whomever they are committed.

The self-styled Islamic State terrorist group remains
a destabilizing factor in the Iraqi and Syrian conflicts.
Its spread to and presence in other countries and regions
is equally alarming. We must therefore work together to
implement a multilateral strategy aimed at putting an
end to its activities.

Regarding the specific topic that brings us here this
afternoon, we believe that additional efforts must be
made to choke off financing of these groups and thus
ensure the full and effective implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions. It is thus vital to
ensure the implementation of the standards contained
in the recommendations of the Financial Action Task
Force.

Putting an end to the financing of the Islamic
State will be no easy task, since a significant part
of its income derives from activities carried out on
the territory under its control and which therefore
cannot be detected by the financial system. We must
therefore focus our efforts on its interactions with the
outside world, such as the sale of oil, the payment of
ransom or the smuggling of objects of cultural and
historical value, inter alia. That is why it is essential
that resolution 2253 (2015), adopted today, allow for the
ongoing judicious study of the evolution of new trends
in terrorist financing.

Moreover, we believe it to be important that the
sanctions imposed on Al-Qaida and associated groups
be implemented effectively. There must be timely
exchange of information among countries on the
financial transactions that terrorist groups conduct,
either themselves or, more important, through third
parties. We also need to be aware of the new challenges
that arise every day, such as the fight against the
funding of foreign terrorist fighters. At the same time,
we reiterate that protecting human rights is an essential
aspect of the fight against terrorism. All efforts and
measures carried out within States must constantly
be adjusted to take into account obligations under
international law, human rights law and the rule of law.

Finally, Chile notes, as it indicated during its
presidency of the Security Council in January, that it
is crucial that the link between inclusive international
development, peace and security be recognized. We
believe that, as the numerous destabilizing processes
are showing, the lack of inclusive development in many,
but not all, cases can foment conflicts, It is therefore
essential that the lack of opportunities be addressed
with greater force, without our being distracted from
taking all immediate measures to stop the financing of
terrorist groups at a global level.

