Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank the
Nigerian delegation for convening this meeting on
regional organizations and contemporary challenges
of global security. I also thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his briefing.

Chad aligns itself with the statement to be made by
the observer of the African Union to the United Nations.
The growing number and intensification of
internal conflicts and the appearance of new serious
threats - including terrorism, the proliferation of
weapons, piracy at sea, transnational organized
criminality, trafficking in drugs, arms and human,
separatism and power conflicts, environmental
degradation and pandemics - make coordinated
regional action and a comprehensive approach
more necessary than ever to address those manifold
challenges. The cross-border nature of most security
challenges in Africa, as well as the insufficient means
at the disposal of individual countries, require the
strengthening of regional organizations, which are
the only bodies able to provide effective responses to
insecurity in its many and multiplying forms across the
world.

In that regard, the African Union (AU) has adopted
a peace and security architecture and developed
exemplary cooperation with the United Nations,
whose Charter in Chapter VIII recognizes its role in
the prevention, resolution and peaceful settlement
of conflict. Thus, the AU has not only deployed
peacekeeping operations authorized by the Security
Council, but has also undertaken its own activities in
the area of conflict prevention and crisis management,
including in Burundi, the Sudan, Somalia, Mali, the
Central African Republic, and so on.

In spite of its experience and significant means,
the United Nations alone cannot be everywhere all the
time to tackle the manifold challenges in the areas of
peace and security. That is why in Africa, where more
than 62.5 per cent of United Nations peacekeeping
operations and 87 per cent of uniformed personnel are
deployed, the African Union is a key strategic partner
that deserves to be supported so that it can shoulder its
responsibilities in the area of peace and security on the
continent. In Mali and in Central Africa, cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union,
through the Economic Community of West African
States and the Economic Community of Central African
States, has allowed for the swift deployment of African
troops. We welcome such cooperation and the support
of the United Nations to the African Union through the
Ten-Year Capacity Building Programme, the provision
of technical assistance and political support through
the United Nations Office to the AU in Addis Ababa.
Chad favours the strengthening of cooperation between
the two organizations, and reiterates its support for
the Common African Position on the United Nations
Review of Peace Operations.

Relations between the two organizations are
evolving in a positive manner, but they have not yet
attained the degree of strategic cooperation we would
like to see. We encourage the United Nations prioritize
a resolution to the urgent matter of financing African
Union peacekeeping operations authorized by the
Security Council. The two organizations must adopt
specific measures to make financing ofUnited Nations-
mandated African Union peacekeeping operations of
the Union more flexible, lasting and predictable, as
recommended by the High-level Independent Panel on
United Nations Peace Operations, whose high-quality
and serious work we commend. We hope that all the
other relevant recommendations of the High-level Panel
will enjoy the attention of the Council. Despite its lack
of predictable resources, which significantly hinders
its ability to undertake peacekeeping and security
operations on the continent, the African Union has
comparative advantages, such as geographic proximity,
legitimacy, an understanding of the root causes of
conflict and the ability to swiftly intervene in case of
crisis, as recalled by many speakers today.

Given the transnational, even transcontinental
dimension of contemporary security challenges, the
development of rapid reaction capacity by the African
Union - including the African Standby Force - three
of whose five regional brigades should be operational
by the end of 2015 - and the operationalization of the
African Capacity for Immediate Response to Crises
could provide the Security Council with the means to
act first when a crisis emerges.

Chad welcomes cooperation between the African
Union and the European Union, two close partners
of the United Nations in peacekeeping in Africa. The
continent is hosting nine European Union civilian
missions and military operations. Through the African
Peace Facility, these are financing the African Union
Mission in Somalia, which is a model of cooperation
between the European Union, the African Union and
the United Nations. It has also contributed to the
deployment of the African Union operations in Mali
and the Central African Republic. Chad welcomes
the European Union's efforts and underscores the
importance of trilateral cooperation among the African
Union, the European Union and the United Nations in
addressing the common security and peace challenges
on the continent.

Strengthening cooperation between regional
organizations and civil society and non-governmental
organizations is ofparamount importance because such
organizations could provide advantages and a useful
capacity to shore up peace and other activities relating
to conflict management. In the African context, the
importance of civil society, in particular women and
youth, was reflected in the African Union decision
marking 2015 as the Year of Women's Empowerment
and Development Towards Africa's Agenda 2063.
It would be a good idea to strengthen the capacity of
African civil society organizations and to encourage
their participation in resolving matters tied to peace
and security.

In conclusion, we note that the majority of security
challenges in Africa and the world know no borders and
require States and regional organizations to draw more
on their mutual efforts to suppress such threats. No
organization, including the United Nations, or region
can respond to the many challenges relating to collective
security alone. Only a solid, reliable and viable
partnership between the United Nations and regional
organizations, in particular the African Union, based on
a division of labour and taking into account the relative
comparative advantages, and strongly supported by the
United Nations, can address the manifold challenges to
peace and security on the continent. In that connection,
the African Union and its subregional mechanisms
have developed institutional and operational capacities
to play their full role, provided that the United Nations
provides significant financial support.

