Fiji congratulates the Federal Republic of Germany on assuming the presidency of the Security Council during this period. Fiji thanks the President and the Council for continuing to schedule open debates virtually. Fijiis grateful for and welcomes this opportunity to contribute to the important topic of peace operations and human rights. Last month, we commemorated the seventy-fifth anniversary of the signing of the Charter of the United Nations. The United Nations was founded on the pillars of peace and security and respect for individual rights. The Preamble to the Charter states: "to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war [...] to reaffirm faith in the fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person." This crucial open debate on peace operations is therefore highly timely. Secretary-General Antonio Guterres stated that "every measure to uphold human rights helps ease tensions, deliver sustainable development and sustain peace". This call applies equally to United Nations peace operations. Human rights violations fuel instability, worsen conflicts and ultimately undermine peace operations. In 2015, Member States adopted the Sustainable Development Goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Peace and development are closely intertwined. The protection of human rights is the most crucial building block for sustaining peace. Conflicts have grown increasingly complex, with a wide range of non-State actors contesting with Governments within, or in close proximity to, communities. Communities are subjected daily to the chaos, uncertainty, suffering and danger of conflicts, which create the conditions for abuse and violation of rights. Peace operations are located within this context of fluidity and uncertainty. Fiji welcomes the United Nations Action for Peacekeeping initiative, which aims to make United Nations peacekeeping more effective, efficient and fit for purpose. One condition for the effectiveness of peacekeepers is their operational readiness - the high standards of knowledge, training and capabilities to respond to the challenges of the peacekeeping environment. Fiji welcomes the mainstreaming of human rights in peace operations, to promote and protect communities. The ongoing coordination and collaboration of the United Nations departments responsible for peace operations with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights has been encouraging. Fiji welcomes the further strengthening of this link. That coordination and collaboration has enabled the deployment of human rights teams to most multidimensional United Nations peace operations, the support and the integration of human rights considerations into mission planning and tasks and the inclusion of human rights issues in manuals and training for police, military and civilian peacekeepers. These developments bring human rights into the very heart of peacekeeping. But this is only a helpful start. There are many more steps to be taken on this pathway. Ultimately, States are responsible for the protection and promotion of human rights in their communities. Improving communities' livelihoods and access to economic opportunities, social protection and health care through development are important steps towards achieving the universalization of human rights. Integrating United Nations development capabilities more centrally into its peace operations would be a helpful way forward. Peacekeepers and peace operations contribute to promoting and protecting human rights in collaboration with host countries. Collaboration and coordination between host States and peace operations should be strengthened. Communities need to be accessible, and there is a need to strengthen funding for human rights capacity-building. The training of peacekeepers is equally important. Peacekeepers should be made aware of how they contribute to promoting and protecting the human rights of the communities they serve. Adherence to the United Nations-designated Core Predeployment Training Materials and specialized training materials is important. Collaboration with United Nations agencies and international organizations during predeployment training can enhance peacekeepers' awareness on human rights. Member States should continue to incorporate human rights awareness into the professional development of their defence and police forces. This will establish a solid foundation of human rights awareness among defence and police personnel, who are potential peacekeepers. Partnership programmes with other Member States and international organizations can support and assist in capacity-building. Fiji reaffirms its commitment to supporting United Nations peacekeeping and to providing the United Nations with highly trained peacekeepers. The United Nations standards are our standards. Fiji, in partnership with our bilateral partners, continues to improve the training standards for our peacekeepers, including on human rights awareness. This is not a one-off partnership; rather, they are routinized, long-term partnerships. Fiji is thankful to all our bilateral partners for their efforts in strengthening leadership, human rights awareness and other peacekeeping capabilities. We encourage other countries to explore such partnerships that allow countries to share human rights training, expertise and experiences. Fiji pays considerable attention to learning from its peace operations deployments. Learning about human rights protection and monitoring during each mission needs to become routine across United Nations operations. More important, we suggest there would be significant value in sharing lessons across different missions. Conflicts are now transforming more rapidly. As they transform, the importance of sharing lessons across missions will be even more elevated.
