Mr. Dauth (Australia): It is a pleasure,
Mr. President, to see you here in New York, and to
welcome you here. I should begin by acknowledging
the important role that Singapore has played on the
Council and by saying how particularly appropriate it
is that Singapore should be President of the Council
this month. Kishore Mahbubani has played a role in
many of the Council's activities in recent times, but it
is on this issue that he has been particularly active and
effective, and my Government very much wants to
acknowledge that.

It is with a great sense of pride and shared
accomplishment that I am here today. Today is a
historic moment for the people of East Timor and also
for the Council, for the United Nations and for all of its
Members. I should like to echo the comments made last
night by our Prime Minister, Mr. Howard, in offering
our heartfelt congratulations to the people of East
Timor as they become citizens of their new nation.
Their courage, determination and commitment to the
transition process have laid the basis for a stable and
democratic nation.

Echoing Deputy Secretary-General Louise
Frechette's comments, I should like to say that today
also belongs to the many East Timorese who are not
here and who are unable to see the attainment of the
goal for which they strived. I should also like to
acknowledge with appreciation Deputy Secretary-
General Frechette's remarks and to say how pleased I
am to see that she is here today, as she was when Mr.
Howard addressed the Council in February.

It is just over three years since the United
Nations, Indonesia and Portugal signed the 5 May
Agreement - three short years in which the process of
popular consultation was established and only two
years and nine months since the ballot on 30 August
1999, through which the people of East Timor chose to
become independent. In that very short space of time,
the people of East Timor, the United Nations and the
international community have worked in close
partnership to achieve the remarkable feat of
establishing, from the ground up, a stable, democratic
Government and an Administration that are now ready
to take on the responsibilities of independence.

This has been a major undertaking for all the
players, particularly the United Nations. I need not
remind anyone here today of the extent of the
challenges that faced the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) when it was
established in October 1999. The fact that UNTAET
can hand over authority to an independent East Timor
only two and a half years later shows what the United
Nations and the Security Council are capable of
achieving with the right mix of political will and
flexible and creative decision-making, on the basis of
sustained international support.

The unique challenges of the East Timor
transition have also provided an opportunity for the
United Nations, its Member States and the Security
Council to put into practice new approaches to
peacekeeping and to post-conflict peace-building and
reconstruction. Working in a transparent and
consultative manner with major troop contributors, the
Security Council provided the International Force in
East Timor (INTERFET) and UNTAET with clear,
credible and achievable mandates. It focused from an
early stage on the need for a clear exit strategy and on
the need to manage and coordinate the Organization's
longer-term involvement, including through its funds
and agencies. That approach has continued with the
recent adoption of a sensible and achievable mandate
for the United Nations Mission of Support in East
Timor (UNMISET). For its part, the Secretariat has
encouraged an integrated Organization-wide approach
to the transition process. It has premised all of
UNTAET's activities on the need for sustained
capacity-building as the basis for the gradual transfer
of authority to the East Timorese.

We have been proud to contribute to this United
Nations success story in a wide variety of ways, from
our leadership of INTERFET in 1999 to our long-term
financial commitment to East Timor's reconstruction
and development, including through the signature
today of the Timor Sea Treaty, which will guarantee
substantial long-term oil and gas revenues for East
Timor. Our national role has, however, extended well
beyond government-level contributions. Hundreds of
Australians have contributed to East Timor's transition,
both as members of the United Nations Mission in East
Timor (UNAMET) and of UNTAET and through non-
Government and volunteer activities through the
private sector and as United Nations volunteers. The
personal relationships and understandings that emerge
from such contributions will be invaluable to
Australia's future relationship with East Timor. The
personal contacts made with the people of East Timor
will underpin a warm, cooperative bilateral relationship
with our newest neighbour from the first day of its
independence.

In the space of three years, the Security Council
and the United Nations have overseen an historic
transition in East Timor. Today is a day of celebration
and success, but the story, of course, is by no means
over. All of us need to maintain our commitment to
ensuring that the promising beginnings of this new
nation are developed and sustained. We all have an
interest in a stable and prosperous East Timor that can
make a positive contribution to its region and can play
a constructive role as a member of the international
community. Our efforts must not end here. Security
Council support must be maintained as long as
UNMISET is in East Timor, and the broader
contributions of the United Nations funds and agencies
and other organizations must be brought on-stream as
they are needed. Individual bilateral donors as well as
multilateral bodies must continue to accord East Timor
high priority. We all owe it to the people of East Timor
and to the United Nations to ensure that the success
story continues.

In closing, I would like once again to
acknowledge with Australia's gratitude the invaluable
and wonderful contribution of my friend the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Sergio Vieira
de Mello, and his staff - both international and East
Timorese - to East Timor's successful transition to
independence. At the risk of omitting some important
players from the United Nations - this is a perilous
course on which I have embarked - it is also timely to
recall and pay tribute to the unstinting efforts of
Ambassador Jamsheed Marker, Francesc Vendrell, Ian
Martin, Tamrat Samuel and others, such as Carina
Perelli and Hocine Medili, who contributed in the
difficult days of 1999, a period when today's
celebrations were a distant aspiration. I also
acknowledge the leadership of Under-Secretary-
General Jean-Marie Guehenno and that of his
predecessor, Bernard Miyet, and the tireless and
dedicated efforts of other Secretariat officials,
including Hedi Annabi, Joachim Hutter, Major General
Tim Ford, Julian Harston and Ingrid Hayden. Without
the contributions of those and many other people, we
would not be celebrating East Timor's independence
today.

