Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): First, I
would like to warmly thank Mr. Djinnit for his excellent
work and unwavering commitment to achieving peace
in the Great Lakes region. I am pleased that we have
been given the opportunity to speak with him in this
format, where we can take a step back and consider
all of the region's challenges. The regional dimension
of the crisis in the Great Lakes region should not
be neglected.

France is concerned about three main mutually
reinforcing issues in the region: the continued slow
process of implementing of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Region, the ongoing political crisis in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the situation
in Burundi, both of which can significantly destabilize
the region ifthey are not resolved. The Security Council
must take joint, decisive action thereon in order to
prevent a regional crisis from erupting.

Turning first to the Addis Ababa Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework, I would note that despite
some headway, as underscored by the Secretary-
General in his report (S/2017/208), which was presented
by Mr. Djinnit, negative forces continue to make their
presence felt in the region. Although the era ofreciprocal
destabilization by armed groups is, fortunately, over,
the legacy of that time remains, and certain armed
groups are still active. This legacy of the past continues
to fuel suspicion and mistrust between the countries
of the region; it must be definitely resolved so that the
region can finally move forward and forge healthy ties
of cooperation. To that end, decisive steps will need to
be taken in three areas, and regional organizations, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and the Southern African Development Community
(SADC), have a key role to play in this respect.

First, with respect to a military response to
the armed groups, a key role will be played by the
Force Intervention Brigade, provided by SADC. The
renewed mandate of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUSCO) will enable it to rebuild
its capacity for mobility in order for it to engage in
decisive offensive actions, as it did with respect to the
Mouvement du 23 mars (M23).

Secondly, political action must be taken in order to
demobilize, repatriate and reintegrate these combatants
in their countries of origin. Here I am thinking of
the Forces democratiques de liberation du Rwanda
(FDLR) and former members of M23, as well as those
of the Sudan People's Liberation Movement/Army in
Opposition, who have been in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo since last year. This will require joint
action and a commitment at the highest level of the
political leaders concerned.

The Addis Ababa agreement, which experienced
a welcome revitalization thanks to the efforts of
Angola in 2016, must be fully implemented, and
the Technical Support Committee of the Regional
Oversight Mechanism must undertake this task. Its
upcoming meeting in Brazzaville in October will be an
opportunity to address the issue.

Thirdly, I turn to the issue of tackling the illicit
trafficking in natural resources. Armed groups use such
traffic to meet their needs, contribute to their survival
and fuel an economy of war and predation. So long as
that illicit trafficking continues, no lasting solution to
the instability in the region is possible. Therefore there
needs to be strong, harmonized action by the countries
of the region as well as a sustained commitment of
international partners to ensure that we can stamp out
illicit trafficking in natural resources with the support
of the international community. We must work for
transparency in the mining industry and ensure greater
traceability of minerals.

Turning to the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, France is very concerned. At the political
level, the failure to implement the 31 December 2016
agreement threatens any potential resolution of the
crisis. All of the legislative bodies in the country
have now overrun their mandates, and therefore
their legitimacy going forward depends entirely on
the 31 December 2016 agreement and the consensus
that characterized its signing. The appointment of a
Prime Minister who does not enjoy consensus support
following a process that does not respect the provisions
of the 31 December 2016 agreement is a very worrying
step. The agreement is the only credible road map for
an end to the crisis, and its violation could seriously
threaten the stability and the future of the country.

In keeping with resolution 2348 (2017), which was
just adopted by the Security Council unanimously,
France reaffirms the need for the urgent and
unconditional implementation of the 31 December 2016
agreement, including the lifting of restrictions on rights
and freedoms, so as to enable the holding, in suitable
conditions, of elections by the end of 2017, as agreed,
thus paving the way for the first peaceful transition of
power in the history of the country.

It is crucial that international partners, the Security
Council, the African Union and the SADC, all of which
welcomed the 31 December 2016 agreement, work to
ensure its implementation. France will stand side by
side with its partners to achieve that purpose.

The deterioration of the security and human rights
situation is also a source of great concern to us. Violence
in the Kasai region has soared to levels that we had
hoped never again to see in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. It is therefore pressing that the situation
be brought under control. France condemns the acts of
violence that we have seen in the region over the last
few months and looks forward to the outcome of the
joint inquiry of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and MONUSCO into violations and assaults on human
rights and humanitarian law in the region.

The cowardly murder of two United Nations experts
in that region underscores once again the deterioration
of the situation in the area. France calls for full light
to be shed on this very tragic event, so that those
responsible can be identified and stand trial for their
crimes. We once again underscore our full support for
the United Nations Group of Experts on the Democratic
Republic of Congo, whose members play a key role.

Turning finally to the situation in Burundi, here
we have to note that, regrettably, there has been no
noticeable improvement. As the Secretary-General
states in his report,

"The inter-Burundian dialogue, facilitated by
the East African Community, has yet to produce a
breakthrough". (S/2017/208, para. 14)

Despite the efforts of the Facilitator, Mr. Benjamin
Mkapa, which France welcomes, a genuine and
authentic commitment to this dialogue is still lacking.
Observers from the African Union have not yet been
deployed, nor have the police officers specified in
resolution 2303 (2016); on the contrary, the situation
seems to be getting worse by the day. I think that no one
could fail to be shocked by the images of the Video that
has been circulating in which young members of the
Imbonerakure militia call for rape and murder. These
images and the hate speech that goes with it conjure
up extremely painful memories in the Great Lakes
region and is a source of grave concern for France. Such
behaviour cannot be tolerated. The leadership of the
Conseil national pour la defense de la democratic-Forces
pour la defense de la democratie has condemned these
acts, and France hopes that appropriate measures will
be taken to put a definitive end to such behaviour and
that the perpetrators of human rights violations in the
country will be prosecuted and sentenced.

Burundi could, with the restoration of peace and
security, play a stabilizing role on the continent, as it
was able to do in the past by sending peacekeepers to
the Central African Republic and Somalia. For that to
happen, the resolutions of the Security Council must be
implemented and peaceful relationships restored with
the United Nations agencies that have been supporting
Burundi for 20 years towards a return to peace. The
resumption of cooperation with the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights would be a positive
step along these lines.

This will require finding a political solution to
the current crisis through inclusive, open and honest
dialogue by way of the mediation efforts of the East
African Community (EAC) and full respect for the
Arusha agreement. Only such a dialogue, strengthened
by a firm rejection of violence and by guaranteeing the
security and fundamental rights of all Burundians, will
can allow Burundi to find its way back to the path of
peace and stability.

France hopes that the EAC Summit at the end
of April will be the first step in a positive process
and that the Government will honestly commit to
moving forward.

Our most deeply cherished wish as a close-knit
partner of the region and a permanent member of the
Security Council is to see Burundi pursue the cause
of peace and lasting stability so as to finally benefit
from its wealth in natural resources and be able to focus
on development and the well-being of people. This
will require a strengthening of political stability and
the democratic legitimacy of institutions, as well as a
fight against impunity. This is not a given, and France
is concerned. We hope that political leaders will meet
the challenges and put the process back on track. It is
the responsibility of the Security Council to support
them in this difficult task so as to ensure that years of
tremendous investment on the part of the international
community are not jeopardized and that the peoples of
the region do not suffer as a result.

