Mr. Maquieira (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first like to express my gratitude for the briefing
given to us by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Terje Roed-Larsen, who has
provided us with a detailed and sobering description of
the situation in the region.

Following the official presentation by the Quartet
of its new peace proposal to resolve a conflict that has
confronted Palestinians and Israelis for generations -
known as the road map - there arose in both the
region and the international community the hope that,
through the appointment of the first Palestinian Prime
Minister with executive powers such as the ones held
by Mr. Abbas had, it might be possible - this time -
for the Palestinian National Authority to carry out the
commitments it undertook, thereby making it possible
to take decisive steps towards peace in the region.

The Government of Chile notes with deep
concern that the road map has encountered serious

setbacks - for which both parties are responsible -
that have led it to the point of stagnation and resolutely
placed it on the path of destruction and senseless death.
We therefore condemn the demolition of homes, the
continuing construction of the wall of separation on
Palestinian territory that is dividing entire
communities, the disproportionate use of force and
targeted assassinations by the Israeli Government. The
Government of the Palestinian National Authority has
failed to quell domestic conflicts and has been remiss
in exerting its authority and dismantling terrorist
groups. The conflict has no military solution, and
narrow-mindedness and the lack of humanity will not
alter the situation.

The international community has also recently
become aware of the decision in principle by the Israeli
Government to expel President Arafat. For the
Government of Chile, that is a very grave
announcement that should be categorically rejected.
President Arafat is a democratic official who was
legitimately elected by the Palestinian people. It is
therefore solely up to the Palestinians to pronounce
themselves as to their future. We launch an appeal that
that decision, which could definitively end the slim
hopes that still remain for the implementation of the
road map and which could lead to the further expansion
of violence in the region and other unforeseeable
consequences, not be implemented.

We must also express in the clearest terms our
condemnation for the terrorists acts committed by
radical groups against Israeli civilians. Stopping and
disbanding such terrorist groups would contribute to
re-establishing the necessary environment to build
confidence between the parties. Any other effort will
be doomed to failure.

At the same time, the Israeli Government must
end the targeted killing of Palestinians, which has led
to the exacerbation of hatred and many innocent
civilian victims. It must also stop building the
separation wall, lift the measures that have resulted in a
deterioration of the living conditions of Palestinians
and end its settlement policy.

The international community has observed with
interest the formation of the new Palestinian
Government and the real powers it will have to fulfil its
tasks, especially with regard to security. Likewise, we
appeal to the Government of Israel to make every effort
to implement the steps necessary to strengthen the
work of the new Prime Minister and to assist him in his
work. Otherwise, it will be very difficult for a
Palestinian Prime Minister to contain extremist
elements or gain the enthusiasm of moderates.

In closing, responsibility for reaching a peace
agreement between Israelis and Palestinians falls
essentially on the authorities of both peoples. It is up to
the international community to help the parties and to
support them in their efforts towards a peace process.

However, if the parties directly involved do not
demonstrate the genuine political will to recreate a
scenario allowing the peace process to be resumed, the
international community should make every effort to
urge them back onto the road of dialogue. We therefore
urge the Quartet to take initiatives leading towards the
restoration of the road map.

