Mr. Yaacobi (Israel): I believe that this is a very
difficult day for all of us.

We regret the loss of life among innocent people who
were unconnected to those fanatic terrorists and to those
hostile activities. As indicated by the spokesman of the
United Nations, the tragedy that occurred today was caused
because the Hezbollah launched Katyusha rockets at Israel
from locations a short distance away from the United
Nations position where innocent civilians had taken shelter.

We know that the Hezbollah have been cynically using
civilians as a shield. Today the head of the Hezbollah
political office admitted this himself. Now they are doing
the same with United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) units, not for the first time. Unfortunately, this is
how this tragedy happened today.

We send our sincere condolences to the families, and
our hopes and wishes for a quick recovery to the wounded
civilians and UNIFlL soldiers.

Unfortunately, we have not heard a word of
condemnation from some of the Members of the Security
Council who spoke tonight of those who initiated those
hostilities. Three hundred Katyusha rockets were launched
in the last few days targeting civilians in Israel. Many
were injured, thousands left their homes and many are still
living in shelters.

Prime Minister Peres announced today that we accept
President Clinton's initiative to reach a cease-fire, to be
implemented as soon as the other party agrees to implement
it as well. We hope that the mission of United States
Secretary of State Christopher to our region will bear fruit
immediately, and that a cease-fire will be achieved without
delay. We appreciate the efforts by the European Union and
France in this respect as well. This, we hope, will put an
end to the situation which forced Israel to retaliate and to
use its right of self-defence against those who attacked
innocent civilians - men, women and children - in many
Villages and towns throughout northern Israel. This is
necessary to clear the way for the resumption of the peace
process in the Middle East.

We believe that there is a coalition for peace which
represents the majority of the people in the Middle East
who share the desire for peace. We must join forces
against militant fanatic terrorists everywhere - in
Lebanon as well as in Egypt. We must overcome these
immediate hardships, clear the way and continue with the
peace process.

