Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I
congratulate Sweden on its presidency and I thank the
Russian delegation for its leadership in June. I want to
thank the Prime Minister of Sweden for convening this
very important debate. I thank Ms. Fore and Ms. Gamba
for their leadership. Ms. Londono's story is inspiring.
I welcome her to the club of mothers. She will never
know again what it is like not to worry. She was the
right voice at the right time to help us with this issu,e
and I thank her.

It has been more than two decades since the
Security Council established the mandate for children
and armed conflict. In that time, one generation has
grown up and an entirely new generation has come into
this world. More than 60 per cent of people in conflict-
affected countries are under the age of 25. That means
that in those places there is an entire generation of kids
who have lived in conflict their entire lives. Those are
the same kids who will some day be in charge of their
countries. Some ofthem will be the same people making
future decisions about peace and security, so we need
to care about how the next generation is growing up.

Last fall, I visited with families displaced by
violence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where
we know the armed forces are continuing to coordinate
with groups that recruit child soldiers and sexually
exploit boys and girls. Knowing this, I sat down and
talked to Congolese women to hear about their lives. I
looked into their eyes, I held their hands and I met their
children. Sadly, their stories were all the same: they
were overwhelmed, heartbroken and suffering.
I met one women, Angelique, who was the mother
of seven children. She was raped on two different
occasions during violent attacks, and because she had
trouble coping with the trauma, her husband left her to
take care of her children alone. As a mother myself, I
wanted to understand how she copes and what she tells
her children in the midst of so much pain. Her answer
has haunted me since. She tells her children to stay
with her in the camp and suffer together as a family.
She tells her sons not to leave the camp because they
would be abducted and forced into fighting. She tells
her daughters not to leave the camp because they would
be raped. Her children have no home, no school, no
choices and no hope for the future.

When I asked Angelique and other women in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and South Sudan
what they wanted most, their answer surprised me. It
was not better living conditions, more food or material
things. It was for their children to be able to go to
school to get an education. They did not want their kids
to be bored, to become vulnerable to violence and to get
swept up into the endless cycle of conflict. They wanted
their kids to be in school and have the opportunity to
live a better life.

It is imperative that we listen to these mothers.
Educating children who have fled from violence is an
investment in the future stability of a country. If we
fail, these children will grow up to be uneducated,
unskilled and resentful. They will be prime targets for
recruitment by extremists and armed groups, and the
cycle will continue. If we do not do something about
the way these kids are being educated in refugee and
internally displaced person camps, we might be dealing
with them as adults on the battlefield. Education is
both a way to recover from conflict and prevent it in
the future.

The United States is a proud leader in providing
resources for education, workforce training and
psychosocial support to more than 50.2 million children
and youth in 51 countries, including 11.8 million
children in crisis and conflict environments. In
Mali, we are working with the Government to enrol
more than 5,100 children and youth in an accelerated
education programme. We are partnering with local
non-governmental organizations to provide books,
desks and learning supplies and increase parental
involvement in their children's education. In Jordan, we
are helping the Government cope with the mass influx
of Syrian refugees. The United States has committed
$230 million to build 2,000 new classrooms and
renovate 250 schools.

The United States is not working alone. Other
countries have joined us in supporting new and
innovative mechanisms, like Education Cannot Wait.
Managed by UNICEF, that is the first global fund
dedicated to education in humanitarian emergencies
and protracted crises.

But putting children behind a desk in a classroom
only goes so far. Children cannot be expected to focus
and learn after they have experienced so much pain and
violence. Children who have escaped or were released
by armed groups in places like South Sudan and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo live with even
deeper wounds from the unspeakable acts they were
forced to do.

The Security Council must hold Governments
accountable for how they treat children both during
and after active conflicts. They cannot neglect the
unseen damage done to children's hearts and minds.
To create sustainable peace, stabilization plans must
prioritize basic education and psychosocial support for
all victims - both boys and girls - including children
born from sexual violence.

Childhood is short. Time is not on the side of child
victims in conflict. The United States welcomes this
discussion. We support the adoption of resolution 2427
(2018), and we urge our colleagues to do more to save
new generations from being lost to the pain and trauma
of armed conflict. Living through violence and conflict
should not determine a child's future. Every child
deserves the opportunity to flourish.

