Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Victor Da Silva Angelo,
for his very detailed and comprehensive briefing. The
situation in Chad and the Central African Republic
continues to pose many challenges for the Security
Council and for the United Nations as a whole. I should
like to comment briefly on some of them.

First, it is important to complete the deployment
of the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) and to ensure the
proper functioning of the Detachement integre de
securite (DIS). Thus far, the transition from the
European Union-led military force to MINURCAT has
been proceeding fairly smoothly, thanks in particular to
the progressive nature of the withdrawal of the
European contingents, the efforts of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the efforts on the ground
to ensure good coordination among all the parties.
However, as Mr. Angelo said, it is essential that
MINURCAT's deployment accelerate and be
completed. To that end, we call on all States to confirm
their commitments or undertake new ones.

For its part, France has announced that it will
maintain a logistics battalion in addition to its support
detachment for the Togolese battalion in Birao and the
more general support provided through Operation
Epervier. It is also essential that the United Nations
respect the commitments undertaken with Chad
concerning the time frame for rebuilding airport
infrastructure, as well as the commitments undertaken
with the European Union.

With regard to the Detachement integre de
securite, we are pleased that its full deployment has
been possible, that it is providing security in 12 refugee
camps and in certain towns in eastern Chad and that it
has been providing escorts for many humanitarian

convoys - according to the report of the Secretary-
General before us (S/2009/359), 2,600 between October
2008 and May 2009. However, we are concerned by
certain disciplinary problems regarding the conduct of
several DIS personnel, about which we should be
vigilant.

In order to ensure the best possible functioning of
the DIS, it is also important that there be the best
possible coordination and cooperation between it and
MINURCAT and, in particular, that MINURCAT
provide the necessary logistical support to the DIS.
Good synergy between those two components is
essential not only so that the DIS can carry out its
mission, but also for the credibility of the United
Nations as a whole, in particular in the eyes of the
Chadian authorities.

The second challenge on which I would like to
briefly comment is the protection of populations and
humanitarian workers in a security context that remains
very uncertain. As indicated in the report of the
Secretary-General, the security environment in Chad
and the Central African Republic remains tense.

First, the tension characterizing the relations
between Chad and the Sudan is very worrisome. We
call on both countries to honour their commitments and
to refrain from any provocation and any action that
could lead to an escalation. In particular, all violations
of territorial space and all support for rebel groups
must cease.

Moreover, greater efforts must be made to combat
banditry in Chad and the Central African Republic.
Attacks against humanitarian personnel remain very
numerous. The figures in the Secretary-General's
report on this are very worrying. I reiterate that 150
attacks have been reported in five months, and I would
also recall that members of the DIS are also being
attacked, as shown by the deaths of three of them, in
April, May and June respectively.

In the Central African Republic, the increase in
ethnic tension has also led to increased insecurity. We
welcome the way in which MINURCAT is carrying out
its mandate, and in particular its assistance to
humanitarian workers during the 6 June and 21 June
attacks. We encourage MINURCAT, in collaboration
with the Chadian authorities, to continue its activities
to end human rights violations and, in particular, to end
the recruitment of child soldiers by armed groups, as
well as sexual Violence.

Finally, the third challenge: There is a need to
continue to encourage the various parties to participate
in the political process in good faith. First and
foremost, it is essential that Chad and the Sudan rejoin
the Dakar process and resolve their problems as
neighbours.

With respect to the internal political process in
Chad, we welcome the progress made in implementing
the 13 August 2007 agreement, in particular thanks to
the finalization of the electoral code, the establishment
of a National Independent Electoral Commission and
the adoption of a law on the status of the opposition
and on political parties. The launch of the census is an
essential step in preparing for elections. It is a
noteworthy development, and we hope that this
positive momentum will continue.

In the Central African Republic also, it is
essential that the peace process continue. In particular,
I should like to mention the importance of continuing
the process of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration.

In conclusion, I should like once again to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and to pay tribute to his work and that of his team and
to welcome the strategic work plan set out in the
Secretary-General's report, which we regard as
particularly suited to the objectives and the situation.

