Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium): I deliver
this statement on behalf of the three co-penholders,
Germany, Kuwait and Belgium. I would like first to
thank Ms. Ursula Mueller for her valuable briefing. We
would also like to thank the humanitarian workers in the
field for their tireless efforts to alleviate the suffering
of the Syrian people, in particular in the currently very
challenging environment around Idlib.

We, the penholders, have five asks today.

First, all parties should abide by their obligations
under international humanitarian law, including the
protection of civilians and civilian objects.

Secondly, the parties should recommit fully to
the ceasefire arrangements of the Russian-Turkish
memorandum signed on 17 September 2018.

Thirdly, the United Nations and its partners should
have safe, unimpeded and sustained humanitarian
access to people in need, be it in Idlib, Al-Hol, Rukban
or anywhere else, including through the use of the
cross-border mechanism as mandated by resolution
2449 (2018).

Fourthly, any return of refugees must be safe,
voluntary and dignified, and continued monitoring of
returnees should take place to ensure their protection.

Fifthly, those who have committed violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law must
be held accountable.

The humanitarian co-penholders have called for two
meetings on Idlib in the past three weeks. Once again,
we cannot but start this intervention by expressing
our deep concern about the situation in north-western
Syria, where a military campaign continues through
indiscriminate and relentless aerial bombardment and
shelling, including the use of barrel bombs. This has
caused the deaths of innocent civilians, destruction
through targeted attacks on numerous de-conflicted
hospitals and schools, the displacement of 270,000
civilians, and despair. One million children live in this
area. Many of those fleeing have been displaced several
times before. These people are the most vulnerable to
any military action. This use of force is incredibly cruel
and completely unacceptable.
As we mentioned last week, we acknowledge the
considerable presence of members of United Nations-
designated terrorist groups in Idlib and condemn their
violent attacks. But the fight against terrorism cannot
justify indiscriminate attacks on civilians and civilian
infrastructure. Counter-terrorism operations do not
override the responsibility of parties to protect civilians
or their obligations under international humanitarian
law, as well as resolutions 2286 (2016) and 2427 (2018).
We have also learned of reports of an attack on a press
crew last week, and we wish to recall that resolution
2222 (2015) condemns all violations and abuses
committed againstjournalists, media professionals and
associated personnel in situations of armed conflict,
and calls upon all parties to armed conflict to bring an
end to such practices.

We urge the parties to recommit fully to the
ceasefire arrangements of the Russian-Turkish
memorandum, signed on 17 September 2018, and urge
the Astana guarantors to ensure that de-escalation takes
place. We consider the Turkish-Russian working group
to be a tool that can swiftly de-escalate the situation.
Finally, we reiterate our call for a nation-wide cessation
ofhostilities, in accordance with resolution 2401 (2018).

Our concern also regards the situation in Al-Hol
camp. While humanitarian partners have been able
to scale up the camp's infrastructure, it remains
overcrowded, with a population of more than 73,000
persons, of whom over 90 per cent are women and
children who face particular protection challenges.
The United Nations and its partners must be able to
provide needs-based humanitarian assistance to all its
inhabitants without delay.

The situation of over 28,000 people in Rukban
remains dramatic. While a lasting solution is needed,
we continue to advocate for a much-needed third
humanitarian convoy. Camp inhabitants should be able
to make the choice whether or not to leave the camp in
a voluntary, safe, dignified and well-informed manner.
The United Nations should have regular and continued
access to the internally displaced persons and returnees
at every stage, including at their final destination.

No lasting peace in Syria will be possible
without justice and accountability. The International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Those Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011 has become a central repository ofinformation and
evidence of the crimes committed in Syria and therefore
has a crucial role to play in achieving accountability
and justice. Several countries have brought criminal
cases to their national courts, making use of the proof
gathered by the Mechanism.

Lastly, we support Mr. Pedersen, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Syria, in his efforts to reach
a political solution in Syria on the basis of resolution
2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique of 2012
(S/2012/522, annex).

