Mr. Bamba (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): As
the members of the Security Council are aware, Cote
d'Ivoire is emerging from a violent post-electoral crisis
that killed 3,000 people, displaced 1 million people
internally, and led 300,000 refugees to flee to
neighbouring countries. It also led to the deterioration
of much economic and institutional infrastructure, in
particular prisons and courts.

The Government of Cote d'Ivoire has been
striving for some two months for a swift return to
normalcy so as to create conditions conducive to the
effective implementation of President Ouattara's
programme, on the basis of which the people of Cote
d'Ivoire voted for him overwhelmingly in the most fair,
transparent and free democratic election ever held in
my country.

It is in that context that my delegation welcomes
the unanimous adoption by the Security Council of
resolution 2000 (2011), extending the mandate of the
United Nations Operation in C6te d'Ivoire (UNOCI)
and Operation Licorne for 12 months, until 31 July
2012. In so doing, the Security Council has
demonstrated its support for democracy in Cote
d'Ivoire and made manifest the commitment of the
international community to supporting Cote d'Ivoire in
its recovery and stabilization following the crisis.

There are many challenges ahead, including
above all the issue of security, and they are all
pressing. At the same time, much progress has been
made. We therefore welcome the timely adoption of
resolution 2000 (2011), which will help us to
accelerate the normalization process under way.

The resolution adopted today is historic because
it enshrines the Victory of the will of the people of Cote
d'Ivoire. As you noted, Sir, it is a symbolic resolution.
It is not by chance that the Council adopted both
resolutions 1000 (1995) and 2000 (2011) under a
German presidency. It is a round number, symbolizing
a new beginning filled with promise for a radiant future
of peace and prosperity for Cote d'Ivoire.

More specifically, resolution 2000 (2011)
addresses the progress made on the ground by the
Ivorian authorities. It commends the initiatives of the
11-43229

President of Cote d'Ivoire to stabilize the country in
the areas of security, assistance to internally displaced
persons, the promotion of reconciliation and the
rehabilitation of infrastructure. It takes note of the
establishment of the Forces republicaines de Cote
d'Ivoire, replacing the former Forces de securite et de
defense de Cote d'Ivoire. It stresses the importance of
future legislative elections and the full restoration of
constitutional order. The resolution maintains the
robust deterrent force of UNOCI, with a troop ceiling
of 9,792 personnel on the ground, as well as
reinforcements.

It is important to note that the resolution upholds
the certification of the legislative elections, taking the
necessary adaptations into account. It commends the
establishment of the Dialogue, Truth and
Reconciliation Commission, and attaches particular
importance to the protection of civilians and respect for
human rights in C6te d'Ivoire. It reaffirms the
leadership of the Government of C6te d'Ivoire in the
implementation of security sector reform, and
addresses the need for a new disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme tailored to
the new circumstances, highlighting both objective and
personal criteria.
11-43229

The resolution addresses the recommendations of
the Human Rights Council in Geneva and refers to the
International Criminal Court, as sought by President
Ouattara, who is here at United Nations Headquarters
in New York. He has just had a very important and
fruitful meeting with the Secretary-General and a
working meeting with the President of the General
Assembly, at which he took the opportunity to reiterate
C6te d'Ivoire's commitment to adhering to the noble
ideals of the United Nations Charter.

The return of peace to Cote d'Ivoire is a vibrant
reality in the daily lives of the people of Cote d'Ivoire.
That peace should be strengthened and consolidated so
that the country can recover its former prosperity and
its natural place as a nexus of political stability and
economic growth in the West African subregion. To
that end, progress must be further extended and
accelerated. My delegation believes that the renewal of
the UNOCI and Operation Licorne mandates will
contribute decisively to that end.

