Mr. Radomski (Poland): Poland aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union. I would like to add a few comments in my
national capacity.

At the outset, I congratulate New Zealand on its
excellent initiative to devote this open debate to the
specific peace and security challenges faced by the
small island developing States (SIDS) and to consider
how the United Nations system can best respond to
them. Today's important debate allows us to deepen
the discussion on many issues raised during the
Arria Formula meeting on climate change as a threat
multiplier, which was organized last month by Malaysia
and Spain.

The SIDS face a range of peace and security
challenges. Their unique and particular vulnerabilities
have been widely acknowledged, for instance at
the Third International Conference on Small Island
Developing States, which took place in Samoa last
September. Once again, we thank Samoa for hosting
that important conference.

The excellent concept note (S/2015/543, annex)
prepared by New Zealand for today's debate very
rightly focuses on four main security challenges faced
by SIDS: transnational crime and piracy, the illicit
exploitation of natural resources, climate change and
development. While all of them deserve our attention, I
will focus on climate change, and comment briefly on
the illicit exploitation of natural resources. Our debate
shows how important climate-related challenges are.
Owing simply to the rising sea levels the mere existence
of small island developing States is threatened.

Poland acknowledges the need for all States to be
engaged in the deepened discussion on the influence
of climate change on global security. The effectiveness
of the new climate regime will have a profound effect
on our ability to prevent or mitigate already existing
threats. In a globalized and interconnected world, that
will impact all our countries.

Furthermore, Poland supports the idea of discussing
climate and security issues in the forum of the Security
Council, while pursuing agreement on the shape of the
new, global climate-protection regime at the level of
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change. Those two forums can work concurrently,
using their respective resources and raising awareness
of the problem.

Poland sees the twenty-first session of the
Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, known as
the Paris Climate Change Conference, as an excellent
occasion to draw the attention of both leaders and civil
society to climate change as a threat multiplier for the
global community. Apart from developing a broad
research and international response system, we also
need to work on concrete solutions to benefit the SIDS.
Such solutions should include the loss and damage
mechanism agreed at the 2013 United Nations Climate
Change Conference held in Warsaw and other practical
methods for supporting the present and future well-
being of the most vulnerable nations. e.g. by securing
a separate channel for the financing of SIDS-related
actions through the Green Climate Fund.

There is little time to be lost in pondering the
modalities for action, and we count on the cooperation
of all parties in seeking durable solutions to the
problem. The challenges to SIDS need to be approached
in a more integrated manner. Complementarity of
action across different sectors is essential for ensuring
comprehensive risk management. It is very important
that the legal frameworks be strengthened so as to be
able to respond to and promote resilient development
at the local level. The SIDS can deal effectively with
climate change challenges and natural disasters only if
they have a detailed overview of all of the risks and how
those risks relate to their vulnerabilities.

Finally, I would like to draw the Council's attention
to the challenge of diminishing natural resources. In
that context, unreported and unregulated fishing is one
of the most serious problems. Although we come from
different parts of the world, we should understand that
it is in our common interest to do more when it comes
to fighting that threat. Almost a month ago, on 1 July,
Poland joined with, inter alia, the Commonwealth of
the Bahamas and the Republic of Palau to organize here
at the United Nations a high-level symposium entitled
"One ocean - Regenerating Fish Stocks: Achieving
Sustainable Development Goal 14". The conclusion
was clear: healthy, resilient and productive oceans
contribute to poverty eradication, sustained economic
growth, food security and the creation of sustainable
livelihoods and decent work. Our debate today fully
confirms the importance of that message.

