Mr. Alzate (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first of all like in to particularly thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting, as well to
express my gratitude for the interesting briefing by
Ambassador Yury Fedotov, Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC).

Transnational organized crime in its various
forms has a global dimension. It generates billions of
dollars that give rise to violence and corruption,
affecting the entire international community.
Combating it requires the allocation of enormous
human and financial resources that otherwise could be
invested in development and the well-being of the
population.

According to the information provided by the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, most flows
stemming from transnational organized crime occur
between continents. With regard to human trafficking,
the number of nationalities of the victims found in
Europe has increased, while in the trafficking in
migrants the greatest flows are the movement of
workers from Latin America to North America and
from Africa to Europe. UNODC estimates indicate that
human trafficking in Europe generates $3 billion a
year, while illicit trafficking in migrants from Latin
America to North America produces some $7 billion.

For its part, illicit trafficking in small arms and
light weapons occurs in all regions of the world, but it
is concentrated primarily in areas affected by armed
conflict, organized crime and widespread violence.
Although the value of the illicit trade is a small
fraction of the legal trade - approximately
$53 million per year - it has an incalculable toll on
human lives throughout the world.

That backdrop underscores the need to adopt
effective measures and mechanisms in order to
strengthen international cooperation and coordination
among States against transnational organized crime.
The adoption of the Palermo Convention was a great
step forward that highlighted States' acknowledgement
of the severity of the threats posed by crime. That
important instrument was innovative in the juridical
sphere, not only in codifying crimes such as
participation in an organized criminal group and the
obstruction of justice, but also in defining the features
of money laundering and its related crimes. More
relevant, the Convention established international
cooperation as the main goal and placed particular
importance on mutual assistance in the criminal sphere,
such as in the area of extradition.

With regard to trafficking in illicit drugs, which is
another form of organized crime, the international
community has an international legislative framework
in place that has been consistently strengthened since
the second half of the past century. In addition to those
instruments, we must effectively apply shared
responsibility as a guiding principle in the
comprehensive and balanced fight against the global
problem of drugs in all its aspects through international
cooperation.

My delegation is concerned about the attitude of
some in disregarding the agreements reached within
the General Assembly on the actual definition of the
global problem of drugs as a general concept that
includes aspects linked to the supply of illicit drugs,
both natural and synthetic, trafficking in their
precursors, demand and related crimes. That trend
represents a backward step in the commitment adopted
in 1998 by heads of State and Government at the
General Assembly, and reaffirmed during the high-
level segment of the 522nd session of the Commission
on Narcotic Drugs in 2009.

The relationship among the various forms of
organized crime, including illicit trafficking in drugs
and their precursors, money laundering, the illicit
traffic in arms and corruption, is not a new
phenomenon. However, those links require the
international community to tackle all such involvement
and all such criminal activity. With that same resolve,
we can overcome it.

Moreover, the international legal framework for
combating organized crime also includes very
important instruments, such as the United Nations
Convention against Corruption. In that regard, the
Organization also needs a binding instrument to
develop mechanisms to improve monitoring of the
trade in small arms and light weapons, explosives,
related materials and munitions, and their marking and
tracing, and to prevent their transfer to armed non-State
actors.

Bearing in mind the fact that the Secretary-
General outlined in his report (S/201l/255) that the
trade in small arms is not well regulated and is the least
transparent of all the arms systems, it is essential that
we conclude negotiations on the arms trade treaty and
provide Member States with the tools to tackle this
crime, whose destructive effects persist on all
continents.

The scope and complexity of the phenomenon of
organized crime require the comprehensive and
coordinated action of the United Nations system and
the international community. We therefore need to
continue to favour the General Assembly as the forum
for discussion and consensus building in order to tackle
all its aspects and challenges.

As part of that consistent response, in the context
of the issues under its consideration, the Security
Council plays an important role in supporting the
strengthening of the rule of law, in particular criminal
justice systems, in order to address organized crime,
which finds fertile ground in conflict and post-conflict
situations and which can threaten the stability of States
undergoing reconstruction. It is also vital to ensure
national capacity-building in order to guarantee
continuity in the functioning of judicial systems during
the transition and peace-building processes.

In that regard, in order to seek more consistent
and coordinated responses, we agree with Mr. Fedotov
that it is particularly important for the Security Council
to complement and contribute to the important work
being done by other United Nations bodies, since the
increase in organized crime can jeopardize progress in
stability, governance and institution-building in the
situations under the Council's consideration.

In providing assistance to a country so that it can
emerge from conflict once and for all, we must take a
broad and comprehensive approach that includes, as an
essential element of crime prevention strategies,
measures to generate opportunities for sustainable
economic development so that people will turn away
from crime. This requires international cooperation.

We are convinced that the efforts of a single State
are not enough to combat such crimes and their
multidimensional and transnational nature. Different
kinds of crime cannot be addressed with isolated
efforts. We need strategic alliances so that we can
move forward together to achieve more secure
societies. The goal of the international community
must be the elimination of all forms of organized crime
through international cooperation.

For its part, Colombia reiterates its determination
to enhance measures for bilateral, regional and
multilateral cooperation that increase the effectiveness
of our efforts to confront the dynamic nature of this
global challenge.

