Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): It is a
pleasure for me to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I would also like to thank
Mr. Ghassan Salame, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, for his important briefing,
wherein he underscored the intensive efforts being
undertaken to engage in dialogue with all Libyan
stakeholders so as to bring together the viewpoints
of the political parties. We wish him every success in
this undertaking.
We would also like to thank Ms. Irina Schoulgin
Nyoni, Deputy Permanent Representative of Sweden,
for her briefing, which covered recent developments
with regard to the sanctions imposed against Libya.
I also thank Ms. Sharief, who spoke about Libyan
civil society, especially with regard to the situation of
women and young people. I reiterate the commitment
of the Government of National Accord to support the
road map, to resolve the Libyan crisis and to achieve
security and stability in Libya.

Last December marked the second anniversary
of the Libyan Political Agreement, which remains
the sole framework for the political process in Libya,
as reaffirmed by the international community in its
statements and resolutions - the most recent of which
was adopted in 2017 (S/PRST/2017/26). Despite the
lack of means, the challenges of recent years have led
us to work tirelessly to surmount the obstacles that have
emerged at all levels, which continue to weigh heavily
on the daily lives of the Libyan people.

Members should be aware that positive developments
have taken place, specifically at the security level in
combating terrorism, as well as the with regard to
Government oversight of State institutions. However,
a number of commitments have not been met due
to political divisions and the existence of parallel
institutions, despite the fact that the international
community has confirmed their illegal nature and
called for such entities to not be cooperated with.
Certain States nevertheless continue to cooperate with
the parallel governments - contrary to the Council's
relevant international and regional resolutions. We
once again call upon all Libyan stakeholders to allow
national interests to prevail over narrow ones, to put
an end to the deteriorating situation in the country and
to work together to build a strong, robust, civil and
democratic State.

Events in Libya in recent have showed that there is no
military solution to the Libyan crisis. The only solution
is a comprehensive, consensus-based political solution
that brings together all stakeholders participating in
political dialogue, without any exception.

With regard to the United Nations road map,
we highlight the forthcoming general elections in
Libya - an initiative broadly supported by the
Libyan people. The number of voting registrations has
increased in various regions in Libya. Most political
leaders have voiced their support for that increase,
and the Government of National Accord has lent its
support for the High National Electoral Commission to
facilitate the electoral process.

Against that backdrop, all positive indicators are
rekindling hope for the success of the process. We call
upon the Libyan Parliament to expedite the adoption
of an electoral law. We will have to take into account
numerous challenges, including encouraging the Libyan
people to participate in the elections, ensure that all
parties accept the the outcome and guarantee a safe and
conducive environment for the holding of the elections,
to take place under robust United Nations oversight and
with the participation of regional organizations. That
will ensure the integrity of the elections and prevent
any flaws that could lead to future disputes. With
respect to the participation of civil society, women
and young people in the political process, and finding
solutions for the issues plaguing the Libyan people,
our Government is working with civil society through
Libyan non-governmental organizations in all regions
of Libya to establish dialogue and address the many
concerns of the Libyan people.

Iturn now to the cargo vessel Andromeda, which was
seized by the Greek Coast Guard en route from Turkey
to the city of Misrata in Libya. According to the Greek
authorities, it contained tons of dangerous materials
used to manufacture explosives. The Government
of National Accord reiterates its condemnation of
all acts that threaten the security of the State and its
citizens, and reaffirms its commitment to international
resolutions related to the arms embargo imposed
against Libya. It hopes that the Greek and Turkish
Governments will convey to it the results of their
investigations into these matters, and calls upon the
Panel of Experts of the committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011) to launch investigations
in order to shed light on the circumstances. The
Government of National Accord reiterates its rejection
and condemnation of all violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law, and the assassinations
that take place in Libya, regardless of the perpetrators.
It reaffirms that it stands strongly against whoever tries
to destabilize the security and stability situation and
endanger the lives of civilians in Libya.

The Government of National Accord condemns all
violations targeting refugees crossing Libyan territory
in an illegal manner. It is monitoring the conditions
endured by illegal migrants in detention centres so as
to ensure that they are provided with adequate services
in secure and safe conditions, in order to establish
conditions conducive to their repatriation in cooperation
with the United Nations Support Mission in Libya and
the International Organization for Migration.

With respect to allegations of human trafficking,
our Government rejects such criminal acts, be they in
Libya or elsewhere in the world. Such acts are against
the traditions of the Libyan people, the values of the
Muslim religion, applicable Libyan law and international
laws and norms. The Prosecutor-General of Libya has
launched an investigation into these allegations so as
to ensure accountability where proof is provided. We
welcome the participation of States and international
and regional organizations seeking to assist the
investigation into these allegations. In that regard, we
commend the efforts of the United Nations, the African
Union, the European Union and neighbouring States to
resolve the question of illegal refugees in Libya and to
ensure their repatriation.

We reiterate our call on the Security Council to find
adequate means to protect frozen Libyan assets through
the better management of said assets and to assist the
Government in stanching the losses accruing from their
status. Such losses are considerable because the Libyan
State is prohibited from managing them appropriately.
Foreign banks are imposing negative, high-interest
rates on Libya's frozen assets, which has eroded our
capital and assets alike. This grave situation - as we
have repeatedly said - has entailed losses and waste in
Libya's frozen funds, which are intended for the Libyan
people and future generations.

Pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), it is important
that these assets be protected and not used in any way
against the interests of the Libyan State. However, the
present situation runs counter to that aim and is leading
to the loss of assets. We have asked not for the freeze
to be lifted, but for a solution to be found that would
manage and protect the funds and investments while
keeping them frozen.

In conclusion, the Libyan people have been badly
affected by the deterioration of their living standards
at all levels, particularly at the economic level, due
to political divisions. We hope that the international
community will assist the Libyan people in restoring
stability and building a democratic State. Once again, I
wish Mr. Salame every success in his mission. We are
confident that his efforts will lead to better results.

The meeting rose at 12.25 pm.
