Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French): I
should like to thank you, Sir, for having organized this
special meeting on the Sudan - a matter at the very
heart of Gabon's concerns.

I should like to welcome the presence among us
of President Mbeki, Djibril Bassole, Ibrahim Gambari
and Haile Menkerios and, of course, to thank them for
their very enlightening briefings on the various aspects
of the crisis in the Sudan. The briefings were
particularly useful in presenting a holistic perspective
on the Sudanese crisis and in clearly illustrating
realities on the ground and the options under
consideration for supporting the peace process in the
Sudan. I welcome their ongoing efforts alongside the
United Nations and the African Union to help the
Sudanese people to return to the path to peace and
stability. I reiterate, of course, the support of Gabon for
their activities.

I appreciate the Ambassador of Lebanon's
reminder of the context in which the Council wished to
hold this meeting and the objectives envisaged for it. In
the light of the relevant information that the briefers
have just conveyed to us, three fundamental concerns
need to be raised: the coordination of the activities of
the international community with a view to achieving a
holistic approach; the organization of the referendum
in the best possible conditions; and the options under
consideration for effectively managing post-
referendum challenges.

In addressing the first of these points, Gabon
wishes to reaffirm its support for the peace process in
Darfur and Southern Sudan. The Darfur Peace
Agreement must be fully implemented. The Doha
agreements of February and March 2010, signed,
respectively, with the Justice and Equality Movement
and the Justice and Liberation Movement, should
encourage other rebel groups to join the peace process.
We encourage the Sudanese Government to continue
along this path. We call on those armed groups that
have not yet done so to join the peace process under
way in order to guarantee a lasting peace for the
populations continue to pay a heavy price.

We are particularly pleased with the evolution in
the discussions under way aimed at the conclusion of a
comprehensive peace agreement for Darfur. We
commend the commitment of the Sudanese
Government in this context. The Comprehensive Peace
Agreement in Southern Sudan must be implemented to
its full extent. Everything must be done to ensure that
the referendum of January 2011 takes place in the best
possible conditions and that its outcome, whichever
option is chosen, will be a stabilizing factor. We remain
convinced that the Comprehensive Peace Agreement is
an inclusive political tool essential to resolving the
crisis in Southern Sudan and achieving lasting peace in
the country.

We should like to reiterate our support for the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). We welcome the progress achieved
in the deployment of UNAMID and the efforts of the
contributing countries - Nepal, Sierra Leone, Burkina
Faso, Ethiopia and Tanzania - that have made these
results possible. We also welcome the efforts of the
Sudanese Government, whose cooperation has
facilitated this evolution towards a slightly more secure
and stable environment in Darfur. We reiterate our
support for the United Nations Mission in the Sudan,
whose efforts to protect the civilian population and to
secure humanitarian assistance play an effective role in
the peace process.

All these activities must be coordinated, and we
welcome the statements of various actors expressing
their total satisfaction with the cooperation of a number
of parties to ensure that the process achieves positive
results. We invite the United Nations, the African
Union and all the other actors of the international
community to maintain these coordination efforts and
to ensure that the action being carried out in the
context of the peace process is integrated and leads to
the establishment of lasting peace in Southern Sudan.

I shall now turn to my second point, the
organization of the referendum. Gabon is following the
process under way with the keenest attention, and
urges the United Nations, the Sudanese Government
and the Government of Southern Sudan to do all they
can to ensure that the referendum takes place in a
peaceful climate. We believe that the assistance of the
United Nations will be more than decisive, and in that
respect we firmly support the efforts being made by
Mr. Menkerios. We invite him to continue his
consultations with the African Union and the countries
of the region. We are convinced that the support of
countries of the region and of the African Union will
help to strengthen the credibility of the process.

I should like to draw the attention of Council
members to my third point, which relates to the post-
referendum challenges. I mention the various post-
referendum challenges with the aim of focusing the
actors involved in the peace processes in Southern
Sudan and in Darfur, as well as Council members, on
possible post-referendum scenarios and their long-term
implications.

The referendum, as we are all well aware,
presents us two options. The first is that Southern
Sudan would remain part of the Sudanese State - a
result that would consolidate the unifying approach
strongly advocated by the African Union, which
remains committed to the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Sudan. But it must also be born in mind
that, in that approach, the United Nations will continue
to play a role just as important as that it plays today.
But we will have to consider redefining the United
Nations role in helping to develop peaceful relations
between Khartoum and Juba in that context, and I
would invite the Council to consider that matter.
The second option is independence for Southern
Sudan, which poses very considerable challenges
including recognition of the new State, the
establishment of harmonious diplomatic relations with
Khartoum, demarcation of the North-South border,
wealth-sharing and the effects of this option on Darfur
and on eastern Sudan. All those challenges remind us
of the need to maintain the United Nations presence in
the Sudan so that it can play its important peacemaking
role. Beyond those challenges there is the future of the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan. If this option is
considered, the Mission's context could change, and
we must look at its mandate and role in that context.

In any event, I invite the Security Council and the
various actors, without prejudging the outcome of the
referendum, to bear in mind the need for an
international mechanism that could help in managing
all of those challenges, as well as the need for
strengthening close, peaceful relations between
Khartoum and Juba.

