We would like to thank the Russian Federation for convening today's debate. The Kingdom of the Netherlands fully aligns itself with the statement submitted by the delegation of Canada on behalf of 63 States members of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security (annex 27), and with the statement submitted by the Delegation of the European Union (annex 38) . Today we reflect on the progress made since the adoption, 20 years ago, of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security. This past month we were enlightened by many interesting events supporting the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda. Owing to the coronavirus disease, those events took place online. Although we could not meet each other in person, an inclusive space was created in which people from all over the world - from Governments, civil society, think tanks and academic institutions - participated, each one with a story to tell, with knowledge and experience to share. We will also cherish these dialogues in the years to come because this is how we should work together to uphold, improve and implement all pillars of the women and peace and security agenda in their entirety. We have made progress together, we have achieved results large and small and we have been able to change lives for the better, at least for some. But that is not enough. Only a fraction of peace agreements contain provisions on gender, and even when such agreements contain specific provisions on gender, implementation has proven difficult. Furthermore, in the Netherlands, a lot remains to be done when it comes to women's participation in politics, peace and security. Some 32 per cent of the members of Parliament in the Netherlands in 2020 are women. Female soldiers currently represent 10 per cent of the armed forces, and of 77 top military officials - those with the rank of general - only two are female. The report of the Secretary-General on women and peace and security (S/2020/946) has made it clear again that we as a global community have not been able to implement the women and peace and security agenda in a way that would rightfully change the lives of all women and girls. Gender inequality in itself is a driver of instability and conflict; it should therefore be addressed as a root cause of conflict. Women and girls in all their diversity need to be able to participate and get involved. They also have a right to live without fear and to tell their own stories of how they would like to be involved in achieving peace and contributing to the development and reconstruction of their own communities, their countries and beyond. We need to reinforce our efforts to keep the theme of women and peace and security on the political agenda, both nationally and internationally, in order to make a difference on the ground. Allow me to share some of our efforts, priorities and challenges, so that we can learn from each other and improve the way we work. With regard to policy development, planning and implementation, at the end of this year, the Kingdom of the Netherlands will adopt its fourth national action plan, focused on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) for the period 2021-2025. In prior national action plans, monitoring, evaluation and learning remained an area earmarked for improvement. In our upcoming plan, we will monitor and evaluate our efforts better, using a robust monitoring, evaluation and learning framework with clear links to internationally agreed indicators. Our new plan will also include a national focus. The Dutch Government will need to address the specific needs of migrant and refugee women and girls. Gender mainstreaming is also key in the fourth national action plan, with a view to strengthening gender expertise and using gender-sensitive conflict analysis for strategic planning and the allocation of resources and programmes. Lastly, as in previous national action plans, close cooperation between Government institutions and civil society remains at the heart of the Dutch approach to women and peace and security. As a key priority in our policy in this area, the Kingdom of the Netherlands is committed to remaining an international advocate for women's rights and gender equality, with special attention paid to sexual and reproductive health and rights, women's participation and leadership in peace processes and ensuring a gender perspective in all peace and security policies. In our efforts to prevent and respond to sexual violence in conflict, the survivor- centred approach remains a guiding principle, including in our efforts with regard to sexual and reproductive health, mental health and psychosocial support, and access to justice. Emerging global crises, such as the climate crisis and the coronavirus disease pandemic, have serious and negative impacts on the progress made with respect to gender equality and the position of women and girls. The latter bear the brunt of socioeconomic stress and burdens of care, and they face increased violence in the home. In a changing global context, local knowledge and resilience, including the role of local women's organizations - localization - are essential. In conclusion, the challenge for us now is to make explicit use of the transformative potential after crises and conflict and build back better, with a specific focus on women's rights organizations and movement-building.
