Ms. Mogobe (Botswana): I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on Malaysia's
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council,
and to offer our continued support for the Council's
work.

Botswana aligns itself with the statement delivered
a short while ago by the representative of Zimbabwe
on behalf of the Southern African Development
Community.

My delegation is grateful to you, Mr. President, for
organizing this important and highly relevant debate,
which comes at a critical juncture in our history, as
violent conflict continues to escalate at unprecedented
speed across the regions of the world. We are also
grateful for the panelists' insightful briefings today,
which have given us the opportunity to more fully
appreciate the risks and dangers faced by children
affected by armed conflict. Those conflicts have also
taken on an alarmingly insidious character, increasingly
targeting innocent civilians and subjecting them to
unspeakable acts of terror and an assortment of types
of exploitation and abuse. The rise in non-State actors
involved in such conflicts further complicates their
already complex nature.

The threat to international peace and security
posed by those developments is as real today as it ever
was, and it requires that the Council act urgently and
decisively to address it. Chief among the Council's
objectives as it does so must be ensuring the protection
and promotion of the rights of children everywhere,
including in armed conflict, and to enable the creation
of an environment conducive to effective and timely
responses to the unparalleled humanitarian crises we
are seeing in many parts of the world.

We have taken solemn note of the Secretary-
General's latest report on this subject (S/2015/409),
which highlights the fact that children affected by
major crises are being exposed to the most shocking
kinds of violations. Botswana is deeply concerned
about the gravity of such evolving Violations against
children, including abductions, which have been
occurring recently at a startling rate. The report shows
that whereas in the past mass abductions of civilians,
including children in conflict situations, were largely
a means to an end, today they are also an end in
themselves, with the prime objective ofinflicting terror.

It is altogether unacceptable that children are
employed as mere tools or objects in war and terror. They
are being robbed of their innocence and their childhood
by being forcibly removed from their communities,
recruited into armies to maim and kill - and often
maimed and killed themselves - made into human
bombs and shields, exposed to sexual violence and
other traumatic forms of exploitation and unlawfully
detained on suspicion of identifying with this or that
group. Needless to say, such situations have devastating
consequences for the health and well-being of those
children and their families who survive them, as well
as of society at large. We thus have a moral duty and
obligation, as responsible members of the international
community, to ensure that urgent and radical measures
are taken to protect children from such grave violations
of their rights.

We must guarantee full protection of children's
rights, including their ability to attend school without
interruption and to enjoy access to all social services
that contribute to their development, good health and
well-being so that they can realize their full potential.
Whatever means the international community finally
decides on in pursuit of that noble objective must also
ensure the full prosecution and accountability of the
perpetrators of such heinous acts. It is also crucial that
security personnel, including those in peacekeeping
missions, be held accountable for the Violations that
they commit against the very civilians and children
they have the responsibility to protect. Confidence and
trust in our troops is a fundamental prerequisite for the
success of any peacekeeping mission.

In this year of the tenth anniversary of resolution
1612 (2005), which created a platform for Council
members to conduct a continuous assessment of
violations against children affected by armed conflict
and to ensure the full implementation of initiatives for
their protection, we must be able to demonstrate notable
progress in that regard and have the unwavering resolve
to further consolidate our efforts. Botswana commends
the efforts made by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, together with UNICEF, in
launching a year ago the "Children, Not Soldiers"
campaign, which continues to raise awareness of this
issue. We are also encouraged by the full Council
support for resolution 2225 (2015), adopted earlier
today, which we hope will also help address the issue.

In conclusion, Botswana wishes to reaffirm its
commitment to all the international conventions to
which we are party that protect the rights of children as
well as those calling for accountability for perpetrators
of gross human rights violations. It is clear that in
some States where major conflicts and crises continue
to rage, the authorities have manifestly failed in
their responsibility to protect civilian populations.
It is therefore my country's view that the onus and
responsibility for acting lies squarely with the Council
and the global community.

