Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2002/1223), which provides a detailed
account of the work carried out during the reporting
period by the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET) to implement Security Council
resolution 1410 (2002). It also gives an accurate
account of the main problems facing the establishment
of statehood in Timor-Leste.

In Timor-Leste, the Organization has acquired
truly unique experience, first in helping to prepare for
independence and then in assisting with the formation
of the young State. We must ensure that that
experience- which has undoubtedly already gone
down in history as a shining example of a successful
effort by the United Nations - is further enriched.

The new institutions of State administration in
Timor-Leste are not yet firmly in place, and it is quite
clear that, in order to strengthen them - particularly in
the initial period after the proclamation of
independence - the international community must
continue to provide support for this youngest of all
States. In that connection, we welcome UNMISET's
efforts to assist in the establishment of Timor-Leste's
statehood, and we would emphasize the need to
strengthen support in the donor community for that
process.

The key problems being addressed by the Mission
certainly include determining how to help to ensure
external and internal security for the new State. Until
full responsibility for security is transferred to the
national army and police, Mission personnel must
ensure that conditions are in place that will exclude any
possibility of destabilization in the country, which
could undermine independence. We welcome the
broadening of the areas of responsibility for Timor-
Leste's army and police, which are now being trained.
That will help to ensure the reduction and withdrawal
of UNMISET's military contingent on schedule and
without any particularly serious complications. We
think it important that the leadership of Timor-Leste
continue to demonstrate unity and pursue its policy of
establishing good-neighbourly relations with
contiguous countries.

Support for social and economic development in
Timor-Leste by multilateral and bilateral donors is
crucially important to long-term stability in the
country. Therefore, we welcome UNMISET's
assistance to the Government as it seeks to attain the
goals of the National Development Plan by working on
priorities in the political, socio-economic and
humanitarian fields.

In conclusion, we wish every further success to
Special Representative Kamalesh Sharma and to all
other Mission personnel as they seek to consolidate the
positive progress that has already been achieved in
assisting the young State of Timor-Leste.

