Mr. Dangue Rewaka (Gabon) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, your presence today demonstrates the
commitment of your country, Malaysia, to the
maintenance of world peace. We thank your delegation
for having included this item on disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants on the
Security Council's agenda.

The upheavals in the world over the last decade have
shown us a new kind of conflict, most often pitting
communities in a single State against one another. The
nature and the complexity of these conflicts, which we
have seen in several parts of the world since the end of
the cold war, should not make the Council shirk its
primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. To be sure, the Security Council was
originally established to deal primarily with conflicts
between States, but in this new era of history, the Council
has to find the right solutions for these new situations.

It is the view of my delegation that it would be best
to identify very early the causes of conflict before there
is an actual armed clash. That being said, our discussion
today does not include conflict prevention because we are
dealing specifically with disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of ex-combatants.

We have to recognize that in the area of disarming,
demobilizing and reintegrating ex-combatants, the United
Nations has acquired considerable praiseworthy
experience which should be extended. I have in mind,
inter alia, successful operations in El Salvador,
Guatemala, Mozambique, Liberia and the Central African

 

Republic. The success of those missions was due in part to
cooperation by the parties.

In the case of Angola, the cooperation of one party,
UNITA, was greatly lacking in respect of the work of the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM)
and the United Nations Observer Mission in Angola
(MONUA).

Our experience should help us to prepare, and to
implement with the greatest hope of success, future
peacekeeping operations in, for example, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

Although every conflict has its own particular features,
it would be wise once a ceasefire agreement is reached for
the United Nations mission which is to monitor
implementation of the agreement to have written into its
mandate a directive to collect and destroy weapons seized,
to monitor the transfer of illicit arms and to help in
demining. In this context, the international community
should not be miserly in the resources required in order to
consolidate peace.

However important in themselves, these tasks are not
sufficient to ensure a lasting peace. They should be
supported by multi-sectoral action to strengthen peace. This
assumes that the Security Council would make an appeal to
the United Nations specialized agencies dealing with
development, human rights, education and health. It also
assumes that international financial institutions and bilateral
donors would demonstrate greater flexibility in the granting
of loans to countries emerging from conflicts, where the
entire administrative, economic and social infrastructures
have very often been destroyed.

While a cure is no substitute for prevention, my
delegation can never overemphasize that the Security
Council, in cooperation with regional and subregional
bodies, should engage in conflict prevention. That would
save innumerable lives and would help ensure the optimal
use of resources and funds for the development which
countries in conflict desperately need.

