The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now say a
few words in my national capacity. I will be very brief
because we are still going to be hearing from another
speaker.

The representatives ofthe United States ofAmerica
and the United Kingdom, as usual, stuck to their
provocative rhetoric. We are used to that free-flowing
discourse and shall not react to it. Attempts to insult us
do not upset or distract us from what is most important.
But I do have two topics I would like to touch on.

The representative of the United Kingdom made an
emotional appeal for putting an end to this immediately.
Indeed, how about it? How about immediately putting
an end to supporting various thugs around the
world- terrorists, extremists and all the other amateurs
exacerbating the situation in one country or another?
How about putting an end to interfering in the affairs
of other sovereign States? Just give up these colonial
customs and leave the world in peace. The situation
would improve in a great many parts of the world.

The argument made by the United States is that
more action is needed. We completely agree. It took
our Minister for Foreign Affairs and the United States
Secretary of State several months to work out an
agreement, but the United States could not implement
it or manage to separate the moderate opposition from
terrorists. It could not even ensure the withdrawal
of opposition groups from the Castello road so as to
provide better conditions to get humanitarian aid to
eastern Aleppo. Yes, more action is needed.

I think the representative of Uruguay made an
important point about the fact that it is the terrorists are
to blame while it is the civilians who are suffering. I
would take that argument further - it is the politicians
who are to blame, as they try to realize their grandiose
plans all over the world while civilians suffer. And they
do not even try to admit to the catastrophic mistakes, if
not crimes, that result from their policies, fanning the
flames of conflict and fomenting chaos in many parts
of the world.

Finally, the representative of Angola expressed
alarm that what is going on could mean the collapse
of the International Syria Support Group. We do not
agree. We believe we will be able to preserve both
the multilateral formats and today's draft resolution
(S/2016/847), which, as I said, we did not expect
to be adopted and viewed it merely as a political
demonstration. It was aimed at preserving those
multilateral formats and hence what was valuable in
the Russian-American agreements. While they have
not been implemented, we think they can be. I would
like to assure the Council that some very complex work
is continuing, both multilaterally and bilaterally, and
we all hope fervently that the situation in Syria can
be normalized, which would undoubtedly improve the
situation in eastern Aleppo. We hope that will happen
as soon as possible.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.

