Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank the
briefers for their statements today.

France aligns itself with the statement to be made
by the observer of the European Union, as well as
with the statement to be made by the representative of
Switzerland on behalf of the Group of Friends on the
Protection of Civilians.

The protection of civilians is an issue that requires
constant attention by the Security Council. It must be
at the heart of its work. Peacekeeping operations are the
primary instrument in that regard.

Since the adoption, five years ago, of resolution
1894 (2009), the Security Council, the Secretariat and
all the relevant stakeholders have mobilized to improve
the process of defining, monitoring and controlling
the implementation of peacekeeping operations'
mandates on the protection of civilians. All recent
Council mandates now include a protection-of-civilians
component. Such protection is therefore a priority
under any circumstance. We must continue to develop
that approach.

That is what we did in Mali. After the emergency
intervention of French forces, the deployment of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali - with a robust mandate
to protect civilians - helped to stabilize the country
and allowed for presidential and legislative elections to
be held successfully. During our visit to the country,
the Council was able to see the scope of what had
been accomplished through the determined work of
the United Nations. The Council also reiterated to the
Malian authorities and armed groups the urgent need
to launch an inclusive dialogue for a lasting solution in
northern Mali, in order for the country to finally find
peace.

That is what we must do in the Central African
Republic. In that country, the intervention by the
African-led International Support Mission in the Central
African Republic, supported by French forces - which
will soon be supported by European forces - helped
to prevent the atrocities beign committed against
civilians from spreading. The clashes have certainly
not stopped, but there has been a kind of pacification of
most of Bangui. Securing certain areas, especially near
the airport, allowed humanitarian aid to be organized
and better deployed. The mobilization of international
assistance, in Brussels and then Addis Ababa, provides
a glimmer of hope.
However, the situation remains precarious,
especially in the provinces. Civilians continue to be
attacked. African and French forces are faced with an
unprecedented situation: the hateful willingness of two
communities to settle accounts. Soldiers cannot contain
crowds. Looting, rapes and lynchings thus continue
despite our efforts. Therefore, given the magnitude of
the challenges and the nature of the threat, the Council
must shoulder its responsibilities quickly. What is
needed is a multidimensional peacekeeping force with
a significant amount of force, including, above all,
police units that are able to restore order, since soldiers
cannot fire on a crowd. Only such a force, with a strong
civilian component and sustainable funding, will
bring lasting stability to the country, help prepare for
elections and begin a national reconciliation process.
We can no longer allow the crisis to get worse, or we
will risk the Central African Republic becoming a
source of instability in the heart of Africa and mass
atrocities being committed there.

Whatever the strength of the protection-of-civilians
mandates given to peacekeeping operations, they will
be effective only if the operations themselves are
beyond reproach. That is why we welcome the policies
implemented by the Secretary-General to ensure that
the work of the United Nations fully respects human
rights. The zero-tolerance policy for sexual violence,
the limiting of contacts with persons indicted by the
International Criminal Court to that which is essential
to the mission of the Organization, and the due
diligence and filter policies are indispensable to the
work of peacekeeping operations. They guarantee the
exemplary conduct that is required of the Organization.
Compliance with those policies guarantees the
credibility of the Organization's work in protecting
civilians.

The effectiveness of peacekeeping operations
in the protection of civilians also requires closer
communication to be developed with local communities
in order to build capacity to prevent and react to threats.
That includes, of course, a linguistic component and
the appropriate means for logistics and communication,
such as the recruitment of community liaison assistants.

The French Mission regrets that the Secretariat does
not believe that language skills should be an essential
element considered for recruitment in the field. The
French Mission recalls, as it has been doing in vain for
several years now, that speaking the language of the
populations can be useful - even if that language is
French. As in previous years, I will not be heard, and
as in previous years, the Secretariat will continue to
recruit without taking language skills into account, and
I have been the representative of France for five years
now.

I will conclude by referring the situation in Syria. As
the Geneva negotiations on the future of Syria resume,
the regime continues to intensify its crackdown against
civilians. Barrel bombings have continued in Aleppo,
again causing several hundred civilian deaths last week.
While an agreement led to the evacuation of civilians
from Horns, humanitarian aid convoys leaving the Old
City have been attacked by mortar fire. Those deliberate
attacks against civilians and humanitarian workers
are unacceptable. The Council can no longer accept
such repeated and flagrant violations of international
humanitarian law, the primary responsibility for which
lies with the regime. It must therefore call upon all
parties to ensure immediate access for humanitarian
aid to those in need.

The text of the draft resolution submitted yesterday
by Australia, Jordan and Luxembourg is moderate. We
would have preferred a stronger message, given the
gravity of the crisis. But the text is a compromise to
which all countries of good faith and goodwill should
agree.

Furthermore, given the sense of impunity
prevailing in Damascus today, the Council must send
a clear message: the perpetrators of war crimes and
crimes against humanity in Syria, starting with Bashar
Al-Assad, should be brought to justice. That is why we
once again reiterate our call for the Council to refer the
situation in Syria to the International Criminal Court.

