Mr. Prystaiko (Ukraine): Let me begin by
expressing Ukraine's deep and sincere condolences to
the families of the victims of yesterday's act of terror.
Our prayers go to all Londoners, and we believe that
we all have to remain united and dig deep to get to the
bottom of the attack and those responsible for it.

I would like to thank you, Sir, for presiding over
today's important meeting personally. We appreciate
the United Kingdom's leadership in the Council on the
issue of Somalia, including by steering the Council's
field mission to Mogadishu in May 2016. I am also
grateful to the briefers for their insightful updates. And
I would like to express our full support for the President
of Somalia and his commitment to bringing sustainable
peace and prosperity to his country.

Like others, we are heartened to see the significant
progress that has been made since 2012 on the political
and security fronts in Somalia. The most substantial
strides have been in the electoral area. It was a long-
distance election marathon with many hurdles along the
way. Yet at the finish line we witnessed the most peaceful
and inclusive electoral process that Somalia has had in
the past several decades. That indicates a clear success.
It is truly remarkable that the representation of women

in political life has increased by 70 per cent since the
previous elections. I am confident that that will have
a positive impact not only on the further political
empowerment of women, but also on the overall success
of peacebuilding endeavours in Somalia.

We understand that elections alone cannot end the
instability in the country. Yet they represent a historic
milestone on the road to peace and reconciliation for
the nation, achieved against a backdrop of continued
security challenges, especially terrorist threats.
That positive electoral experience should facilitate
preparations for the next step - ensuring universal
suffrage in Somalia. Further international assistance,
in particular through the commendable efforts of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia, the
African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, the European Union, the League of Arab
States, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
remains instrumental.

As the famous eighteenth-century English writer
Samuel Johnson once quipped, "the future is purchased
by the present". With that in mind, I would like to
single out three specific challenges that Somalia is
facing today.

First, the dire humanitarian situation unfortunately
continues to deteriorate with every passing day.
According to recent data from the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
UNICEF, malnutrition and drought-related diseases are
on the rise, and cholera has spread to 11 ofthe country's
18 regions. Drought- and conflict-related displacement
also continues to increase. Half of the population
is in need of food and humanitarian assistance.
Approximately 1.4 million children are at risk of dying
imminently from severe malnutrition as famine looms
in Somalia and neighbouring countries. Those numbers
are more than abstract statistics. They represent the
lives of people who must be saved, including women
and children. The Council should act decisively and in
a unified manner. We should realize that under such
circumstances time is not on our side. In that light, we
commend the efforts of the Secretary-General and fully
support his personal involvement aimed at preventing
the repetition of the situation we saw in Somalia in
2011, when hundreds of thousands of people perished.

Now is the time forjoint action and for our unified
support and assistance to the Government and the
people of Somalia. It would be totally unacceptable for
the United Nations, or the international community in
general, to allow famine to devastate the country once
again. We welcome all international efforts aimed
at preventing such a scenario. In that context, we
commend the United Kingdom's role in those efforts
and its readiness to seek new platforms and ways to
help Somalia, including the London conference on
Somalia to be held in May.

Secondly, with regard to security and counter-
terrorism, although the security situation continues to
improve, we realize that the threat posed by Al-Shabaab
persists. We strongly condemn its terrorist activities,
particularly attacks and violence against civilians, the
recruitment and use of children, and abductions of and
attacks on humanitarian workers. We pay tribute to
AMISOM. and Somalia's security forces for their efforts
to combat that threat. In the context of AMISOM'S
eventual exit, we encourage the Government of
Somalia to accelerate its security-sector reform, in
close cooperation with the United Nations presence and
international partners. The readiness of local forces
for a gradual takeover of security responsibilities from
AMISOM, including in the area of the protection of
civilians, should remain our top priority. We know very
well from our own experience back home that only
well-trained and well-equipped national forces can
effectively ensure lasting peace and stability in the face
of the threat posed by terrorism.

Thirdly, on the political front, besides the importance
of ensuring universal suffrage, which I have already
mentioned, there can be no doubt that conducting the
constitutional review and achieving further agreement
on the country's federal administrative system are
key tasks for the new Government. Transparency and
inclusiveness will play a decisive role in determining
its success in that regard and how it will be judged by
the international community and, most important, by
the Somali people.

Finally, I would like to touch briefly on another
factor that must not be overlooked if we are to
support Somalia on the path to sustainable peace in a
comprehensive and holistic manner. Last week we had
reports of the first hijacking of a commercial vessel
by pirates since 2012. We hope that incident does not
portend a return to the levels of piracy threats that we
saw in the Gulf of Aden several years ago. Preventing
and countering piracy and armed robbery at sea should
continue to be a priority for the Government of Somalia
and the international community. Ukraine will stand
in solidarity with Somalia as it counters that and other
challenges and embraces new, historic opportunities.

