The President: Before we begin our discussion
on Afghanistan and I give the floor to Special
Representative Eide, I should like to take a few
minutes to pay tribute to Ms. Norma Chan, Chief of the
Security Council Secretariat Branch. Many of us know
and some of us, myself included, have been in denial
about the fact that Norma is retiring tomorrow after a
career that has spanned 36 years at the United Nations.

Sometimes referred to as the sixth permanent
member, Norma is an institution within the Security
Council. She joined the Security Council Affairs
Division in May 1978. Apart from three years in
Vienna, she has served the Council continuously since
that time. That means that Norma has worked with
more than 100 different Member States and more than
330 Security Council presidents - an unprecedented
and unparalleled record that is unlikely to be broken.

But it is not only the length of her service that is
extraordinary, but also the skill, professionalism and
integrity she brings to this job every day. Norma has
been here to guide the Council during pivotal moments
and to ensure that every day the work gets done, and
done properly.

Numerous presidents, prime ministers, hundreds
of foreign ministers and thousands of permanent
representatives from Council members and
non-members alike have benefited from her wise
advice and expert counsel, as I have every day this
month. As a new ambassador, I relied on Norma to help
me with the ins and outs of Council meetings - the
precedents, the procedures - and how to master and
fine-tune her famous scripts for formal meetings.

Many people spend their last month before
retirement enjoying celebratory lunches and dinners
and wrapping things up, but not Norma. In her last
month, she has worked as hard as ever, helping us
prepare for the fifth summit in the Council's history,
and once again Norma applied her unflagging
professionalism, energy and enthusiasm for the
Council. In her attention to detail, she revved up her
team and made it all happen.

So to Norma we offer our deep gratitude for her
dedication and service to the Council, to us and to
2
advancing global peace and security. Her well-deserved
retirement is a deep loss for all of us, but we share in
her joy about the new adventures ahead for her.

I ask my fellow Council members to please join
me in extending very best wishes and thanks to Norma
Chan for her remarkable service in the interest of
global peace and security and her dedication to the
United Nations Security Council's vital work.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Afghanistan

Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2009/475)

The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Afghanistan, in which he requests to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the consideration of the
item without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Spanta
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: On behalf of the Council, I
extend a warm welcome to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Afghanistan, His Excellency Mr. Rangin
Dadfar Spanta.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Kai
Eide, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan.

It is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
09-53153
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/475, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Kai Eide, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.

I now give the floor to Mr. Eide.


