Mr. Awaad (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic): The
delegation of Egypt congratulates you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of May. We are confident that your experience
and diplomatic skill will enable you to fulfil your difficult
task and lead the Council's work to a successful outcome.
I wish also to pay tribute to the fine diplomatic
performance of your predecessor, Ambassador Somavia,
who guided the work of the Council last month.

The Security Council is meeting today to discuss the
situation in Angola. This reflects the international
community's concern about the situation and its interest in
peace efforts in that brother African country. The concern
arises because of the slow pace of the peace process. The
international community wishes to see the uneasy relations
between the parties concerned replaced by constructive
relations based on mutual trust, coexistence and
reconciliation and giving pride of place to the interests of
the country, so as to realize the hope of the international
community that Angolans will be able now to put an end to
the tragedy that has persisted for more than two decades.

The delegation of Egypt has studied the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Angola, and we would
like to express our appreciation for his efforts and those of
his Special Representative and the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III), particularly since they
all carry out their tasks efficiently under difficult
circumstances, lacking the full cooperation of one party or
another.

The report of the Secretary-General dealt with some of
the negative aspects of the settlement in Angola, foremost
being the failure to complete the quartering of UNITA
troops during the previous UNAVEM. mandate, as provided
for in operative paragraph 8 of Security Council resolution
1045 (1996), and the fact that the Government and UN ITA
have been unable to reach agreement on extremely
important questions, on the conclusion of which both
parties had made pledges in the last meeting between
President Dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi in Libreville on
1 March last.

These questions included, first, integration of the
UNITA forces into the unified Angolan Armed Forces
(FAA), a basic step to be completed as soon as possible;
secondly, the description of posts for the military leaders of
UNITA in a way that would guarantee leadership posts for
them in the new Angolan Armed Forces; thirdly, the
beginning of participation by representatives of UNITA
begin in the Angolan Parliament, so that UNITA would
transform itself into a political party, a process on which
the new stage of parliamentary life will be based;
fourthly, arrangements for the UNITA leadership to
assume two vice-presidential posts, and for all parties to
support a general amnesty, which was promulgated by the
Angolan Parliament today. This will bolster confidence
among the parties.

We were also concerned that the report mentions
stalled United Nations demining efforts. The normal
Angolan citizen daily faces the evil and risks of
landmines, for reasons that cannot be justified at this
crucial stage of the settlement. We agree with the
Secretary-General's demand that the two parties should
promptly commit themselves fully to cooperate with
international efforts. Without this, no real development or
reconstruction can begin.

The delegation of Egypt would like to pay tribute to
the Angolan Government for taking some of the steps that
will lead to confidence-building, particularly the
quartering of the rapid reaction police. We appeal to it to
adopt constructive and positive policies that will lead the
other party to follow suit and result in the implementation
of all the items in the Lusaka Protocol. All the parties in
Angola should understand that the opportunity they have
today through the deployment of the largest United
Nations Mission on their territory should not be wasted.
There are other crises in Africa and elsewhere, and other
areas of tension and conflict. The United Nations has not
sent other missions or forces to these areas; it would be
very difficult to take such a decision now, particularly
because of the financial crisis facing our Organization, of
whose consequences we are all aware. This places an
additional responsibility on the parties in Angola to use
the international presence on their territory to the best
effect, thus encouraging the international community to
continue providing economic, technical and humanitarian
assistance over the next few years. It is time Africans
proved that theirs is not a case of lost opportunity, as
some would like to describe it.

The Egyptian delegation supports the extension of
the UNAVEM. III mandate to 11 July. Hopefully, this
period will see important accomplishments towards a
successful settlement in Angola. Consequently, we will
vote in favour of the draft resolution before the Council.

 

