Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank Stephen
O'Brien and Elizabeth Hoff for their powerful briefings.

The United Nations is working tirelessly to help
millions of men, women and children in desperate need
in Syria. The Syrian regime and Russia, in contrast,
seem to be determined to increase that number, make
their suffering even worse and prolong the barbaric
conflict. As Stephen has spelled out, that is most clearly
seen in Aleppo. Hundreds of thousands of people are
enduring hell, living without the most basic supplies,
living - if it can be called that - in fear of barrel
bombs, shelling or worse. They have gone months
without receiving a single delivery of aid or a single
box of medical supplies. And yet, thanks to the United
Nations there are trucks full of supplies ready and
waiting to go, ready and waiting to save lives.

The Syrian regime, which Russia chooses to back,
is deliberately preventing the food and medicine from
reaching those in need. Russia has the power to allow
the aid, so desperately needed, into the city. If it does
not, the world will hold it to account for the barbarous
result. I urge the Russian Federation to persuade the
Syrian regime to let the United Nations do its job and
get aid into Aleppo.

But the tragedy is that even that will not be enough.
Not content with starving thousands of innocent
civilians, the Assad regime is pummelling them with
sortie after sortie of devastating air strikes. As we have
heard, dozens have been killed and injured in the past
few days alone, including through two vile attacks on the
same children's hospital. Elizabeth has confirmed that
there are no more functioning hospitals left in eastern
Aleppo. That is the result of deliberate aerial attacks
on those hospitals and is part ofa systematic campaign
to remove even the most basic of services left in the
city. And yet, Russia has said: "The allegedly bombed
hospitals in Aleppo exist only in the imagination".
Please. We all know what needs to happen. I will repeat
it in the Chamber again, and I will keep doing so until I
am blue in the face if it means shifting the policy of the
Russian Federation.

First, stop the war crimes. Attacks on hospitals,
civilians, schools and vital infrastructure are attacks
that serve no military purpose. How can the bombing of
the school, like the one in Idlib, be justified? How can
the killing of 20 children and 3 teachers be justified?
As Elbio Rosselli said, there is no god and no principle
that can possibly justify such an attack. We all want to
counter terrorism in Syria, but attacks on schools and
hospitals are not counter-terrorist operations. So we
support Staffan de Mistura's request to send a United
Nations verification team to investigate the attacks on
hospitals in Aleppo.

Secondly, aid needs to get in. We commend the
United Nations on its humanitarian response plan for
Aleppo. All parties need to implement it fully and
immediately. But the issue goes far beyond Aleppo. As
Staffan said, the United Nations now puts the number
ofthose livining in besieged areas at almost one million
people. Aid must reach those people. Unless we see an
improvement, November will be the worst month yet
for effots to deliver aid to besieged and hard-to-reach
areas across Syria. Not one single humantarian convoy
has reached any of those areas on the United Nations
plan this month.

Those are two simple steps, and they must be taken
if we are to have a chance of that most elusive third
step - political talks that will bring an end to this
horrorific conflict. As I have said many times before,
Russia has a unique role to play in all three of those
steps: to persuade the regime to end its destructive
military approach, to allow full humanitarian access to
all beiseged areas and to commit to a political settlement
to end the brutal war.

