The Secretary-General: It gives me great
pleasure to join the Council today as it considers the
contribution it can make in addressing the devastating
impact of small arms and light weapons on people and
societies throughout the world.

Last month's United Nations Conference on the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All
Its Aspects achieved important progress. I would like
to congratulate the President of the Conference,
Ambassador Camilo Reyes Rodriguez of Colombia, for
his instrumental role in ensuring its successful
outcome.

The Conference attracted widespread attention,
with the world's media reporting extensively on the
cost and carnage caused by these weapons. Civil
society groups from across the globe were deeply and
creatively involved. After tense and difficult
negotiations, Member States forged a consensus among
diverse views and interests and adopted a
comprehensive Programme of Action.

Faced with the global scourge of small arms, the
international community has now begun an important
process of constructive global action. States have
committed themselves to developing, strengthening and
implementing norms and measures aimed at
preventing, fighting and, ultimately, eradicating the
illicit manufacture of and trade in small arms and light
weapons. They agreed to place special emphasis on
post-conflict situations and, in particular, to provide
greater support to programmes for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants,
including child ex-combatants. They also agreed to act
responsibly in the areas of export, import, transit and
retransfer of weapons, since legal weapons all too often
and all too easily find their way into the hands of
terrorists, criminals and drug traffickers.

States recognized the need to mark and keep
accurate records that will enable timely tracing and
identification. They pledged to improve the
implementation of arms embargoes decided by this
Council and they agreed to destroy illicit or surplus
weapons as necessary. I am pleased to note that the
Department for Disarmament Affairs has produced a
handbook on ecologically safe methods of weapons
destruction, which I hope will assist States in this
regard. The Programme of Action calls for greater
transparency and for education and public awareness
programmes. And, to assess progress and maintain the
momentum that has now been generated, it provides for
a review conference to be held by the year 2006.

These are significant first steps in alleviating a
grave threat to international peace and security. We
must now consolidate these gains. A Programme of
Action is a beginning, not an end in itself.
Implementation will be the true test. I would also
encourage Governments to continue work on those
issues on which consensus could not be found at the
Conference.

There is also the question of negotiating legally
binding instruments. States have established
international norms in the areas of nuclear non-
proliferation and have adopted treaties banning
chemical and biological weapons and anti-personnel
landmines. The illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons is conspicuous for its lack of such a
framework of binding norms and standards.

There is also a need to address the supply side of
the problem. Since the mid-1980s, there has been an
increase in the number of companies and countries
manufacturing small arms and light weapons. Some of
the world's wealthy nations are the main suppliers, but
many developing countries also produce small arms,
including for export.

The devastating impact on children also warrants
special attention. Children suffer the direct effects of
small arms violence, such as death, injury or
displacement; the loss of parents and siblings; and
trauma at witnessing violence. But there are also severe
indirect consequences, such as the destruction of health
and education facilities and the lack of opportunities
that comes with stunted societal growth.

The glorification of guns also sends children a
terrible message: that non-violent solutions are
unworkable and unrealistic and that power is to be
found not in one's skills or intellect, but by
intimidating or inflicting harm on others. The fact that
small arms require such minimal training has surely
played a role in the recruitment of some 300,000 child
combatants around the world. Children are the most
vulnerable victims of small arms and light weapons and
their special needs have not been given sufficient
attention.

Small arms are easy to buy, easy to use, easy to
transport and easy to conceal. Their proliferation
exacerbates conflict, sparks refugee flows, undermines
the rule of law and spawns a culture of violence and
impunity. This is not just a question of disarmament; it
is also an issue of development, democracy, human
rights and human security.

Last month's landmark Conference was not
meant to infringe on national sovereignty, limit the
right of States to defend themselves or interfere with
their responsibility to provide security; nor was it
meant to take guns away from their legal owners. The
targets remain unscrupulous arms brokers, corrupt
Government officials, drug trafficking syndicates,
terrorists, armed groups and others who bring death
and mayhem into our streets, schools and towns and
who ruin lives and destroy in minutes the labour of
years. No country is immune from this threat.

There are no simple solutions and there is no
single method of dealing with the impact of the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons. Political
commitments can make a critical difference in saving
lives and easing suffering and this Council has a major
role to play in making small arms a focus of urgent
global attention. I look forward to continuing our work
on this central aspect of international peace and
security.

