Mr. Abdullah (Malaysia): Allow me, Sir, to express
my delegation's congratulations to you on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October. Your diplomatic skill and wisdom will no doubt
ensure the successful conclusion of the deliberations of the
Council. I should like also to extend my delegation's deep
appreciation to Ambassador Cabral of Guinea-Bissau for his
able stewardship of the Council for the month of
September. I also acknowledge the presence of the
ministerial delegation from the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) countries.

My delegation welcomes the initiative of the Southern
African Development Community countries to have an open
debate on the situation in Angola in the Security Council.
Malaysia has always maintained that it is important for the
international community to be continuously involved in
Angola, in a very active and positive manner, until a
concrete and durable solution to the problem in that country
is found.

Having gone through a protracted and difficult period
of internal strife, the people of Angola surely deserve
peace, stability and development in their country. We are
concerned that, despite the various efforts undertaken by the

 

international community - both by the United Nations
and the countries of the region - the peace process in
Angola continues to be stalled. Malaysia had hoped that,
following the signing of the Lusaka Protocol on 20
November 1994, the Angolan parties would faithfully
honour their commitments and work towards constructive
relations, based on mutual trust, peaceful coexistence and
national reconciliation, so that peace could at last be
restored in Angola.

Malaysia is distressed to learn from the Secretary-
General's report (S/1996/827) of 4 October 1996 that
obligations set forth under the Lusaka Protocol, and
various agreements following from it, have not been fully
complied with, thereby dampening the prospect for an
early solution to the continuing conflict in Angola. It is
imperative, therefore, that the parties concerned honour
the commitments they entered into under the Lusaka
Protocol and work towards national reconciliation. In this
regard, we call upon UNITA in particular to help move
this process forward. It is our desire to see Angola a
united country, abandoning guns and advancing its
peoples towards development and prosperity.

The establishment of the Government of National
Unity and Reconciliation should still remain the objective
of the parties concerned, as they themselves realized and
accepted in the Lusaka Protocol. Malaysia fully supports
the various efforts undertaken by the international
community, in particular those of Mr. Alioune Blondin
Beye, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
and of the countries of the region, to bring together the
parties concerned to work towards a lasting peace and
security in Angola.

Although Angola is geographically distant from my
country, Malaysia, we have contributed, within our
capacity, to international efforts to restore peace in
Angola. Malaysia's involvement in Angola began in July
1991, when we dispatched military and civilian police
observers to the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM), which incidentally is the largest
United Nations peacekeeping operation today. Since 1991,
we have continued to contribute military and civilian
police personnel to this peacekeeping mission. At present
Malaysia has 20 military observers, 3 military staff
officers and 20 civilian police in UNAVEM. III.
Malaysia's involvement in UNAVEM. is a reflection of
our firm support and commitment to the United Nations
in its efforts to promote international peace and security.
We hope that our peacekeeping forces under the United
Nations banner in Angola, like those currently in Western

 

Sahara and Liberia and those previously in the Congo,
Mozambique and Somalia, are helping United Nations
efforts to restore peace and stability in various troubled
spots on the African continent.

Despite all efforts undertaken by the international
community, the parties concerned must realize that peace
and normalcy can only return to Angola if they seriously
commit themselves to work towards national reconciliation.
They should avoid mistrust and hostile propaganda, and
instead begin to work together to bring peace and security
back to their country.

Malaysia will fully support all efforts by the Security
Council that can help realize the objective of national unity
and national reconciliation in Angola.

