Mr. De Ruyt (Belgium) (spoke in French): I have
the honour of speaking on behalf of the European
Union. The countries of Central Europe and Eastern
Europe associated with the European Union -
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary,
Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and
Slovenia - and the associated countries Cyprus, Malta
and Turkey as well as the countries of the European
Free Trade Association that are members of the
European Economic Area, Iceland and Liechtenstein,
associate themselves with this statement.

The European Union once again today expresses
its great concern at the violent events that have taken
place in the Middle East in recent months and, in
particular, in recent weeks. It rejects as unjustifiable
violence in any form, which only exacerbates an
already disquieting situation in the Middle East and
renders ineffective the international community's
efforts to relaunch a political process.

The parties must replace the logic of
confrontation and violence without delay with that of
dialogue and negotiation. It is high time that the parties
reconsidered, turned resolutely towards the future and
worked together to restore the climate of mutual trust
that is necessary to break the vicious cycle of violence
and retaliation. The European Union reminds the
Israeli and Palestinian authorities that it is their
responsibility to do everything possible to avoid any
action that might claim new victims. We are convinced
that there is no alternative to a political solution.

The escalation of violence, which has intensified
dramatically in recent days, is intolerable. The
European Union most vehemently condemns the latest
suicide bombings. These acts, particularly the ones that
target Israeli civilians, are hateful and repugnant in the
extreme. Terrorism is a serious threat to the stability of
the region. It must be resisted with the utmost rigour.
The European Union also condemns all assistance to
organizations that practise terrorism, whether in the
form of financial aid or of providing weapons or
training. The European Union calls upon the
Palestinian Authority to do everything possible to bring
the violence to an end, particularly by arresting and
bringing to justice the perpetrators, instigators and
sponsors of acts of terror.

Israel's decision to close Orient House and other
institutions in Jerusalem does not serve the interests of
peace and can only weaken the Palestinian leadership
at a time when it is called upon to show firm resolve in
the fight against extremism. It runs counter to the
declared objective, which must remain the restoration
of security for all. Unilateral acts can do nothing to
alter the international community's long-standing
position on the status of the occupied territories,
including East Jerusalem. The European Union would
like to see the closure reversed at the earliest date, and
the archives returned, and would like to see Israel
demonstrate maximal restraint by avoiding any act that
could be considered as provocative.

The European Union believes that extrajudicial
executions are not only illegal and unacceptable but are
also obstacles to peace and are therefore damaging to
both parties. The European Union calls on Israel to
show the utmost restraint in the use of military force.

The European Union reaffirms its view that the
basis of negotiations, and of a just and lasting peace,
must be Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973) and other relevant resolutions, including the
rejection of the acquisition of territory by war, the need
for every State in the region to be able to live in
security, and the principle of land for peace. We
reaffirm our belief that the only way to restore security
for all is to return to the route mapped out by the
Madrid Conference, the Oslo Accords and the
recommendations of the Mitchell report, in accordance
with the relevant United Nations resolutions.

The Mitchell Committee's recommendations must
be immediately and fully implemented. Any further
delay or conditions placed on the implementation of
those recommendations would play into the hands of
extremists and would perpetuate the violence. An
impartial monitoring mechanism is needed to overcome
the obstacles that could impede the implementation of
the recommendations. The European Union is
convinced that this mechanism would serve the
interests of both parties.

The European Union urges the two sides to open
a sustained political dialogue without delay in order to
break the deadlock, and it expresses its support for the
initiatives along these lines, including the one taken by
Mr. Shimon Peres, the Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Israel. It expresses the
hope that such dialogue will open the way for a
political approach to resolving the conflict.

The European Union remains willing to play its
role, in close cooperation with the United States as well
as with the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, and all
other partners committed to the quest for peace in the
Middle East.

The European Union expects the Security Council
to provide constructive, useful support in order to make
this effort effective and in order to contribute to the
implementation of the Mitchell Committee
recommendations and to the resumption of dialogue
between the parties.

