Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We thank you, Madam
President, for convening today's meeting on threats to
international peace and security. My delegation also
appreciates the briefing by Ms. lzumi Nakamitsu,
Under-Secretary-General and High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs.

South Africa's primary concern on matters of
international peace and security is the threat posed
to humankind by weapons of mass destruction, in
particular nuclear weapons and their means of delivery.
It is our firm view that the only guarantee against the
intended or accidental detonation of those weapons is
their total elimination. It is equally of concern that some
nuclear-weapons States still insist on the modernization
of their nuclear arsenals and their means of delivery, in
flagrant violation of the letter and spirit of the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).

It is indeed deeply troubling that a long-established
arms control instrument such as the Intermediate-Range
Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty has unravelled, placing
not only the region of Europe but the whole world at
risk of a nuclear war and catastrophe. We also wish
to use this timely opportunity to urge both the United
States of America and Russia to resume discussions
on the New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (New START) before it expires in 2021. Such an undertaking
by the two premier nuclear-weapon States would be an
appropriate and fitting tribute to the NPT, whose fiftieth
anniversary we mark in 2020. We will also celebrate
in 2020 the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United
Nations - the parliament of the peoples of the world,
which those two countries assisted in establishing.

As the international community will commemorate
the International Day for the Total Elimination of
Nuclear Weapons on 26 September this year, let it serve
as a constant and painful reminder to the international
community of its unfulfilled commitments and
obligations to eliminate nuclear weapons, as envisaged
in the very first resolution (resolution 1 (I)) adopted by
the General Assembly in 1946 - 73 years ago.

As we approach the seventy-fifth anniversary
of the United Nations in 2020, it is our view that we
should reflect deeply and reaffirm our commitment
to the realization of a world free of nuclear weapons.
South Africa's support for the total elimination of
nuclear weapons is informed by our own experience as
the only country to date to have developed and then
voluntarily eliminated its nuclear weapons for the sake
of our children and generations to come.

South Africajoins the majority of Member States in
voicing our deepest concern regarding the humanitarian
consequences of nuclear weapons, as aptly outlined in
the Treaty on Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons (TPNW),
which opened for signature on 20 September 2017. We
call upon the United Nations community to sign and
ratify the Treaty at the earliest possible time so that the
TPNW can enter into force as soon as possible. We need
just two more signatures for the Treaty to come into
force. South Africa reaffirms its view that the TPNW is
a bold and positive step towards the total elimination of
nuclear weapons and strengthens the NPT.

The NPT remains the cornerstone of nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation. However, we
are deeply concerned that the NPT continues to be
subjected to significant tensions as a result of the
non-implementation of the nuclear disarmament
obligations under article VI of the Treaty and the related
undertakings made at the 1995, 2000 and 2010 Review
Conferences of the Parties to the NPT.

The current NPT review cycle, which will coincide
with the fiftieth anniversary of the Treaty, presents
an opportunity to make urgent progress on nuclear
disarmament. South Africa believes that nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation are mutually
reinforcing processes that require continuous and
irreversible progress on both fronts. The selective
focus on non-proliferation measures and the lack of
progress on nuclear disarmament undermines the NPT
and weakens the non-proliferation regime. The total
elimination of nuclear weapons and legally binding
assurances that they will never be produced again is the
only guarantee that those weapons will never be used
as we saw in Hiroshima and Nagasaki in 1945.

In conclusion, South Africa wishes to reiterate its
commitment to multilateralism and the centrality of
the United Nations in resolving today's challenges,
including that of nuclear disarmament.

