Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): I would like
begin by to thanking Special Representative Salame
for his briefing to the Security Council today and for
his valuable efforts. We strongly support his work and
that of the United Nations in Libya. I would also like
to welcome the inspiring briefing from Ms. Sharief.
I thank her for bringing the essential voice of civil
society, particularly that of Libyan women, to the
Council. We commend the efforts she is undertaking in
a truly challenging environment.

We have consistently advocated for the United
Nations to play the leading role in the mediation efforts
in Libya, and we are particularly encouraged by the
recent visit of Under-Secretary-General Feltman.
Continued high-level United Nations engagement
in Libya is important for a reinvigorated, inclusive
and long-term approach in support of the Libya-led
political process.

Special Representative Salame' can be assured of
our full support as he continues to implement the United
Nations plan of action for Libya.We are encouraged by
his flexible and pragmatic approach and we remain
committed to the Libyan Political Agreement as the
only viable framework for the transitional period. After
years of conflict and violence, rebuilding trust between
communities is an essential prerequisite for rebuilding
the country. We welcome the bottom-up approach to
promoting reconciliation and unity - at local as well
as national levels. We agree with Mr. Salame that this is
also a crucial part of laying the foundation for elections.

We are encouraged by the progress made to date

in the voter registration exercise, with almost 2 million
voters now registered by the High National Electoral
Commission. We urge all Libyan political leaders to
engage constructively in the election preparations and
to help create the necessary political, legal and security
conditions for elections in 2018. All Libyans have the
right to live in a democratic State that upholds the rule
of law and respects human rights.

Ms. Sharief eloquently and forcefully communicated
the indispensable role that women are already playing
in building trust and reconciliation in Libya. Let me
join her in reiterating the importance of women's fair
representation and full participation in each step of
the political process going forward. We welcome the
participation of women in the drafting committee
sessions in Tunis, and expect that upcoming gatherings,
as well as the national conference, will be inclusive and
will also provide opportunities for Libyan women's
concerns to be addressed - for example, on issues of
security and mobility. Such an inclusive peace process
will open up opportunities for a more just peace, and
is more likely to be perceived as representative and
legitimate by the population at large. In Libya, we now
need to seize the momentum and place women's full
enjoyment of their rights at the core of international
peace and security. This is not a women's issue, it is a
peace and security issue.

We remain deeply concerned about the suffering of
migrants and refugees in Libya. Every effort must be
made to safeguard those who have fled human rights
abuses and violations in their home countries in search
of refuge or a better future. We reiterate our call for full
and unhindered humanitarian access to detention centres
and for further efforts to turn detention facilities into
open transit centres that meet international standards.
In addition, investigations into crimes committed,
including the slave trade, as well as accountability
for those responsible, is crucial. We remain open to
exploring the possibility of using sanctions to target
smuggling and trafficking in persons.

Finally, the assets of the Libyan people must
be managed properly so in the future they can be
used for the benefit of all Libyans. For that reason,
we are concerned about the management of Libya's
frozen assets and about indications of a depletion of
those funds. In our national capacity, we are committed
to working with the United Nations and partners to
explore ways of improving the current situation.

