Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
The Security Council has reiterated the urgent need for
the implementation of resolutions 1397 (2002) and
1402 (2002) by adopting resolution 1403 (2002). The
Security Council has called upon the parties to move
immediately to a ceasefire and for Israeli troops to
withdraw from Palestinian cities. The Security Council
has met twice with the Permanent Representative of
Israel and twice with the Permanent Observer of
Palestine, and repeated its call for a ceasefire. On many
occasions, in its resolutions and presidential
statements, the Council has expressed support for the
negotiation efforts of the "quartet". Nevertheless, the
situation in the Middle East continues to deteriorate
and to be the cause of increasing concern.

In View of this, Mexico expresses its intense
concern at the fact that the confrontations in their
current form will have very serious consequences for
the future. The events of today will serve as a
justifications brandished by future terrorists in order to
perpetuate violence between Israelis and Palestinians
and to persist in the spiral of hatred. Peace and security
are truly threatened. That is the perception of all the
Members of the United Nations and of world public
opinion. It is also what is expressed through the
growing number of mass demonstrations in the streets.
The United Nations and the Security Council are
compelled to heed the legitimate concern of world
public opinion, to seek ways of making international
law prevail and to bring about compliance with the
demand for an immediate ceasefire and the initiation of
peace negotiations.

The continuation of the disproportionate use of
force; the siege on the civilian population in the
Palestinian territories and refugee camps; the use of
weapons of great destructive power in densely
populated areas; the obstruction of humanitarian and
medical assistance; and Israel's siege of the Palestinian
Authority: these are all flagrant violations of
international humanitarian law. Nothing, no cause or
reason, can justify such actions under international law.

This defiance of the appeals of the international
community leads Mexico to appeal once again to Israel
to put an end to its military operations in the
Palestinian territories. We stress that the excessive use
of force and the violations of international
humanitarian law are unacceptable. Israel will not be
able to find the security it seeks, it will not be able to
prevent further acts of terrorism against its people and
it will not be able to live in peace with its
neighbours - all of which are its legitimate rights - if
it turns its back on the international community,
ignores the Council's resolutions and flagrantly
violates international humanitarian law.

The Security Council must be firm in demanding
compliance with its resolutions in this connection. In
this respect, the United Nations Charter is clear in
establishing measures for implementing Council
decisions, as well as the measures necessary to
maintain or restore international peace and security
wherever it is threatened or breached. The Council
must not lose sight of its mandate and its powers.

Mexico reiterates once again that it shares the
vision of two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by
side, in peace and security. However, it is true that this
goal can be achieved only if both sides relinquish
aggression and reprisals.

Mexico notes with concern that Palestinian
suicide bombing attacks in Israel have now been joined
by Hizbullah attacks from southern Lebanon in
violation of the Blue Line. These actions threaten to
further worsen the situation and spread the conflict
through the region, drawing in other areas and other
actors.

The Palestinian Authority continues to defy the
international community and to fail its people. That is
why President Arafat must declare his unequivocal
rejection of suicide attacks, including the suicide
attacks that have cost dozens of innocent civilian lives
in Israel. He must call on Palestinian organizations
such as Hamas and others, and their leaders to put an
end to these acts. He must address Palestinian citizens
and Arab public opinion, declaring that terrorism is
absolutely contrary to the interests and the cause of the
Palestinian people.

Mexico endorses the Council's call in resolutions
1397 (2002) and 1402 (2002) for the parties to cease all
acts of violence, including terrorism, provocation,
incitement and destruction. The international
community has turned to the United Nations, as the
highest legal, political and moral authority, to resolve a
conflict that is jeopardizing international security. The
Council has already demanded that the parties put an
end to the violence. In view of the mistrust between the
two parties, the Council must explore action and
effective support mechanisms for those who seek peace
in the Middle East, so that its clear demands may be
met.

In that respect, Mexico firmly supports the
activities of the "quartet" and Secretary of State Colin
Powell to take constructive steps towards a just and
lasting peace in the Middle Peace. We have said that
the clearer the mediators' position, the more effective
their actions on the conflict will be.

The mediation efforts must be supported by
concrete measures from the Council. In that regard,
Mexico agrees with the Secretary-General that it is
imperative to start thinking about the terms of
reference for active participation by a third party that
will help bring about the conditions for peace. A
mechanism must be created to observe and monitor
compliance with Council resolutions.

Today, it is obvious that Israelis and Palestinians
cannot arrive at a solution to the conflict by
themselves. Neither of them is moving in the direction
of understanding and negotiation. Both are both betting
on violence. The international community must
recognize this harsh reality. The time has come to
explore extraordinary measures that, in keeping with
the provisions of the Charter and international law, will
put an end to the hostilities.

