Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I would like to extend a
warm welcome to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Turkey, His Excellency Mr. Ahmet Davutoglu. I also
thank Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Oscar F ernandez-Taranco, for his briefing.

It was with shock and consternation that Brazil
learned of the attack by Israel early today, reportedly in
international waters, on vessels carrying humanitarian
supplies to Gaza, which resulted in the tragic loss of
more than ten civilians and tens of injuries. The
Brazilian Government vehemently condemns the
attacks. There can be no justification for a military
operation against a humanitarian convoy. The gravity
of the incident is compounded by the fact that the
attack reportedly took place in international waters.

Brazil expresses its deep condolences to the
families of those who have been killed. We are
particularly concerned by unconfirmed reports that a
Brazilian national is or may have been on board one of
the ships. The Ambassador of Israel to Brazil has been
summoned to the Ministry of External Relations to be
informed of Brazil's indignation at the incident and of
our concern about the Brazilian citizen. Brazil believes
that the incident must be fully clarified in the light of
international law and international humanitarian law
through an independent investigation.

The tragic results of this deplorable incident
show yet again the need for the blockade of Gaza to be
immediately lifted. The blockade is a blatant violation
of international law. Resolution 1860 (2009) called for
the unimpeded provision and distribution throughout
Gaza of humanitarian assistance, including food, fuel
and medical treatment. However, despite repeated and
Virtually universal calls from the international
community, including from my own Government,
Israel has systematically refused to lift it. The blockade
also violates the basic rights of approximately
1.5 million people. Palestinians are still forced to live
in entirely unacceptable conditions almost a year and a
half after the end of operation Cast Lead.

We join the whole of the international community
in strongly urging Israel to immediately suspend the
unlawful blockade of Gaza and take the necessary steps
towards full implementation of resolution 1860 (2009).
Continued violations of international law will only
increase the human and political costs of an
unjustifiable policy.

