Let me, at the outset, thank all the delegations that organized and co-sponsored today's open debate. Our special appreciation goes to His Excellency Mr. Antenio Guterres, Secretary-General of the United Nations, for his remarks and far-reaching recommendations. We also thank other briefers for sharing their perspectives on this important subject. My delegation would like to make the following additional remarks in its national capacity. Climate change is a global challenge that burdens all of humankind at various levels. The distinct impact of climate change on both men and women can be seen in the areas of violent conflict, political instability and economic strife, leading to food insecurity and loss of livelihood, which threaten to reverse hard-won development gains. The cumulative effects of climate change have resulted in a rise in temperatures, variable rainfall, a rise in sea levels and flooding, drought, desertification, land degradation, extreme weather conditions, diminishing freshwater resources and a loss of biodiversity, thereby depriving entire populations of their livelihoods. Women, who constitute the majority of the agricultural workforce in Africa and elsewhere, are disproportionately affected by the effects of climate change, deepening gender inequality, affecting maternal health and women's economic productivity and increasing the risk of gender-based violence. In conflict-afflicted countries, where populations already suffer from multiple risks posed by climate change, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has further aggravated such situations by preventing access to markets, disrupting supply chains and restraining mobility, leading to the closure of markets. The lack of capacity to practice social distancing among populations displaced as a result of climate-related developments in camps where health and sanitary facilities are inadequate presents another challenging security risk scenario with the potential to lead to a high number of infections, which could spread to nearby communities. The COVID-19 pandemic has therefore unmasked the shades of inequality, as well as prospects for resilience and recovery. The contests over vital natural resources, particularly water and grazing fields, have become dire as the impact of climate change takes hold. Such contests have had significant security implications for Nigeria and other African countries. The incessant herder-farmer crises in Nigeria demonstrate the reality of climate change and the resource-control interface, and the attendant deep-rooted security challenges. Climate change is also associated with the problems of migration, terrorism and farmer-herder clashes in the Sahel, which have resulted in maiming, killings, rape and other forms of banditry associated with highly armed nomadic herders. The increasing loss of ecosystems, which traditionally provide means of livelihood for communities in the area, has continued to lead to forced displacement and migration concerns. The Lake Chad basin, which used to be a beehive of productivity, food security and wealth for citizens of eight African countries living around the basin, has shrunk significantly from its original size owing to climate change. This has led to a severe humanitarian crisis, as the region suffers from violence linked to armed groups, such as the Boko Haram terrorist group. The restrictions on the movement of farmers and pastoralists seeking alternative livelihoods during droughts limit their opportunities for income diversification, thereby exposing them to more vulnerabilities, such as youth recruitment, as well as the kidnapping and enslavement of women, by armed groups. We wish to recall that the Secretary-General convened a Climate Action Summit on 23 September 2019 to focus global attention in the face of the worsening climate crisis and to forge new pathways ahead to support the achievement of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Leaders at all levels were requested to step up to the challenge and demonstrate that business as usual was no longer acceptable. The Climate Action Summit set a clear direction of travel for climate action, but it also highlighted where much more action was needed to secure our footing on a path towards 1.5°C by the end of the century. In other words, the Climate Action Summit reinforced 1.5°C as the socially, economically, politically and scientifically safe limit to global warming by the end of this century, and net zero emissions by 2050 as the global long-term climate objective for all. It called on all countries to urgently accelerate work to define what this entails for the short-term 2020 and the mid-term (2030) commitments, which will be captured in their nationally determined contributions, and ensure the alignment of strategies to meet those commitments. There is no gainsaying the fact that the world needs to take more concrete steps to mitigate the fast-declining health of our planet. There is a need for all leaders to step up their climate actions in line with the request of the Secretary-General. Nigeria's commitment to its obligation under the Paris Agreement, particularly the aspirations enshrined in our nationally determined contribution, including the commitment to reduce greenhouse-gas emissions by 20 per cent unconditionally and 45 per cent conditionally by 2030, is unwavering. Nigeria is leading in the efforts to create solid partnerships for the recharge of Lake Chad, in the belief that it would help improve the living conditions of populations settled in the area, promote sustainable productive activities, improve inter-State cooperation and transboundary circulation, strengthen adaptation and community resilience, as well as assist in addressing the environmental and security risks that threaten the region, its resources and inhabitants. To that effect, the Nigerian Government is developing a rehabilitation programme and finalizing the development of the Lake Chad Basin Climate Change Resilience Action Plan, which includes an inter-basin water transfer project estimated to cost $55 billion. Nigeria has also embraced the issuances of green bonds as an innovative and alternative source of funding projects that would reduce emissions and provide the robust climate infrastructure needed in Nigeria, such as renewable energy, low- carbon transport, water infrastructure and sustainable agriculture. The sovereign bonds issued were used to provide off-grid renewable energy in seven federal universities in different geopolitical zones of the country, as well as to generate and distribute off-grid renewable energy resources in some unserved and underserved areas, especially rural communities in the country, with an emission reduction of up to 41,888,04 metric tons in the past two years, creating green jobs and planting trees in over 2,000 hectares of land across Nigeria. As a show of commitment, the next issuance in the series is under way, which we intend to use to triple Nigeria's greenhouse-gas emission reductions, stimulate economic growth and catalyse investment in social programmes, such as education and health. We will continue to forge a mutually beneficial coalition of global partnership, including the private sector and regional Governments, towards addressing the socioeconomic and security challenges that face the Lake Chad region. Nigeria also intends to carry out an upward review of its nationally determined contribution towards the inclusion of additional sectors by 2020. In the water sector, Nigeria is underwriting a green bond for irrigation and constructing multipurpose dams for power, irrigation and water supply, in line with integrated water-resource management principles. In the waste management sector, Nigeria has set up plans to develop a national solid and liquid waste policy and commission a feasibility study of waste-to-energy projects at the national and states levels to attract private sector investors. Nigeria will continue to take steps to establish six geopolitical zonal hubs for harnessing innovative climate ideas from young Nigerians, as well as include our youth in decision-making processes as part of our overall climate change governance architecture. We will also continue to create youth entrepreneurship/green jobs from renewable energy, including solar, and establish a youth innovation fund within the currently existing Bank of Agriculture, the Bank of Industry and the Development Bank of Nigeria. We will also mobilize Nigerian youth towards planting 25 million trees to enhance Nigeria's carbon sink. In conclusion, there is no gainsaying the fact that the challenges of climate change are enormous. And, since no individual country can confront the phenomenon alone, we call for joint and collaborative efforts to tackle the problem.
