Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me first to thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Burundi, Mr. Michel Kafando,
and the Chair of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Jiirg Lauber,
for their briefings.

Uruguay notes that since the last briefing of the
Council on Burundi (see S/PV.7978), held on 20 June,
new events have taken place that in our opinion
are positive steps towards a resolution of the crisis
in Burundi. One of those steps was Special Envoy
Kafando's visit to the country at the end of June,
which we hope will help to restore the dynamic of the
relationship between the Burundian Government and
the United Nations.

Special Envoy Kafando has just given us details
about his visit and the nature of the conversations that
took place on 27 June. We reiterate our support for
his work and hope that in carrying out his tasks, he
will involve a broad range of partners, both from the
Government and the opposition, as well as from civil
society. Furthermore, we acknowledge the constant
efforts carried out by the regional and subregional
bodies to unblock the political process in Burundi.

In recent summits, both the African Union and
the East African Community reaffirmed their full
commitment to a peaceful solution to the crisis and
underscored that dialogue is the only road possible.
We also have a road map that was presented by the
facilitator of the inter-Burundian dialogue, former
Tanzanian President Benjamin Mkapa, which contains
a series of specific steps that would help to relaunch
the political process and generate conditions for
transparent, inclusive and peaceful elections in 2020. In
that connection, Uruguay encourages countries in the
region to support Burund in a united and coordinated
manner. We also urge all of the Burundian parties to
commit to the proposed road map and to work on its
implementation as soon as possible, as was mentioned
by Ambassador Lauber.

We welcome the successful holding of the
socioeconomic retreat on 12 July, which brought
together national authorities and several international
partners. It identified the main challenges that the
country faces in socioeconomic matters and, on that
basis, will aid in seeking solutions. Uruguay notes the
important role played by the Peacebuilding Commission
in those efforts and encourages the continuation over
time of the dialogue platform that was created and the
involvement of new interested partners.

Uruguay cannot help but reiterate its concern
over the deterioration of the human rights situation in
Burundi. We strongly condemn each and every one of
the abuses and violations in the area of human rights,
no matter who committed them. That includes cases of
extrajudicial executions, sexual violence in the context
of the political crisis, arbitrary arrests and detentions,
forced disappearances, and harassment and intimidation
of civil society organizations and even journalists, as
well as restrictions on fundamental freedoms.

Given the situation, we regret the fact that the
Government of Burundi has not yet resumed its
cooperation with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights since it was suspended
in October 2016. We call for the swift conclusion of a
memorandum of understanding for the resumption of
the Office's activities in Burundi. We also call for full
cooperation between the Government to Burundi and
the Commission of Investigation on the human rights
situation established by the Human Rights Council.
Full respect for the human rights of all Burundians is
a necessary condition for the holding of an inclusive
and credible political dialogue. It is also necessary for
the creation of an environment conducive to organizing
peaceful and democratic elections in 2020.

Mr. Bessho (Japan) I also thank Special Envoy
Michel Kafando and Ambassador Jurg Lauber for their
informative briefings.

I would like to focus on two main points regarding
Burundi. The first concerns the need to re-establish
trust between the Government of Burundi and the
international community.

We welcome Special Envoy Kafando's engagement
with Burundi and regional Governments. We call on
the Government of Burundi to work constructively and
cooperatively with the Special Envoy. We fully support
the Special Envoy's efforts. We also thank Ambassador
Lauber, Chair of the Burundi Configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission, for his proactive
role. It exemplifies how usefully the Peacebuilding
Commission can support the work of the Council.

A year has passed since the adoption of resolution
2303 (2016), which remains unimplemented. The
situation in Burundi remains fragile, and we are
concerned by the worsening socioeconomic situation,
as well as serious, ongoing human rights violations. In
June, our colleague, the Permanent Representative of
Burundi, told the Council that a resumed presence of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights (UNHCHR) in Burundi was a
certainty. Yet, as I see it, there has been no progress
on resumed cooperation between the Government
of Burundi and UNHCHR. Despite repeated calls by
the international community, only a limited number
of human rights observers of the African Union (AU)
have arrived in Burundi. While the Council has urged
the Government of Burundi to cooperate fully with the
deployment and activities of the United Nations police
component, it has not yet been established. We call on
the Government to Burundi to promptly address those
concerns.

I believe that the maintenance of cooperative
relations with the United Nations, the AU and other
international partners is clearly in Burundi's own
national interest. A neutral international presence in
Burundi would have a very positive effect in building
confidence between Burundi and the international
community. The Council must act to ensure that
presence.

My second point concerns regional efforts on
Burundi. We thank President Museveni and President
Mkapa for their mediation efforts. Progress on an
inclusive national dialogue in advance of the 2020
elections is vital for peace and security in not only
Burundi, but also in the wider region as a whole. We
call on the Government of Burundi to seriously commit
to an inclusive national dialogue without conditions.
We also call on the Heads of State in the East African
Community (EAC) to further enhance their engagement
in the situation in Burundi. In response to the call by
our colleague, Ambassador Lauber, I am confident that
the Council will continue to support the EAC-mediated
dialogue process moving forward.

