Mr. Shcherbak (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Lamberto Zannier,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Kosovo, for his introduction of the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
(S/2008/692). The Russian authorities have carried out
a thorough analysis of the report.

We welcome the participation in today's Security
Council meeting of Mr. Vuk Jeremic', Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia. We are
grateful to him for the points he made, and we agree
with them. Also, we listened carefully to the statement
made by Mr. Hyseni.

The Russian position on the situation in and
around the province is a consistent one, and it is
unchanged. We continue to believe that there is a need
for strict implementation of resolution 1244 (1999) and
of the mandate for the Mission in Kosovo, which the
Council approved through that resolution. We believe
that Kosovo's unilateral declaration of independence
and its recognition by some States representing a
minority of the international community run counter to
the norms of international law, first and foremost the
Charter of the United Nations, the Helsinki Final Act and
resolution 1244 ( 1999), as well as other instruments.

As the Secretary-General has often said,
resolution 1244 (1999) remains in force in its entirety.
By the terms of that resolution, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the
Mission he heads in Kosovo must continue to
discharge the functions entrusted to them, including
assisting members of national minorities and ensuring
their rights and security, and implementing the
democratic standards established by the international
community for the province. The main impetus for the
activities of the international presence must be the
implementation of those standards, because the
situation in respect of those standards, as indicated in
the report, remains unsatisfactory. We drew attention to
this point earlier - in fact, before the illegal
declaration of independence - and we would draw the
Council's attention to it again now.

As time has shown, the unilateral declaration of
independence of Kosovo has not helped to solve the
key problems in the province. There is still a high level
of corruption and crime; there has been no
improvement in the economic or social spheres; there
has been no easing of the inter-ethnic tension, now
subject to a new factor - friction and disagreements
among the Kosovars themselves. The Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Jeremie, spoke today of
the many worrisome aspects of the situation in Kosovo.

If these negative tendencies are not reversed -
and this is a point that the Russians have often warned
about - the situation in Kosovo could become a
source of serious regional destabilization. Naturally,
Russia would like to see some radical change for the
better in all of the aforementioned areas, because it
would be in the interests of all countries of the region
and the international community as a whole.

We welcome the agreement between Belgrade
and the United Nations on the six technical points, and
it is now a question of fully implementing them. All
parties are required to do so. We do not exclude the
possibility that if the Pristina authorities were not to
work to honour those agreements - and we do,
unfortunately, have some information to that effect -
the international community would be obliged to bring
effective pressure to bear on Pristina to implement
those points. This should be given special attention by
the international presence. The dialogue between
Belgrade and the United Nations must continue on
these matters, which are still pending.

08-6204]

We confirm our negative assessment of the action
begun in June this year by the Secretary-General,
without required authorization by the Security Council,
to reconfigure the international presence in Kosovo. In
such circumstances, the legalization of the so-called
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) would be possible only with the consent of
all parties, including Belgrade, to its deployment. Any
move to circumvent the Security Council is a direct
violation of the United Nations Charter.

We would stress that, under paragraphs 49 and 50
of the report of the Secretary-General, the international
presence in the province must maintain a status-neutral
approach and it must act within the context of
resolution 1244 (1999) and in coordination with the
United Nations.

The only way to remedy the situation is to return
to the process of seeking a solution in the international
judicial arena, in the interests of long-term stability in
the Balkans and of shifting the numerous separatist
tendencies throughout the world. Russia intends to
continue insisting that the Security Council play a
leading role in Kosovo, on the basis of compliance
with the existing norms of international law, the United
Nations Charter and decisions of the Security Council
itself.

