Mr. Mitri: The Council has before it the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (S/2014/131), which covers the events
in that country since his last report on 5 September
2013 (S/2013/516).

On 8 March, Libyan oil was loaded on a North
Korean flagged vessel, the Morning Glory, by armed
groups that have been blockading a number of oil
terminals and fields in eastern Libya for many months.
That constitutes an illegal act and violates Libya's
sovereignty over its ports and natural resources.

Three months ago, I spoke before the Council (see S/PV.7075) of the steady decline in the security situation
across Libya, and of mounting popular frustration with
the political process. I alluded to the strong polarization
resulting from disagreement over the management
of the transition period, reflecting deeper political
and ideological divisions. On 2 March, the General
National Congress building was stormed by protestors
demanding its dissolution. About 150 young men
ransacked the main chamber and assaulted members,
four of whom were injured. I strongly condemned
the violence against the General National Congress
members and premises, re-emphasizing the need to
respect legitimate State institutions. While upholding
the right to freedom of expression, I also made it clear
that the use of force to achieve political objectives is to
be unequivocally rejected.

The decision of the General National Congress on
3 February with regard to the transfer of authority in
due course to a constitutionally elected legislative body
did not defuse tensions ahead of 7 February, the date
some have interpreted - controversially - as that on
which the term of the General National Congress should
have ended. Acknowledging public pressure, that body
opted for early elections, establishing de facto a new
transitional period - a third - to continue until the
end of a longer constitutional process. It has formed
a 15-member committee to consider amendments to
the Constitutional Declaration, issued by the National
Transitional Council in August 2011.

Intense efforts to resolve differences and negotiate
an agreement on the management of the transitional
period, including the future of the General National
Congress and the Government, have not succeeded in
bringing an end to the divisions that have paralysed the
political process. Considerable differences remain over
holding both parliamentary and presidential elections,
and the extent of powers to be granted to a future
president. The application of the political isolation law
remains a contentious issue as well.

Throughout this process, the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) has consistently
encouraged the different parties to reach agreement
on the main national priorities and the management
of the transition. To that effect, I convened regular
consultative meetings with leaders of the major political
and civil society forces.

In the previous three months, there has been a
dramatic increase in violence across the country.
In January and early February, clashes took place in
the Warshafana area west of Tripoli, within earshot
of UNSMIL's compound. In Sabha, in the south, and
Kufra, in the south-east, political, economic and social
grievances spilled over into armed violence between
rival groups, many along ethnic and tribal lines. Former
regime supporters took advantage of the situation to
occupy Government facilities for some time. In Sabha,
violence resulted in over 100 fatalities, including those
ofchildren and the elderly. It also led to the displacement
of hundreds of families and shortages of fuel, food and
medical supplies. In coordination with the national and
local authorities, the United Nations moved quickly to
provide displaced families in Awbari and Sabha with
emergency relief items. Providing relief items to Kufra
is also under way.

In the east the unabated campaign of targeted
assassinations, bombings and abductions has reached
intolerable levels. Many victims have been security
and judicial personnel, but civilians have also suffered
unchecked terror and intimidation. The killing in
Benghazi on 24 February of seven Egyptian nationals,
all Christians, is a sad illustration of the dangerous
lawlessness. I take heart from the unequivocal
condemnation and repulsion with which the Libyan
public and leaders have reacted to those killings.

In Benghazi, a city that prides itself on its role
in putting an end to decades of tyrannical rule, the
public's sense of anger is mounting. While the primary
responsibility for reining in the perpetrators of the ugly
campaign of terror lies with the State, that will only
be possible with concerted efforts by the Government
and political, civic and revolutionary forces for the
protection of the civilian population. I must say that in
that context the United Nations was criticized for what
is seen as its impotence by those whose expectations
extend far beyond what the United Nations Mission
is mandated to do in terms of protecting the civilian
population.

Nation-wide demonstrations have taken place
since early February against the continued tenure of
the General National Congress. Strong resentment and
animosity have grown between the two main - though
not homogeneous - camps. Libya faces the risk of
embarking on a new trajectory of unprecedented
violence.

On 18 February, two armed brigades gave an
ultimatum to Congress members to step down within
five hours or face military intervention. That escalation
followed a series of attacks against media outlets that
have strongly disapproved of the General National
Congress. In my contacts with political and brigade
leaders and in a public statement, I called for restraint,
warned against resorting to violence and appealed for a
return to political dialogue. In a meeting with the two
brigades, I reiterated that position and asked them to
resolve political problems by political means. It is widely
believed that UNSMIL had a role in helping to avert
violence on that occasion. It is regrettable, however,
that some voices of criticism, and even slander, failed
to recognize the true motives and effects of the United
Nations initiatives.

Mindful of our neutrality, respect of national
sovereignty and strict adherence to non-interference in
the internal affairs of Libya, I have persistently called
on all actors on the Libyan scene to uphold national
interests and refrain from threatening to use force to
resolve political disputes. I also have reiterated the
United Nations support to the safeguarding of the
legitimacy of Libya's elected institutions and their role
in a peaceful transfer of their authority to an elected
body.

On 20 February, elections took place to the
Constitution Drafting Assembly, with 649 candidates
running in those elections. Fifty-four women competed
for the six reserved seats and 509,043 voters cast
their ballots, representing 46 per cent of the 1,101,541
registered voters. One million Libyans registered to vote
this time, whereas there were 2.7 million in 2012. In
addition to the Amazigh boycott of the polls, there was
a sizeable boycott by the Tabu and Tuareg in the south.
Their stance relates to their demand for a consensual
decision-making mechanism in the Constitution
Drafting Assembly regarding their rights. There had to
be re-run of the polls on 26 February in about 2 per cent
of centres. In some of them, polling did not take place
because of the boycott. Security considerations in the
city of Derna meant that no polling took place there. A
total of 13 seats out of 60 from across Libya have not
been filled.

There has been an alarming increase in attacks on
journalists and media institutions. Several television
stations in Tripoli and Benghazi were the target of
armed acts of vandalism. A number ofjournalists and
media figures were abducted. Attacks on media outlets
and personnel were, and must be, condemned.

In February, the General National Congress
promulgated a law that punishes with imprisonment
any person found to be undermining the 17 February
revolution, publicly insulting the legislative, executive
or judicial authorities or disgracing the national
flag. The law was criticised by many Libyans as
incompatible with Libya's Constitutional Declaration
and its international human rights obligations. We have
called upon the General National Congress to bring the
law in line with international human rights standards.

On 2 March, the 90-day deadline set by the law
on transitional justice for completing the screening of
detainees expired. Initial figures suggest that the process
has yet to be completed. UNSMIL remains concerned
about reports of continuing torture, deaths in custody,
kidnapping and secret detentions by brigades nominally
affiliated to the Ministries of Justice or Defence. The
handover of all detainees to the effective control of the
State is a prerequisite for the establishment of the rule
of law in the country.

Efforts to strengthen the State's ability to assume
its security responsibilities continue to be hindered by
the absence of a political agreement over the rebuilding
of a national army, the integration of revolutionary
fighters and the collection ofweapons. A solution to that
problem will require a clear strategy and the provision of
a number of assurances to the revolutionaries, who are
only nominally under State authority. That will include
a recognition of their contributions to the revolution
and safeguards for their legitimate rights and interests.

Despite a number of systemic problems, efforts by
the United Nations persevere. In addition to advice and
technical assistance, there has been special attention
given to developing national programmes to control
arms and ammunition stockpiles, heavy weapons and
small arms and light weapons. I am pleased to report
that the Government has responded positively and
taken steps to create a structure to address those issues.

International and well-coordinated support to
Libya is vital. In that regard, I welcome the holding and
results of the Rome conference, held on 6 March with the
participation of a large number of countries, including
the five permanent members of the Security Council,
neighbouring countries and other friends of Libya. The

people of Libya expect that the international community
will assist them in the difficult task of building a State
with strong and accountable institutions. Support
to Libya, however, can be meaningful and effective
only if there is unequivocal commitment on the part
of Libya's leaders to this goal and a political will to
resolve, through dialogue and concerted efforts, the
major problems of the country.

