Mr. Rogachev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First of all, we would like to express
gratitude to the Chairpersons of the Al-Qaida and
Taliban sanctions Committee, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) - Ambassadors
Mayoral, Loj and Burian respectively, for their
comprehensive briefings on the Security Council's
work in those key areas of countering the global threat
of international terrorism.
The Russian Federation welcomed the General
Assembly's adoption of the United Nations Global
Counter-terrorism Strategy (General Assembly resolution 60/288), which Russia sees as possessing
significant potential for the necessary strengthening of
the international community's system-wide work to
eradicate terrorism. Of particular importance here is
the resolution's emphasis on preventing global
terrorism and also on enhancing the anti-terrorism
security capabilities of Member States.

The practical implementation of such goals is
impossible without coordinated active work by the
Security Council in the various areas of counter-
terrorism and without the consistent implementation of
its resolutions, the task of monitoring which is
entrusted to the three subsidiary Committees.

On the whole, the Russian Federation commends
the work done by the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) and its Executive Directorate. We support the
main programmatic areas of the Committee's work of
the set forth in Ambassador Loj's briefing.

The five years that have passed since the
adoption of resolution 1373 (2001) have served to
convince us of the complexity and length of its
implementation process. We hope that the Committee's
recent improvements in the methods of assessing the
resolution's implementation and the accountability of
States will increase the quality of the dialogue with
States and streamline the provision of timely necessary
technical assistance to them.

We support the CTC's initiatives on targeted
interaction with individual regional and subregional
organizations. We also welcome the preparatory work
now under way to organize the fifth meeting of the
CTC with international and regional partners.

The work done by the Committee with regard to
country visits is now more meaningful and profound
than ever. As current Chair of the Group of Eight
(G-8), the Russian Federation consistently believes in
utilizing the capabilities of its Counter-Terrorism
Action Group to provide assistance to the CTC's
visiting missions. We welcome the steps taken by the
Committee to organize systematic work with States on
the outcome of the visiting missions. Given the
increasingly busy schedule of such visits, this is an
issue that must remain central among the CTC's
concerns.

I would especially like to focus on the
implementation of resolution 1624 (2005).
Unfortunately, we must observe that the results here
neither meet our expectations nor live up to the
innovative and forward-looking spirit of the resolution,
which is of crucial importance to preventing terrorism
and strengthening the basis for a dialogue among
civilizations. The report submitted to the Security
Council, surveying measures taken by States to
implement the resolution, reflects material submitted
by only 69 States. The very fact that such a very low
number of reports have been received from various
regions of the world and that almost two thirds of
Member States have not submitted reports has hardly
brought us any closer to a truly objective picture. That
is particularly disquieting given that, among other
things, the implementation of the more complicated
part of the mandate lies ahead. This relates to assisting
States by providing them with shared best practices and
databases of legislative and other measures to suppress
incitement to terrorism and to implement the other
provisions of resolution 1624 (2005).

We once again call upon those countries that have
not submitted their reports to the Committee to do so
as soon as possible.

At the same time, the Committee should very
soon think about a plan for future interaction with
States regarding the implementation of resolution 1624
(2005), including the portion of the resolution that has
yet to be implemented. We expect that, along with the
CTC's next six-monthly report, the Council will also
be provided with the Committee's report on the
implementation of resolution 1624 (2005).

We continue to view the 1267 Committee and its
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team as
one of the effective and productive Security Council
mechanisms to meet the challenges of counter-
terrorism. We attach great importance to continuing the
practice of country visits by the Chairman of the
Committee and members of the Monitoring Team. We
also favour closer coordination in this area, in
particular with the CTC and its Executive Directorate.

The 1267 Committee's Consolidated List
continues to be the main instrument for the
implementation of the anti-Taliban sanctions regime.
We welcome the efforts of the Monitoring Team and of
the Committee itself to improve the List. We call upon
Member States to continue to submit to the Committee
requests for the listing of persons and organizations
associated with the Taliban and Al-Qaida, as well as to
provide additional information with regard to those
persons.

We hope to see the continuation of the interactive
and fruitful discussions in the 1267 Committee
regarding improving the Committee's guidelines. We
are prepared to play an active role in that regard. In our
view, some progress has been made in this area, which
will no doubt help to strengthen the sanctions regime
itself. We are convinced that the most important thing
in that regard is to improve national mechanisms for
the taking of decisions to add new names to the
sanctions list.

It is precisely the commitment of Member States
to the full and conscientious implementation of their
obligations that will determine the success of our
common efforts to stem the unabated threat to
international peace and security posed by the Taliban
and Al-Qaida. The exacerbation of the situation in
Afghanistan caused by those extremists and terrorists
once again demonstrates how urgent it is to strengthen
the sanctions regime established by the Security
Council.

With regard to the activities of the 1540
Committee, one of its main tasks at this stage is to
provide assistance to States in submitting their national
reports. Unfortunately, about one third of Member
States have not yet done so. Given that fact, Russia, as
Chair of the G-8, has proposed a collective demarche
on behalf of the Group to States that are late with their
submissions. We believe that only by receiving regular
reports from all States can we have a full picture of the
global situation as regards national measures on non-
proliferation. For our part, we would be prepared to
provide States with expert assistance should they
encounter difficulties in preparing their national
reports.

We commend the Committee's work to organize
and participate in regional seminars on the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Russia will
continue to take an active part in that regard.

At the same time, we note that a significant body
of non-proliferation information and expertise
acquired, inter alia, through export control regimes has
not yet been assimilated by the Committee.
Streamlining national systems of export controls is a
key component of resolution 1540 (2004). Closer

contact between the Committee and export control
regimes, and in particular greater involvement on the
part of senior officials of those regimes in the seminars
to which I just referred, should be a priority in the
Committee's work.

Effective work to implement resolution 1540
(2004) will only be possible with the enhancement of
productive interaction between States regarding non-
proliferation problems. The most important thing is to
ensure countries' full implementation of the provisions
of the resolution. That will ultimately enable the
creation of national systems to monitor the use by
States of goods and technologies related to weapons of
mass destruction and their delivery systems. We must
all work together to create a solid barrier against non-
State actors seeking to gain access to such weapons
and related materials. A response to such a global
challenge can be possible only if we pool the efforts of
the entire international community.

We commend the interaction among the CTC, the
1267 Committee and the 1540 Committee. We hope
that cooperation among the experts of the three
Committees will continue in the future.

