Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
We thank Argentina for hosting today's debate, which
is taking place during World Humanitarian Day as we
mark the deaths of those killed 10 years ago in a tragic
attack against United Nations headquarters in Baghdad.

We thank the Secretary-General, the heads of
the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the United Nations Office
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights and the
representative of the International Committee of the
Red Cross for their statements.

Today's agenda item is extremely relevant given
the difficulties in protecting civilians in a number of
hot spots. We are convinced that, in order to remedy
the situation, selective and unilateral approaches to
violations of international humanitarian law must be set
aside, and strict adherence to human rights standards
and the implementation of the relevant decisions of the
Security Council are necessary.

We firmly condemn targeted attacks on civilians,
as well as casualties as a result of the indiscriminate or
disproportionate use of force. Such actions are flagrant
violations of international humanitarian law. There is
no justification for armed groups to attack peaceful
civilians, carry out terror attacks or take hostages. We
underscore the responsibility of all parties for ensuring
the safety of civilians and strict compliance with
norms of international humanitarian law. We call for a
thorough investigation of all the relevant incidents and
the punishment of perpetrators.

The protection of civilians is the responsibility of
the Governments of the States parties to a conflict. The
activities of the international community should seek
to assist national efforts in that regard. The adoption
of response measures to ensure the protection of
civilians by the use of force are only possible with the
approval of the Security Council and with unwavering
compliance with the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations. Attempts to manipulate mandates
approved by the Security Council are unacceptable.

It is not always right to rely on strengthened
mandates to provide peacekeepers the right to use force
or intimidate. Protecting civilians is one aspect of the
activities ofpeacekeeping missions, and is to be carried
out in connection with specific mandates defined by
the Council for each operation. The fundamental task
of peacekeepers is to provide assistance to the peace
process. To ensure the optimal use of peacekeeping
resources, there is an imperative need to devise clear
protection-of-civilians strategies for peacekeeping
operations with related mandates and to train
peacekeepers in that area. Ensuring the protection
of civilians requires the system-wide coordination of
measures, at the international, regional and national
levels.

Furthermore, it must be borne in mind that one
of the components of that challenge is the issue of
the provision of humanitarian aid. It is clear that the
importance of humanitarian aspects is growing, in
particular with respect to a comprehensive strategy for
crisis prevention as well as in the post-conflict phase.
Work in that area must be based on the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations and basic humanitarian
principles, and its effectiveness will depend to a large
extent on the level of coordination with the efforts of
the international community in the area of political
settlements. In that context, one of the core principles
is that of upholding State sovereignty.

The Russian Federation attaches great importance
to the creation of conditions conducive to the appropriate
and timely provision of humanitarian assistance to
those in need. Governments must play a leading role
in initiating and coordinating international aid, and
ensuring safe and unfettered access for humanitarian
staff to civilians in need, in particular in the context
of armed conflict, is one of the key challenges in
humanitarian response operations. The successful
implementation of such operations requires unstinting
compliance by all participants in humanitarian
activities with the guiding principles of emergency
humanitarian assistance set out in annex to General
Assembly resolution 46/182.

Ensuring the physical presence of foreign
humanitarian personnel in disaster situations is just
one aspect of the problem of access and not an end in
and of itself. The primary task is, rightly, choosing the
simplest, most practical, achievable and suitable means
and routes for the provision of aid, as these may differ
in each case.

Furthermore, the international community and
all humanitarian partners, including United Nations
system entities and specialized non-governmental
organizations, must uphold the sovereignty of States
receiving assistance. We once again stress that the
general coordination of such operations, including
the allocation of funds, the identification of transport
routes and the selection of partners, is the exclusive
prerogative of host States.

On the issue of ensuring access, we wish to call
attention to the problem of the use of armed forces for the
transport of humanitarian assistance. The international
community has repeatedly underscored that the
allocation of military resources to humanitarian-aid-
provision operations should be a method of last resort,
when the use of civilian manpower or resources is not
possible and human lives are at stake.

In our View, the inappropriate use of military
resources runs counter to the principle of the
independence of humanitarian aid from economic,
political and military objectives. We support the
activities of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs as a central coordination
mechanism for international humanitarian assistance.
We note the efforts undertaken, including steps towards
reform to increase the effectiveness and timeliness of
the provision of humanitarian assistance to those in
need. We are convinced that a key role in that process
must be played by Member States themselves. In that
connection, we would emphasize the need to bolster
cooperation among United Nations humanitarian
bodies and Member States, which would increase trust
in the United Nations humanitarian system as the most
effective mechanism for assisting Governments in
tackling the consequences of emergency situations.

