Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I thank the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Ms. Guebre
Sellassie, for her statement and I would like to reiterate
my country's full support to the implementation of the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. I will
focus my statement on three points.
First, the full implementation of the peace
agreement in Mali is a crucial step in stabilizing
the country and the Sahel. I take the opportunity to
reiterate our condolences to the Government of Mali
and the bereaved families of the victims, as well as to
other States whose nationals who died in the terrorist
attack in Bamako on 20 November. That attack was
hardly fortuitous. The meeting for the implementation
ofthe peace agreement was to take place that very same
day. We must stop those who are seeking to derail the
peace process.

The United Nations, and more broadly speaking
the international community as a whole, must continue
to fully support the stabilization of Mali and the
implementation of the peace agreement. As announced
by President Hollande on 22 October at the conference
for the economic recovery and development of Mali
hosted by Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development, France is providing more than
€360 million in aid to Mali and nearly €80 million for
the northern regions for the period 2015-2017.

Secondly, France is fully committed to assisting
the countries of the Sahel in addressing the challenges
before them. In addition to its activities within the
European Union and the United Nations, France is
continuing to develop its Sahelo-Saharan strategy in a
comprehensive approach that brings together security,
governance and development issues. France's Sahelo-
Saharan strategy covers activities in six countries:
Senegal, Mauritania, Mali, Burkina Faso, the Niger
and Chad. The strategy is focused on four priorities:
contributing to improving the people's living conditions,
strengthening States' capacities to fight terrorism and
major trafficking networks, countering radicalization
by supporting the development of education and the
media, and encouraging and facilitating regional
security cooperation. In that context, France allocates
between €400 million and €500 million a year in
bilateral assistance to the six countries covered by
our strategy, all of which are priority recipients of our
assistance.

The terrorist attacks perpetrated in Paris on
13 November only strengthen our conviction that the
international community must pool its efforts to combat
terrorism. In the Sahel, since August 2014 France's
Operation Barkhane has been our military contribution
to combating terrorism and improving the security
situation in the Sahel region, with 3,500 French soldiers
on the ground in five countries: Burkina Faso, Mali,
Mauritania, the Niger and Chad. Barkhane operations
have led to the neutralization and capture of more than
100 terrorists in one year, including many leaders,
while inflicting long-term damage on the operational
and logistical capacities of terrorist groups.

My third and final point is that the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel should help the
countries of the Sahel to establish projects that will
benefit their people. The Strategy should improve
coordination among the different United Nations
agencies in the Sahel and make them more effective.
Its goal is also and above all to help the Sahel countries
to develop transnational projects in the three areas of
governance, security and resilience. It is essential for
the people of the Sahel to begin to enjoy the dividends
of the United Nations commitment. We therefore
eagerly await the recommendations of the forthcoming
strategic review of the Integrated Strategy for the Sahel,
and hope that it will further strengthen the coherence of
United Nations action in the Sahel and in West Africa.

During the past year, the countries of the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-S Sahel) have strengthened their
cooperation, as demonstrated by the second summit
of Heads of State in N'Djamena on 20 November, in
which the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
participated. Joint military operations led by the G-5
Sahel States, with the support of Barkhane, represent a
concrete response to the terrorist threat by the States of
the region. Francejoins the Special Envoy in her goal of
conjugating regional and international efforts on behalf
of the Sahel.

