The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Japan.

I would like to begin by expressing my appreciation
to Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs
Miroslav Jenea and to High Commissioner for Human
Rights Zeid Ra'ad Al Hussein for their briefings.
For the past three years, the Security Council has
taken up the issue of systematic, widespread and gross
human rights violations in North Korea. However, we
have not yet seen tangible improvements. In resolutions
2371 (2017)and 2375 (2017), which were unanimously
adopted this year, the Security Council reiterates its
deep concern about the grave hardship to which the
people in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
are subjected.

The Security Council also condemns the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea for pursuing nuclear
weapons and ballistic missiles instead of the welfare of
its people, while the people in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea have great unmet needs. According
to recent United Nations findings, significantly more
than half of the people in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea suffer from major food insecurity
and lack of medical care, including a very large number
of pregnant and lactating women, and children under
five years of age, who are at risk of malnutrition, and
nearly a quarter of its total population is suffering from
chronic malnutrition.

However, instead of addressing those urgent
issues, North Korea has conducted three nuclear tests
and launched 40 ballistic missiles since January 2016.
Not only is the quantity outrageous, but the qualitative
advancements are also deeply alarming. Just two
weeks ago, for the third time, a ballistic missile with
an intercontinental range was launched. North Korea
claims that that missile can strike anywhere within
the United States mainland. It is essential for the
international community to maximize pressure on
North Korea, including through the full implementation
of the relevant Security Council resolutions, and make
North Korea change its policies. North Korea has
consistently ignored the obligations under the relevant
Security Council resolutions, and challenged regional
stability, as well as international peace and security,
while violating the human rights of its people. The
Security Council must continue to address this agenda
item within its mandate.

I also wish to highlight the issue of North Korean
workers abroad. In its resolution 2371 (2017), the
Council expressed concern regarding situations in
which North Korean nationals often work abroad for
the purpose of generating foreign currency that North
Korea subsequently uses to support its prohibited
nuclear and ballistic missile programmes. Japan,
together with the European Union, pointed out in the
General Assembly resolution 71/202 that workers sent
abroad are exploited by North Korea. That is another
stark example of the close link between the human
rights situation and the pursuit of nuclear and missile
development by North Korea.

Let me now touch upon the issue of the abduction of
foreign nationals, including Japanese nationals. As the
report of the commission of inquiry on human rights in
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea states,

"the Democratic People's Republic of Korea has
engaged in the systematic abduction, denial of
repatriation and subsequent enforced disappearance
ofpersons from other countries on a large scale and
as a matter of State policy."(A/HRC/25/63, para. 64)

Abduction is a grave issue concerning the sovereignty
of countries involved and the lives and safety of
their citizens, and it undoubtedly poses a threat to
international peace and security. In the past, North
Korean agents infiltrated Japan and abducted a number
of Japanese citizens, including a girl as young as
13-years-old.

Abductees' futures have been stolen, and their
families torn apart. Even now, at this very moment,
many abductees are being deprived of freedom and
waiting to be rescued. As the abductees and their
families grow older, that issue can afford no further
delay. Some family members have passed away, without
ever seeing their loved ones again. There is no time to
waste in resolving the issue. I sincerely hope that the
international community will work closely together to
realize the immediate return of all abductees.

In March, the Group of Independent Experts on
Accountability for Human Rights Violations in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea submitted a
report to the Human Rights Council that emphasizes
the importance of ensuring accountability for North
Korea's grave human rights violations, including
the country's abduction of foreign nationals. For the
implementation of the relevant recommendations made
in the report, the Human Rights Council adopted a
resolution to strengthen the capacity of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, including its field-based structure in Seoul.
Japan intends to continue to actively cooperate with the
activities of the Office in that regard.

Today I strongly urge North Korea to heed the
messages from the Security Council, the General
Assembly and the report of the commission of inquiry.
It must start taking concrete steps towards resolving all
outstanding issues of serious human rights violations,
stop its acts of provocation and cease its nuclear and
missile development programmes, which pose a threat
to international peace and security. The Council
should continue to hold meeting on the situation in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. Japan intends
to continue to participate.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Republic
of Korea.

