Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): At the outset, I extend my condolences to Oxfam and the humanitarian family following the deaths of two of their own today in Syria. I thank Mr. Pedersen and Mr. Lowcock for their briefings today. I welcome Mr. Pedersen's diligent efforts to create conditions conducive to a political settlement to the Syrian crisis. While the establishment of the Constitutional Committee offered a glimmer of hope, unfortunately it did not translate into substantial progress as the parties have remained intransigent. I encourage Mr. Pedersen to pursue his efforts to allay suspicion and build trust between the parties, and thereby defuse tensions in the negotiating environment. It is regrettable that since 1 December, the rise in violence has pushed hundreds of thousands of Syrians - primarily women and children - to abandon their homes at this frigid season. While we must all combat terrorism wherever necessary, we must do so in full compliance with international humanitarian law and specifically ensure the protection of innocent civilians and secure their access to humanitarian assistance. My delegation calls on belligerent elements on both sides to exercise maximum restraint and to work towards de-escalation. We remind the parties concerned to respect their commitments in the framework of the agreements reached in order to achieve a ceasefire. The Niger remains convinced that the political and humanitarian situations in Syria cannot be tackled independently because ongoing hostilities adversely affect the humanitarian situation, which in turn affects the political situation. My delegation believes that a settlement to the Syrian crisis must be political rather than military, in a process led by the Syrian people, including all elements of their society. That is why we must urgently get thepolitical process back on track, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). In conclusion, we once again call on all parties to the conflict to ensure respect for the ceasefire and to facilitate the access of humanitarian organizations to civilian populations that greatly need humanitarian assistance, especially in this period of bitter cold. We cannot remain indifferent to the harrowing briefings of Mr. Pedersen and Mr. Lowcock. It is time to act. It is time to contribute practically to putting an end to despair in Syria. It is time for the Council to take up its responsibilities, as its credibility depends on it.
