Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): I offer many thanks to
the Executive Director of the World Food Programme
(WFP), Mr. Morris, for his very informative briefing
on Africa's food crisis, as well as on the challenges
which the World Food Programme - and, I would say,
the international community - are facing in
addressing hunger in the continent. We carefully
noted the concerns of Mr. Morris, and I am pleased to
share them.

Eradicating hunger is not merely a lofty idea.
Access to adequate food has long been recognized as
both an individual right and a collective responsibility.
Yet, hunger - whether caused by war, drugs, natural
disaster, civil strife or poverty - continues to cause
widespread suffering. Like any event or process that
leads to large-scale death or the lessening of life's
opportunities, and undermines States as the basic unit
of the international system, hunger is a threat to
international security, as recognized by the Panel of
Experts in its report on threats, challenges and change.

Unfortunately, current trends indicate persistent
and possibly worsening food insecurity in many
countries, especially in sub-Saharan Africa. That is due
to a combination of factors: difficult weather
situations, health factors, civil strife resulting in
refugees and internally displaced persons, and issues
related to governance and economic policies. And
unfortunately, food is still used as a weapon in war.
There is a strong link between security and food
security. For all those reasons, the issue of hunger is
more than relevant to the Security Council, and in that
regard, we welcome today's briefing.
The numbers Mr. Morris gave us are staggering.
They point to a humanitarian situation of the utmost
gravity. It is obvious that, in order to avert disaster,
adequate levels of assistance must be provided
immediately, but long-term measures and planning are
also needed. The challenge is multifaceted and requires
dealing with a variety of issues, such as the need for
better synergy in emergency intervention and follow-
up; sustainable development; and the link between
humanitarian access, on the one hand, and malnutrition
and poverty, on the other. The cases of Darfur and of
certain regions of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo clearly demonstrate that a lack of humanitarian
access leads to the further deterioration of the situation.

There are significant shortfalls in the funding of
food assistance. As a result, we all know that, in
Eritrea, two thirds of the population have been exposed
to the risk of famine, while in Ethiopia the future of 3
million hungry Ethiopians is in jeopardy.

Government policies relating to food imports and
the environment, as well as the impact of bad economic
policy choices and the lack of political commitment to
address the problem, also play a role. Zimbabwe, for
example, is facing a critical economic situation, with
food shortages and a ballooning budget deficit,
together with high inflation, unemployment, and an
accelerating rise in cases of HIV/AIDS. At the same
time, investors have largely deserted the country
following a land-reform policy and concerns about
property rights and the rule of law.

Another issue of great relevance to Africa is what
Mr. Morris repeatedly described as a "triple threat":
hunger, AIDS and low Government capacity.

In concluding, I would like to ask some

questions. We have heard various estimates for various
crises in various countries. Is there any global estimate
for what is required to cover the total needs in Africa?
We welcome the fact that the World Food Programme
has made the eradication of poverty and the provision
of nourishment to orphans and vulnerable children a
priority in its policy. In that context, what, in Mr.
Morris's View, can the international community do
specifically with respect to the challenge of child
hunger? Lastly, given the relationship between
HIV/AIDS and hunger, I wonder whether he might
explain to us what kind of cooperation exists between
the World Food Programme and the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS.

