Mr. Pleuger (Germany): I wish to thank you, Mr.
President, for having convened this important meeting.
Given the latest developments in the region, it is my
View that it is timely to have an open debate in the
Security Council on the situation in the Middle East. I
therefore welcome the opportunity to share views on
the issue with Council members as well as with all
other interested delegations.

I would like to point out that I associate myself
with the statement that will be made by the Italian
presidency of the European Union at a later stage of the
meeting.

Germany deplores the recent surge in violence
between Israelis and Palestinians. We must not allow
this bloodshed to undermine the implementation of the
road map, which we still consider to be the relevant
document for a just and lasting peace in the region.

We call upon both the Israeli and Palestinian
Governments to refrain from any action that might
endanger the two-State solution, as laid out in the road
map.

Thus Germany urges the Government of Israel to
halt its continuing settlement activities and stop the
construction of the so-called security fence. While
recognizing Israel's need for security, we consider the
security fence to be detrimental to the implementation
of the road map. We believe that the fence might
become an obstacle to the peaceful resolution of the
conflict and the establishment of a viable Palestinian
state, living alongside Israel in peace and security. The
path of the Israeli fence departs from the Green Line,
cutting deep into Palestinian land, sometimes on the
basis of the confiscation of land. All of that entails
serious humanitarian and economic consequences for
the Palestinian population.

At the same time, we urge the Palestinian
Authority to take all necessary measures to end
violence and terror by militant groups against Israeli
targets. The suicide bombing in Haifa, which took the
lives of many innocent civilians, has shown that the
Palestinian leadership must do its utmost to prevent
such atrocities. Germany calls on the new emergency
cabinet of Prime Minister Ahmed Qureia to crack down
on violent groups and to dismantle the terrorist
infrastructure.

The members of the Quartet continue to back the
road map for peace as accepted by both sides at the
Aqaba summit, held on 4 June 2003. We call upon both
the Israeli and Palestinian Governments to continue to
implement the road map in good faith, because we feel
there is no alternative to the road map as the way to
peace.

