Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): I would like to thank the
Uruguayan presidency for organizing today's open
debate, as well as for the briefings by the representatives
of the International Committee of the Red Cross and
Human Rights Watch.

Hungary aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union, and I would
like to add a few words in my national capacity.

We share the view that the issue of health care in
armed conflict should be addressed in the wider context
of the protection of civilians, peacekeeping operations
and humanitarian access, and the strengthening of
compliance with international humanitarian law. We
also firmly believe that the protection of civilians should
be integral to every United Nations peace operation
that has such a mandate. It is important to maintain
continuing consultations and enhance communication
between the Security Council, the Secretariat and
troop- and police-contributing countries about possible
gaps in mission mandates.

Hungary considers respect for international
humanitarian law and the protection of victims of
armed conflicts to be extremely important. Since today
thousands of civilians are not only suffering from
the effects of armed conflict but are also becoming
targets for the military strategies of the parties to those
conflicts, the international community must intensify
all its efforts to enhance respect for international
humanitarian law. Resolution 2286 (2016) sent the
strong message that any attack on medical personnel
and facilities in conflict situations is absolutely
unacceptable. But sadly, while we regularly call the
international community's attention to the protection of
civilians and to atrocities committed against innocent
people and medical personnel, we are all aware that the
daily facts reveal hardly any changes for the better.

The protection of medical care in conflict and
humanitarian aid to the most vulnerable populations
must continue to be a priority. In cases where
international efforts fail and atrocity crimes, including
attacks on health-care institutions and medical
personnel, are committed, accountability is crucial.
Hungary is committed to supporting institutions
dedicated to ensuring accountability and establishing an
environment of respect for international humanitarian
law, such as international courts and tribunals and other
mechanisms. In that spirit, Hungary made a voluntary
contribution of €50,000 towards the establishment of the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Those Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under
International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011. As a member of the Human
Rights Council, Hungary will prioritize working to
prevent atrocity crimes and to promote tools already at
the international community's disposal that can help to
achieve an effective and timely response.

We would also like to affirm the relevance to
today's discussion of the concept of the responsibility
to protect. With a view to ensuring more timely and
decisive responses on the part of the Security Council,
Hungary participated actively in creating the code of
conduct regarding Security Council action against
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes
formulated by the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group, which has already been signed by
112 Member States.

Hungary believes that the best way to protect
civilians is by preventing armed conflicts. The United
Nations should use every tool at its disposal for
achieving the early warnings and political mediation
that are needed to prevent outbreaks of hostilities and
to de-escalate them when they occur. In that regard,
we wholeheartedly support the Secretary-General's
recommendation for a surge in the use of diplomacy
for peace and for placing prevention at the centre of
our joint efforts. Hungary fully shares that vision,
and my Government has therefore made voluntary
contributions in 2016 and 2017 in support of the work
of the Department of Political Affairs in preventive
diplomacy and mediation.

