Mr. Bennouna (Morocco) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, the Moroccan delegation is pleased to
see you presiding over the Council for the month of
April. All those who have frequented the United
Nations know of your great experience in this house,
and they are also aware of your personal commitment
to peace. That is why, in these tragic times in the
Middle East, we could not hope for a better President
in the Security Council.

The day before yesterday, hundreds of thousands
of Moroccans, coming to Rabat from all parts of the
Kingdom, bore witness to their pain. These hundreds of
thousands of Moroccans showed their pain with their
hearts; they shared with Palestinians their tears and
their sorrow. No human being could fail to share such
suffering on seeing all these small children holding
each other's hands, lost in the streets in Nablus or
Bethlehem, taking home just enough food, in the midst
of Israeli soldiers and of the roar of bombs coming
from everywhere from the occupier's artillery.
Old people are hiding, cringing under the tables
in the age-old casbahs. Human beings, monuments and
religious symbols have been martyrized, violated,
pillaged. The Palestinian resistance who die while
going to recover the bodies of their compatriots, all the
houses which have been burned, along with their
inhabitants - all these images, and many others, have
gone around the world, and they have deeply distressed
the conscience of all. They have reminded the people
of the world of the scenes and the tragedies we thought
were gone forever.

These images give us pause, all of us - citizens,
diplomats, officials, whatever our beliefs and our
convictions. They would have startled the founders of
the United Nations, those who drafted the Charter, and
all of those who have joined the United Nations since
and who have all declared themselves resolved to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
reaffirming their faith in fundamental human rights, in
the dignity and worth of the human person, in the
equality of rights of men and women, and of nations
large and small. Of course I am referring here to the
Preamble of the Charter.

Heedless of all that, Mr. Ariel Sharon continues
his war. He has even stated that he found himself at the
point of no return and that he would not go back to the
situation which prevailed before operations were
launched. One could not be any more clear. The Israeli
Prime Minister has chosen to defy the whole world -
the Security Council, its permanent members and
international public opinion. Thus far he has turned a
deaf ear to all the Council's appeals and to your last
statement, Mr. President, the one made during the
weekend, and also to those of the major world leaders
and, finally, to the appeal made by the Secretary-
General of the United Nations, who still represents the
legitimacy of the international community - Mr. Kofi
Annan.

For Mr. Sharon, the Israeli army will withdraw
only when it has accomplished its mission. Does this
mean that it will continue this mission, making a
mockery of all humanitarian law and of the existence
of thousands of civilians, whom it is terrorizing daily,
in full view of everyone? How can the Security
Council accept that without questioning its own
authority?

The Arab world held out the hand of peace in
Beirut. Israel would be wrong in seeing in that nothing
but an expression of weakness. It would be a serious
mistake; it would be short-sightedness that might have
tragic consequences. To continue to escalate repression
and violence, with such disproportionate resources, is
to commit the irreparable and to gravely jeopardize the
future.

The Arabs want peace. They are prepared to live
with the Israeli State. They have no disputes, historic
or otherwise, with the Jews. They have shared
tradition, culture and language with Jews for centuries.
This peace, this hand which has been held out, must
now be taken. Peace must begin with a forthright and
worthy dialogue with Yasser Arafat, the legitimate
leader of the Palestinian Authority.

Only yesterday, the King of Morocco, His
Majesty King Mohammed VI, President of the Al-Quds
Committee, was able to speak by telephone with
President Arafat. He reminded the President of the
support of the King of Morocco and of the Moroccan
Government and people in the ordeal it has endured
since the Israeli invasion.

It is indecent to isolate Yasser Arafat; it is
indecent to threaten him illegally with deportation and
then blame him for doing nothing to put an end to the
hostilities. I should like someone to explain to me how
one can isolate the head of the Palestinian resistance
and then ask him to intervene to stop the hostilities.
Yasser Arafat is the legitimate representative of his
people, and confirm this, day after day. They die to
testify to that. They proclaim it every day, risking their
very lives. It is with Yasser Arafat that Mr. Sharon
must begin a dialogue by forgetting old scores to be
settled and the vicissitudes of other confrontations that
are 20 years old. When one exercises the responsibility
of head of State, one does not settle personal scores.

Throughout his life, Yasser Arafat has claimed
nothing less than justice for his people. Today as
yesterday, he has been met with force and repression.
As the philosopher Blaise Pascal stressed, "Justice
without force is powerless; force without justice is
tyrannical". The exactions committed by the Israeli
army are doing grave harm to the very values that
Israel claims. When there is no justice, nothing remains
but arbitrariness and tyranny. That is why, today,
people are rising up to demand that the international
community dispatch an interposition force to protect
the defenceless Palestinian people and provide them
with justice.

As we well know, we attach the same value to
any human life, no matter whose it is. We condemn all
acts against innocent civilians, whatever their
provenance. Today, we pray that, at the end of the road,
Palestinians and Israelis will live in peace with mutual
respect.

The mission to the region begun yesterday by
United States Secretary of State Mr. Powell, beginning
with my country, is a first, tangible sign of hope for
peace. Our most earnest desire is that Mr. Powell's
efforts, through his contacts and the strength of his
conviction, will succeed as soon as possible. The
region awaits Mr. Powell with impatience. However,
the fact remains that today, the Security Council itself
is also in a position to give its support to the success of
Mr. Powell's mission, by using all juridical means at its
disposal - and the Council knows that it does have
juridical means under the Charter - to require that
Israel implement all Council resolutions, lift the siege
imposed on Yasser Arafat, immediately end the
bloodbath and withdraw from Palestinian cities that it
is occupying illegally. Each day that passes brings new
tragedy. We must act as swiftly as possible, because -
to paraphrase the poet Saint-John Perse - inertia alone
is a threat.

