Mr. Bolton (United States of America): I am very
pleased that my first participation in the Security
Council comes on the day on which the Council has
unanimously adopted this resolution condemning
terrorism in Iraq, vividly demonstrating broad
international support for the Iraqi Government. That
support is extremely important as Iraq continues
forward with its political, security and economic
transition.

Today it is, notably, only days after the 15-year
anniversary of Saddam Hussein's unprovoked
aggression against Kuwait and the adoption of
resolutions 660 (1990) and 661 (1990). Over that 15-
year period, the Council has been seized with the
question of Iraq. For most of that time, the effort was
to compel positive behaviour from the Government of
Iraq. Today, however, the Council is in partnership
with the new, democratically elected Government of
that country.

On a personal note, I was the Assistant Secretary
of State for International Organizations in August
1990. I have long been invested with ensuring the
development of a peaceful, democratic Iraq. We are
nearing the resolution of that process, and the next
months will be critical.

Iraq is quickly approaching another major
milestone in its transition, that of having a draft
constitution in place by 15 August. In anticipation of
doing so, the Iraqi Government has expressed its
commitment to meeting the 15 October referendum and
the 15 December election timelines as outlined in the
Transitional Administrative Law and endorsed by
Security Council resolution 1546 (2004). It is
important that that be a transparent, participatory and
inclusive process.

The Iraqi people continue to demonstrate the
courage that we have seen throughout the transition
process, most notably on 30 January, when millions of
Iraqis participated in Iraq's first democratic national
election. Undeterred by Saddam Hussein's legacy of
many years of oppression and war, the Iraqi people are
determined to create a new reality. Iraqis continue to
work towards a new constitution and new elections
despite ongoing terrorist attacks and threats of attacks.

This resolution is also important because it
illustrates that Iraq faces the same transnational
terrorist threat that has struck many other parts of the
world. This resolution highlights the critical
importance of cooperation among all Member States to
halt the flow of terrorists, weapons and terrorist
financing to Iraq.

We call upon the Governments of Syria and Iran
to honour their commitments to assist Iraq under this
resolution and other relevant resolutions, including
resolution 1546 (2004), and to implement the pledges
they have made to support stability in Iraq at the
conference of Iraq's neighbours.

We call upon all Iraqis to reject Violence and to
support a transparent, participatory and inclusive
transition process.

The constructive dialogue through which this text
was developed demonstrates further the strengthened
resolve of the United Nations to work together for a
democratic, secure and prosperous Iraq and for the
lasting and permanent benefit and safety of its people.

Finally, we urge all Member States of the United
Nations, especially in the Arab world, to come forward
and support the Iraqi people at this critical point in
their development of constitutional structures of
representative government.

