Ms. De] Ponte: Thank you, Mr. President, for
inviting me to attend this meeting today. I welcome the
opportunity, and hope that during my time in office there
will be regular occasions on which the Security Council
will find it useful for me to address it.

First, I would like the Security Council to know that
I am very proud to have been appointed Prosecutor of the
International Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and
Rwanda. I have only been in office for less than two
months and have been generally impressed by the work
being done in my own offices and by the activity of the
Tribunals as a Whole.

As Prosecutor, I am, however, acutely aware of my
responsibilities. The task before me is a daunting one, and
I need the Council's assistance and its continued support
in order to achieve successfully the objectives it has set
for me. There can be no doubt that the success of the two
International Criminal Tribunals depends upon the active
support of the Security Council of the United Nations.
The effectiveness and strength of international criminal
justice ultimately lies in the Council's hands. The Council
expresses the political will of the international
community, and it embodies the determination of all
civilized peoples to bring to justice those individuals
responsible for crimes which are among the most horrible
and massive the world has seen in recent years. In
creating the two Tribunals, the Council has designed a
powerful enforcement mechanism of international
humanitarian law. The Tribunals will turn to the Council
from time to time when its full weight must be brought to
bear on those who refuse to honour the international
obligations imposed on them by Chapter VII of the
United Nations Charter.

Indeed, the Tribunal has already reported to the
Security Council the total defiance on the part of the

 

Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in surrendering indicted
accused. I fear that as a result, Serbia is becoming a safe
haven for indicted war criminals who have been accused of
serious crimes in Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Kosovo. This situation cannot be allowed to continue.

Further, we cannot allow, to take another recent
example, the Republic of Croatia to withhold its
cooperation because of its unilateral decision that the
Tribunal has no jurisdiction to investigate the actions of its
armed forces in Operation Storm and Operation Flash.

It is essential for the success of the Tribunal that
States not be permitted to dictate to the independent
Prosecutor what events shall and shall not be investigated.
The power to initiate investigations bestowed upon the
Prosecutor by this Council is fundamental. It must be
preserved; and the judicial process has to be protected from
the tyranny of political or ethnic manipulation. The subjects
of international criminal law are individuals, not States or
entire peoples, and decisions about individual investigations
and prosecutions must lie with the Tribunal's Prosecutor.
That principle applies with particular force to States that
have themselves been involved in the armed conflicts in
question, on whose territory the investigations must be
carried out.

The Council is already aware of the refusal of Croatia
to cooperate over Operations Storm and Flash; and it
should also be aware that other requests will also test the
attitude of Zagreb towards the Tribunal's work. In
connection with a different investigation, my Office is
required to conduct certain on-site investigations in Croatia
and has requested the Government of Croatia to make the
necessary security arrangements in order to provide a safe
environment to allow that work to proceed this year. I hope
that Security Council intervention will not become
necessary for that exercise. I draw it to the Council's
attention simply to illustrate that the requirement of State
cooperation is a constant one and that it underpins the day-
to-day work of our institutions.

Over the last few weeks, I personally have been busy.
As the Council may know, I have completed my first visit
to the former Yugoslavia; I saw my offices in Skopje,
Pristina, Sarajevo, Banja Luka and Zagreb; I met officials
in all those locations; I met the Stabilization Force (SFOR)
and Kosovo Force (KFOR) Commanders; and I met the
Secretary-General's Special Representatives in Bosnia and
Kosovo. I went to an exhumation site in Kosovo and to our
mortuary in Bosnia, where I saw the results of our
exhumations programmes: the human remains of Victims. It
was an important visit for me, because seeing the many
different aspects of our investigations in the field helps
one understand the magnitude of the undertaking in which
we are engaged. I was pleased to see that the work was
being done in a professional manner, even when the
conditions were very hard for the teams. So, I am
learning.

Very soon I will do the same thing for Rwanda. I
will travel to my office there, and I will spend several
weeks in Kigali and Arusha. My Rwanda work has
begun, and I have already met the Deputy Prosecutor and
the Chief of Investigations in The Hague. I have also met
the Chief Prosecutor and the Military Prosecutor of
Rwanda, as well as the Rwandan Ambassador in Brussels.
That was the first time Rwandan officials had visited The
Hague, but since then our relations with the Rwandan
Government may have been affected by their reaction to
an important decision of the Appeals Chamber to release
one of the accused and to dismiss the charges against
him.

I am very concerned about the circumstances of that
case and about the court's findings of delays and
violations of the accused's rights. I very much regret that
the Office of the Prosecutor has been criticized for not
having acted diligently in that prosecution, but until I
have spent some time in Rwanda itself, it would be better
for me to reserve any further comments about the work
of that Tribunal. I would be happy to come back on
another occasion to address the Council specifically on
Rwanda.

Today, I would prefer to restrict my remarks to the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, and I would like to speak about two matters.
The first is the issue of arrests. In Bosnia and
Herzegovina, where international forces are present, 14
accused have been detained by SFOR since July 1997.
Four of these were detained this year. I hope that the
momentum will last and that the figures will continue to
rise. This record of success is most encouraging, so I
will work hard to maintain our level of cooperation with
SFOR, and I will continue to press for increasingly strong
action against all those accused persons who have not yet
been arrested, including those at the highest level.

But there are accused who are beyond the reach of
SFOR. Their arrests pose quite a different question. The
Tribunal itself can do only so much. I therefore need the
Council's help, as well as the support of national
Governments and all other key international institutions.

 

My predecessor was here in this Chamber in September; in
their remarks on that occasion, Council members
recognized the obligation of the Council, as the parent body
of the International Tribunal, to support it. One member
went so far as to remark that the Council does not have a
very effective record in that regard and that it could be
more active on that front. I cannot emphasize enough the
importance of the support the Security Council can give the
Tribunal. We do not seek it lightly, and I therefore urge the
Council to put its full weight behind our efforts when we
ask for its assistance and to be creative in finding ways to
bring to bear the sort of pressures that will produce results.

Secondly, I would like to say something about
Kosovo. Much of our effort this year concerned Kosovo,
because we know we had to act quickly before evidence
was lost. I can tell the Council that for the past five months
we have been working with forensic personnel from 14
countries, who contributed forensic pathology and "scenes
of crime" teams. The last of these teams left Kosovo on
31 October. I have now received a preliminary analysis of
the first findings, although not all the forensic reports have
been completed. I would like to give accurate details today,
because some statistics are beginning to appear in the
media.

There has been a lot of general speculation about the
number of people killed in Kosovo. Some people expect the
Tribunal to give the definitive answer. But our task is not
to prepare a complete list of war casualties. Our primary
task is to gather evidence relevant to criminal charges. Our
initial focus, understandably, had to be to investigate those
places listed as crime scenes on the indictment against
President Milosevic, and other leaders. Our work has, of
course, expanded since that early list, but it is still not our
mission to compile a complete census of the dead.
Nevertheless, my staff have collected some reliable
statistics. It may be some time before all the evidence is
presented before a court, and there is a legitimate public
interest in my giving some indication of the nature of our
findings even at this early stage, so I think it is important
for me to give the Council some numbers.

We have received reports of 529 grave sites, including
sites where bodies were found exposed. As of today,
approximately one third of the 529 grave sites have been
examined. Work has been completed at 195 sites. In total
4,266 bodies had been reported to be buried in those sites.
To date 2,108 bodies have been exhumed. This figure does
not necessarily reflect the total number of actual Victims,
because we have discovered evidence of tampering with
graves. There are also a significant number of sites where
the precise number of bodies cannot be counted. In these
places, steps were taken to hide the evidence. Many
bodies have been burned, but at those sites the forensic
evidence is nevertheless consistent with the accounts
given by witnesses to the crimes. The figures themselves
may therefore not tell the whole story, and we would not
expect the forensic evidence in isolation to produce a
definitive total.
Even so, our work can help establish the total
number of dead, and we are already building up the
overall pattern of the killing. That pattern is of a large
number of relatively small sites. We do not typically find
hundreds of people buried together. A few sites did
contain the remains of approximately 100 people, but
often the number is much smaller; and sometimes the
reports of victims buried are not borne out at all. For the
Council's information, I have prepared a detailed list of
sites and figures for distribution. I am afraid that I cannot
give a more detailed breakdown of the age or sex or other
characteristics of the deceased.

Many of the bodies, including those of women and
children were positively identified, and often the names
of individual victims were well known. Our work
therefore helps in the sad process of confirming
identification, although, again, that is not the primary
objective of my Office.

To sum up, we now have in our possession,
invaluable documentation of what happened to many
people in many places in Kosovo. There is no substitute
for this kind of accurate information, because it is
evidence that eventually will stand up in a court of law.

We are preparing now for next year, when we would
like to be able to complete the investigation of crime
scenes and mass graves. I want to complete the forensic
examination of all remaining sites as soon as possible.
There is a continuing risk that some of the remaining sites
may be disturbed before we can examine them. The
imperative to work quickly that drove our exhumations
this year still exists. We do not know how many bodies
we may find. As I have said, we have this year confirmed
finding over 2,000 bodies out of a total of 11,334
reported to us. With the same level of resources next year
as we have had this year, we can finish the whole
forensic programme in a single season. My goal is to
complete the task we have begun, and I therefore intend
to seek the continued assistance of States contributing
gratis personnel for the remainder of the forensic work
next year. We cannot leave the job only half-finished.

 

We therefore still have a lot of work to do, but I do
not intend to allow our Kosovo investigations to detract
from other prosecutions relating to Bosnia and Herzegovina
and to Croatia. The year 2000 will see a full range of
activity from the Office of the Prosecutor.

(spoke in French)

The Council is the executive body of the International
Tribunal when States do not comply with their duty to
cooperate. I am here today precisely in order to ensure that
the Security Council intervenes in this urgent matter to
make certain that Croatia collaborates and cooperates with
us on the documents which we urgently need in order to
complete these very important investigations.

These are the most important points which I wish to
raise and I would be happy to answer any questions that the
Council may have.

