Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I would like to
thank you, Madame President, for scheduling today's
debate on the situation in Afghanistan. We are also
grateful for the latest report (S/2010/630) of the
Secretary-General and appreciate the briefing by his
Special Representative Staffan de Mistura. We also
thank Ambassador Zahir Tanin, Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan for his statement.

I join others in expressing sincere condolences on
the passing away of Mr. Richard Holbrooke, the United
States Special Envoy to Afghanistan and Pakistan. An
accomplished diplomat, Ambassador Holbrooke served
his country and the cause of international peace and
security with great distinction in difficult conditions in
various parts of the world. He will be missed by us all.

As the year draws to a close, today's meeting
offers us a timely opportunity to comprehensively
review the goals and commitments that we have been
able to achieve and fulfil in Afghanistan, as well as the
tasks that remain unaccomplished on the long road to
lasting peace, prosperity and stability in that country.
The overarching objective of the efforts of the
international community has been to create an enabling
environment for the Afghan Government to eventually
assume full responsibility and take charge of its own
destiny. The London Conference in January, the Kabul
Conference in July and the parliamentary elections in
September were significant political milestones in that
direction.

The Kabul Conference marked the beginning of
Kabul process, a new phase in the partnership of the
Afghan Government with the international community.
I am happy to note that the focus of the Kabul process
has now shifted from planning to implementation and
delivery. That is an important step on the road to a
transition to greater Afghan ownership. The Secretary-
General's latest report also highlights that a framework
for detailing implementation plans for the short- and
medium-term in all 22 national priority programmes
has been put in place.

The holding of National Assembly elections in
September, despite threats by the Taliban and other
illegal armed groups, was an important step in the
consolidation of the democratic framework in
Afghanistan. We are particularly encouraged by the
robust participation and campaigning by some 2,500
candidates, including 396 women. We hope the
uncertainty regarding the results of the elections is
settled sooner rather than later.

In our shared pursuit of sustained and tangible
improvements in security, governance and
development, the unity of purpose of efforts is indeed
imperative to enhance the efficiency and overall
coordination of the international community's presence
in Afghanistan.

I am pleased to note that the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) is
assuming a greater role in generating a coherent
approach to coordinating donor assistance and the
alignment of provincial reconstruction teams, donors
and other implementation partners to the Government-
led processes, including at the sub-national level. I
could not agree more with the observation in the
Secretary-General's report that, as the process of
transition to full Afghan leadership and ownership
advances, both the Government and the international
community should be guided by realities rather than
schedules.

We need to guard against the impulse to consider
the peace process a shortcut to facilitating transition.
Going down that path without respecting the red lines
for the process laid out at the London Conference and
endorsed at the Kabul Conference would risk
Afghanistan backsliding into being a safe haven for
terrorists and extremist groups. The international
community must bear in mind the lessons learned from
past experiences in negotiating with fundamentalist
and extremist organizations, and ensure that the
process remains Afghan-led, inclusive and transparent.
India supports the Afghan Government's efforts to
reintegrate those individuals who abjure violence, give
up armed struggle, do not have links with terrorist
groups, and are willing to abide by the values of
democracy, pluralism and human rights as enshrined in
the Afghan Constitution.

As the International Security Assistance Force
prepares to gradually withdraw from Afghanistan, there
is a need for adequate capacity-building of Afghan
security forces, along with adequate enablers, before
security responsibility transitions to them. The
necessity of dealing with the terrorist sanctuaries and
safe havens beyond Afghanistan's borders is equally
important in this context. The adequate capacity of
Afghanistan's security forces and other institutions is a
sine qua non for protecting the country's sovereignty,
plurality and democracy.

The security and stabilization of Afghanistan will
remain a distant goal unless we are able to isolate and
root out the syndicate of terrorism, which includes
elements of Al-Qaida, the Taliban, Lashkar-e-Toiba and
other terrorist and extremist groups, operating from
within and outside Afghanistan's borders. As we have
discussed today, though we appreciate the gains made
in the southern provinces of Kandahar and Helmand
against Taliban strongholds, it is worrisome that a
deteriorating security environment, especially in the
north, has been an ongoing trend this year. The
Secretary-General's report notes that there has been a
66 per cent increase in security incidents in
Afghanistan compared to the same period in 2009.

Afghanistan's stability and economic
development depend a lot on its neighbours and the
region as a whole. The country's greatest economic
potential resides perhaps in its immense potential as a
trade, transport and energy hub, and as a bridge linking
Central, West and South Asia, given Afghanistan's
traditional cultural and economic moorings in South
Asia. Growing economic interdependence will also
help in weaning disaffected youth away from
insurgency and militancy and in promoting regional
cooperation. We support the wishes of the Government
of Afghanistan to take the lead in this direction.

In India's efforts towards the stabilization of
Afghanistan, the focus has been on development and
humanitarian work to assist the Afghan people as they
build a peaceful, stable, democratic and pluralistic
nation. We have sought to assist Afghanistan within our
means. Our $1.3-billion assistance programme is aimed
at building infrastructure, capacity-building in critical
areas of governance, health, education, agriculture and
so forth, and in generating Afghan capacity and
employment.
At the dawn of the new year, it is our earnest
hope that the international community will remain
steadfast in its commitment to supporting Afghanistan.
Enhanced synergy and coherence of efforts on the part
of the international community are critical for creating
an enabling environment that can facilitate transition to
greater Afghan ownership and put Afghanistan firmly
on road to peace, progress and stability. We support the
good work done by UNAMA.

