Mr. Keita (Mali) (spoke in French): I should like to
welcome Mrs. Ogata, United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, among us. I should like to thank her for the
very useful and frequently moving information that she
has given us. We would also like to thank her for having
devoted her initial thoughts to the millions of African
refugees who have greeted the new millennium in the
most difficult circumstances. Her presence here gives this
meeting all its significance. Mali is pleased to see
included on the Security Council's agenda the item
"Promoting peace and security: humanitarian assistance to
refugees in Africa".

 

The first week of the Security Council's work in the
third millennium has been marked by the consideration of
two closely related subjects of great concern and great
importance: the impact of AIDS on security and stability in
Africa and the promotion of peace and security. Our
attention is demanded when solemn declarations and
recognized principles relating to respect for humanitarian
law do not lead to action at a time when action is
necessary. The credibility of our commitment is at stake.

The various issues raised by the High Commissioner
for Refugees require our attention. The Council must
reaffirm its commitment to Africa in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, and in reaffirmation of the principles of the
political independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of all Member States.

African States have made considerable progress in
democratization, economic reform and respect for the
protection of human rights with a view to achieving
political stability, peace and lasting economic and social
development. Despite these positive developments, Mali
remains deeply concerned by both the number and the
intensity of armed conflicts on our continent, particularly in
Sierra Leone, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Somalia, Burundi and Angola and the fratricidal dispute
between Eritrea and Ethiopia. These conflicts, as is well
known, are the source of the flows of displaced
populations. This is why we agree with Mrs. Ogata when
she says that it is high time the Council became involved
by taking concrete action.

My delegation appreciates the work being done by the
United Nations, the specialized agencies and the many other
agencies that are working to alleviate the suffering of
African refugee populations, but we would be even more
appreciative if the international community and the media
showed the same concern towards Africa as they have
towards other areas of the world, which would constitute a
basis of equal treatment in the protection of refugees and
displaced persons.

The exodus of civilian populations affected by a
conflict can seriously compromise international peace and
security. In this connection, I should like to emphasize that
in order to provide protection to humanitarian workers, to
refugees and to other people affected by a conflict,
coordinated steps must be taken, in accordance with the
purposes and principles enshrined in the United Nations
Charter. We must also ensure the protection of refugee
camps and aid to host countries. My delegation condemns
the increased number of attacks and the more frequent use
of force against refugees and other civilian populations in
conflict situations, as well as any attack or use of force
against United Nations and associated personnel or the
personnel of humanitarian organizations, in violation of
applicable international law, including international
humanitarian law.

The foundation of a peaceful society is respect for
basic human rights, for human dignity and for the value
of the human being. The search for peace in Africa
requires a global, concerted and resolute approach, based
on the elimination of poverty, the promotion of
democracy and sustainable development and respect for
human rights, as well as the prevention and settlement of
conflicts, the maintenance of peace and humanitarian
assistance. A real show of political will is necessary in
Africa in order to obtain lasting results in this area. To
this end, support is required for the various mechanisms
created in the continent to contain its many conflicts, as
well as the maintenance and augmentation of the
resources made available by donor countries.

We also support the establishment of a special trust
fund that would enable young refugees to pursue their
studies, and we endorse all of the proposals that Mrs.
Ogata has made, for which I thank her. In conclusion, my
country hopes that the appeals made today will be
followed by concrete action.

