Mr. Ramirez Carreflo (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela voted in favour of today's resolution 2216
(2015), in the firm conviction that it is the responsibility
of the Security Council to encourage a peaceful,
negotiated settlement of the conflict in Yemen. We
emphasize that there can be no military solution to the
conflict affecting the country. The only solution is a
political, negotiated and peaceful one. In that regard,
we reaffirm our support for the mediation efforts of
Mr. Jamal Benomar, Special Adviser to the Secretary-
General on Yemen, aimed at helping the parties to
arrive at a peace agreement within the framework of a
political transition.

We hoped that today's resolution would include
stronger language on a cessation of hostilities - and
indeed of every kind of military action - in Yemen.
The escalating violence has resulted in the death of
civilians, including women and children, and the
growing number of clashes has exacerbated the already
complex humanitarian situation that our Arab brother
country has been dealing with for many years, which
has left more than 60 per cent of the population in need
of aid. The current situation is only worsening the
already delicate and critical situation on the ground.
We condemn the attacks on hospitals and schools, in
violation of international humanitarian law, and in that
regard we call on the parties to fully comply with the
standards set by international humanitarian and human-
rights law so as to ensure the protection of civilians.
We also appeal to them to facilitate the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to Yemenis in urgent need of
food, medicine and basic services.

We reaffirm our condemnation of terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations. The only people who benefit
from the current conflict are the terrorist groups of
Al-Qaida and the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, since
institutional collapse and sectarian tensions help them
to realize their aims. It is therefore essential that there
be a return to dialogue and negotiation with a view
to achieving peace and stability in Yemen. Likewise,
we urge Member States to refrain from taking any
measures that would prevent the achievement of those
objectives.

Lastly, we agree with what was said by
other delegations. Our country will always work
constructively within the Security Council in order to
achieve the proposed objectives. However, we would
like to express our concern at the fact that the negotiating
process lacked the required inclusiveness, limiting the
discussions on the items in the resolution to a group of
actors and excluding the other non-permanent members
of the Council, whose proposals were not discussed
properly. We hope that this type of situation will not
happen again, because it affects the Council's working
methods and in particular undermines its transparency
and credibility.

