At the outset, on the occasion of the holy month of Ramadan, I would like to extend my best wishes to our Muslim friends around the world. My heart goes out in particular to those who are affected by conflicts and other natural and man-made tragedies. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is causing a human security crisis worldwide, but conflict-affected people are among the most vulnerable and hardest hit by the pandemic. I fully echo the Secretary-General's call for an immediate global ceasefire and his statement that there should be only one fight in our world today - our shared battle against COVID-19. Some parties have expressed their acceptance of the call, but others have not. We are deeply concerned about the situation in the region, notably in Syria, Yemen and Libya. We urge all parties to immediately cease hostilities, allow humanitarian access and stop the spread of COVID-19 among innocent populations already under severe distress. Under the current situation, Palestinians in Gaza are at particularly high risk of the pandemic due to the dense population and lack of essential medical facilities. In March, Japan made a contribution of approximately $1.75 million to the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies to support the Palestinian people's fight against COVID-19. Japan welcomes the ongoing cooperation between Israelis and Palestinians to stop the spread of COVID-19, with United Nations support. We call on both sides to continue and even scale up their joint endeavour to combat the common threat of COVID-19 and mitigate its impact, including the socioeconomic consequences. Japan stands ready to work hand in hand with United Nations agencies and other partners. At this critical juncture, the activities of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) are more important than ever. The Agency provides fundamental daily services to sustain the livelihoods of the Palestinian people, including basic education, water and sanitation, as well as the essential medical support to cope with the pandemic. In March, Japan decided to contribute approximately $1.9 million to UNRWA's programme budget for this fiscal year. In addition, we are considering a further contribution in response to the Agency's COVID-19 flash appeal. We believe that the swift response of UNRWA and the Palestinian Authority has, so far, contained the spread of the virus to a relatively low level. Japan calls on other donors and partners to join in supporting UNRWA's efforts, as Mr. Suzuki Keisuke, State Minister for Foreign Affairs, advocated yesterday at the Ministerial Strategic Dialogue on UNRWA. It is disappointing to continue to hear about Israel's illegal settlement activities, including the demolition of Palestinian-owned structures and the threat of annexation. Japan deeply deplores those activities and once again strongly urges the Government of Israel to completely cease all settlement activities in the West Bank, including the implementation of construction plans that are undermining the viability of a two-State solution. We are also deeply concerned about the continued violence in the region. We strongly condemn terrorism and attacks against innocent civilians, and call upon the parties to take immediate steps to prevent all acts of violence, provocation and incitement. Japan remains committed to supporting a two-State solution, in which Israel and an independent Palestinian State live side by side in peace and security, in line with relevant Council resolutions and other agreements. The final status of 61/99 62/99 Jerusalem should be resolved through negotiations based on the relevant Council resolutions and known parameters. Restrictions on movement to counter COVID-19 may affect efforts to advance the peace process, but we must not allow any backtracking. In cooperation with its international partners, Japan will remain actively engaged to promote the peace process.
