Mr. Cardenas (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): I should like first to convey to you, Sir, our great
thanks for your excellent work as President of the Security
Council and as Germany's representative to the Council.

I should like to thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report on the situation in Liberia. We
regret the sombre picture that it paints. Since the adoption
of the Council's resolution in April the parties in Liberia
have been unable to make any substantive progress in
respect of almost any of the measures in that resolution
that the Security Council urged them to take. We are
referring to the installation of the Council of State, the re-
establishment of the cease-fire and steps towards the
implementation of the other provisions of the Accra
agreement.

As a result of the current state of affairs the
humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate, and
violations of human rights persist. Indeed, those who are
trying to alleviate difficulties in the field have themselves
been victims of mistreatment.

For all these reasons the Council is obliged, in this
resolution, to reiterate identical appeals. Despite this, the
convening of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) summit, while not entirely productive,
resulted, in the view of the Heads of State and
Government of ECOWAS, in considerable progress
towards an agreement on many of the outstanding issues.
And the door was left open for the convening of another
meeting of the Liberian parties.

As a result of that summit, according to information
provided by the Secretary-General's Special
Representative, Ambassador Nyakyi - to whom we
express our deep appreciation for the work he is doing -
contacts between some of the Liberian factions and
countries of the region have made progress, making
possible an additional meeting of those factions in the
near future.

In this connection, we should like to emphasize the
positive nature of the meeting held between the Nigerian
authorities and Mr. Charles Taylor, the leader of the
National Patriotic Front of Liberia. These positive signs
give the impression that, finally, there may be a slight
change in the factions' attitude to the conflict, and the
Council therefore stands ready to provide the Liberian
parties with a new opportunity. However, this additional
opportunity will merely be a repetition of the one that
was offered in April.
The lack of concrete progress in the political process
and, which is even more serious, with regard to the cease-
fire, the lack of harmonization in the policies and efforts
of all the parties involved and the unfortunate

 

continuation of the flow of arms to the country have now
made it necessary to make international support conditional
on the existence of real, concrete political will among the
parties peacefully to resolve their differences and achieve
national reconciliation. This is why the UNOMIL mandate
is being renewed for a period of two and a half months, on
the understanding that the parties will comply with the
terms of paragraph 4 of the resolution. The future of
UNOMIL, as indicated in paragraphs 5 and 6, is entirely in
the hands of the Liberian parties.

We should like particularly to acknowledge the
African countries that have provided troops for the
Monitoring Group of ECOWAS (ECOMOG) and the
positive role that that body has been playing through its
efforts to establish peace, security and stability in Liberia.
We are encouraging it to continue unfailingly to discharge
its mandate and to undertake measures that would reinforce
the embargo on the supply of weapons to Liberia.

We also commend UNOMIL for they way in which it
has accomplished its difficult tasks and encourage it to step
up its cooperation with ECOMOG in the discharge of their
respective mandates. We hope that the international
community will continue to contribute to the peace process
in Liberia, to alleviate the humanitarian situation of its
suffering people and to help the forces of ECOMOG fully
to discharge their mandate.

It is our hope that the leaders of the various factions
will now be able to deal squarely with the situation. They
should not let this opportunity, which may be their last,
elude them. They must heed their peoples and the
combatants in Liberia who, tired of war, would surely
welcome the speedy implementation of the peace process.

