Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Dutch presidency of
the Security Council for its outstanding efforts during
the month of March and for convening today's debate,
which contributes to coordinating efforts towards
improving peacekeeping operations.

Over the past few years, we have seen how
peacekeeping operations have been saddled with
unrealistic burdens and mandated with tasks that exceed
their ability in a way that ignores the political reality and
the situation on the ground. The deployment of some
missions has become a mere symbol of the inability
of the United Nations to achieve final settlement of
decades-long conflicts. Thus far, efforts to improve
peacekeeping operations have focused on addressing
operational and technical shortcomings, namely, the
readiness and adequacy of contingents and equipment
and the conduct and discipline of peacekeepers. In
addition, ensuring the physical protection of civilians
has been the only parameter according to which the
effectiveness of a mission is gauged. As important as
those aspects are, they are insufficient to achieve the
desired objective. In that regard, we would like to
underscore a number of points relating to the topic of
today's debate.

First, partnerships among the main actors in
peacekeeping operations must be improved, including
the host country, troop- and police-contributing
countries, the Security Council, the Secretariat and
regional organizations. That would ensure joint
ownership of the missions at all levels, starting with
the strategic level, then formulating executable realistic
mandates and reaching practical implementation. In
that regard, we would like to underscore the importance
of regional organizations, in particular the African
Union, according to Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations.

Joint ownership and responsibility requires
improvement in existing traditional coordination
mechanisms. It is not enough to hold official meetings.
Coordination is required at the decision-making level in
order to design mandates. In that context, we underscore
the importance of the advisory role ofthe Peacebuilding
Commission, which has become instrumental in

enhancing the Council's ability to design mandates that
address the root causes of conflict. We look forward to
an enhanced role for the Peacebuilding Commission in
the upcoming phase.

Secondly, we must avoid deploying United
Nations missions without taking into consideration
the general context of conflicts. We highlight the
presidential statement (S/PRST/2017/27) with regard
to the contribution of peacekeeping operations to
sustaining peace. That statement establishes seven
indicators to be taken into account when designing
or renewing mandates, including supporting national
ownership of political settlement processes; setting
clearly defined objectives towards sustaining peace;
conducting an integrated analysis within the missions
of opportunities and challenges to building national
capabilities; ensuring coherence between political
and operational tasks of a mission; establishing clear
responsibilities and integration of roles among the
missions and other United Nations agencies and
programmes to support national institutions; and having
mission exit strategy that enables national institutions
to sustain peace in the long run.

Those indicators contained in the aforementioned
presidential statement contribute to assessing the
success of peacekeeping operations and their actual
impact. They enhance the effectiveness ofpeacekeeping
operations and reduce their costs, as well as decreasing
deployment times. To that end, tangible results in the
ongoing strategic review processes for a number of
missions must be achieved through the adoption by the
Security Council ofthose recommendations. Otherwise,
those reviews will be merely theoretical exercises with
no practical implications.

Thirdly, when assessing the performance and
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations, we must
take into account the specificity of each conflict and
the operational, tactical and political conditions of
each mission. Performance assessments should not be
limited to operational aspects; they should also include
an assessment of the role of the mission as a whole in
settling conflicts.

With regard to the Organization's ability to mobilize
potentials and forces, we have seen commendable
efforts undertaken recently to increase the number of
troop-contributing countries through the Peacekeeping
Capability Readiness System (PCRS). There must be a
qualitative shift in the work of PCRS so that it becomes
more flexible and capable of selecting the best-trained
and equipped troops. The selection process must be
based on the requirements of each mission. This is why
we need a smart and customized PCRS.

Fourthly and lastly, the safety and security issue of
peacekeepers cannot be addressed from an operational
and training perspective alone. There is an organic
connection between the safety of peacekeepers and the
overall political efforts carried out by the United Nations
in addressing the conflict in question. Accordingly, the
recommendations contained in the Cruz report and the
proposed action plan constitute commendable efforts.
However, those recommendations only address one of
the intertwined aspects of this issue.

We stress that the prevailing mindset of the forces
is derived primarily from the mandate adopted by the
Security Council, which brings us back to the core
issues: partnership and joint ownership in designing
mandates, and the equitable sharing of responsibilities
among the Secretariat, the Security Council and the
troop-contributing countries. We do not consider the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the
principles of peacekeeping operations to be restrictive
with regard to the performance of forces. On the
contrary, they are the main guarantors of the safety and
security of peacekeeping personnel.

In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to reiterate Egypt's commitment to contributing
effectively to peacekeeping operations. I express our
appreciation to those who have lost their lives while
defending the principles, purposes and mandates of the
United Nations. We must do our utmost to continue to
improve peacekeeping operations in order to honour
their sacrifice.

