Mr. McNee (Canada): We thank the Russian
Federation for convening this important debate today.

I have the honour to speak today on behalf of the
delegations of Canada, Australia and New Zealand.

At the outset, I would like to express our
appreciation for the very effective work of Assistant
Secretary-General Carolyn McAskie and her team in
supporting the Peacebuilding Commission in its crucial
early phase.

The delegations of Canada, Australia and New
Zealand strongly support the Peacebuilding
Commission. It has a critical role to play in
coordinating and integrating post-conflict
peacebuilding activities. A strong Commission will
move the international community past an ad hoc
response to peacebuilding and on to a more coherent
response embodying what needs to occur in a post-
conflict setting to achieve lasting peace.

In the year since the creation of the Peacebuilding
Commission, in December 2005, good progress has
been made in establishing this new institution.
Representation on the Peacebuilding Commission's
Organizational Committee has been agreed, and a
dialogue has been started to clarify the Commission's
specific functions within the United Nations system.
We were also gratified to see Burundi and Sierra Leone
referred to the Commission by the Security Council in
June of last year.

Despite that progress, the delegations of Canada,
Australia and New Zealand have been disappointed by
the overemphasis placed on procedural matters by
some members of the Commission at the expense of
substantive peacebuilding issues, which are indeed the
core mandate of the Commission. Our delegations urge
the Commission to find new ways of working that befit
the challenges before it. That includes working
informally when possible in order to maximize
progress during this formative phase, refocusing on its
core mandate of advising United Nations organs on
integrated strategies for post-conflict peacebuilding,
giving attention and resources to reconstruction and
institution-building efforts, and serving as a focused
forum for political discussions related to transitions
from war to peace.

That mandate needs to be approached in an
action-oriented, flexible manner, with results identified
that can be realistically achieved. Our delegations also
urge the Commission to develop modalities to ensure
the active participation of civil society and other
Governments in all areas of the Commission's work,
since their input and participation are critical to the
success of the peacebuilding process.

While we recognize that building peace is a long-
term process, the delegations of Canada, Australia and
New Zealand continue to believe that the
Peacebuilding Commission should focus on those cases
where it can have the greatest and most transformative
impact, and which can be Viewed as immediate positive
contributions to kick-start a longer-term peace process.

Our Governments were very pleased to see the
Peacebuilding Support Office undertake missions to
Burundi and Sierra Leone to identify gaps in the
peacebuilding process and to identify areas where the
Commission could have the greatest impact. We were
also pleased that the Governments of Burundi and
Sierra Leone were able subsequently to identify key
priorities for the Commission during the fall sessions
of the Peacebuilding Commission. Now that those two
countries have been declared eligible to benefit from
the Peacebuilding Fund, we are hopeful that there will
be early disbursements and early results from the
investment made.

As Burundi and Sierra Leone make the transition
from the fragile post-conflict period towards lasting
peace, international support remains critical for
consolidation of the gains realized so far. Sustainable
recovery and peace cannot be achieved without
addressing a country's needs in the political, social and
economic spheres, as well as the interlinkages among
them. The Governments of Canada, Australia and New
Zealand were therefore pleased to see that the
December sessions of the Peacebuilding Commission
identify several cross-cutting thematic issues, including
support for political dialogue for Burundi and
strengthening democratic governance and gender
mainstreaming for Sierra Leone. Our Governments
View that as very important work to ensure that
whatever activities are undertaken by the Commission
do not duplicate efforts already under way, and that
they genuinely advance international coordination to

ensure a positive contribution to the peacebuilding
process.

While better coordination by the donor
community and the international financial institutions
is a key objective for the Peacebuilding Commission,
our delegations view the Commission's work as more
than just a location for pledging assistance. We hope
that the work that the Commission is doing in relation
to the national peacebuilding strategies of Sierra Leone
and Burundi will begin to build the basis of an
expertise for identifying and addressing in an
integrated manner thematic areas that require attention
in all post-conflict peace-building situations.

(spoke in French)

As Assistant Secretary-General McAskie pointed
out, that task will require a new investment of
intellectual capital aimed at developing a strategic
peacebuilding framework. Needless to say, the
Peacebuilding Commission will not be able to achieve
its full potential until we are able to articulate that
basic vision of its objectives and output.

That will require that such issues as security
sector and justice sector reform, the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of former combatants
into society, gender equality, children and armed
conflict, refugees and internally displaced persons be
taken up on a thematic basis, both within the
Organizational Committee and in the country-specific
meetings. In that regard, we were particularly
encouraged when, at the first country-specific meetings
on Burundi and Sierra Leone, the Commission
reaffirmed the centrality of resolution 1325 (2000), on
women, peace and security, for the implementation of
peacebuilding strategies. That work needs to be
expanded to other areas of cross-cutting significance as
the Commission seeks to design a strategic framework
within which the Peacebuilding Commission can frame
its advice and its interventions.

The Peacebuilding Commission is a vital
component of the wider United Nations reform agenda.
The transition from war to peace requires major
concerted effort to prevent a relapse to violence. We
look forward to helping the Peacebuilding Commission
in the coming months and years to clarify its role and
make a positive contribution to the very important task
of building durable peace in countries emerging from
conflict.
