Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I would like to extend my thanks to
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman for his comprehensive briefing
on the developments in the Middle East, including
Palestine. I am also pleased to welcome my colleague
and friend, Ambassador Masood Khan, the Permanent
Representative of Pakistan, to the Council and to wish
him every success.

While the world is attentively following the changes
in the Arab region, which is at a crucial stage that is
paving the way for the construction of democratic
societies in which citizens will enjoy decent lives
and freedom, the peace process in the Middle East is
in an unprecedented and dangerous stalemate. That
constitutes a serious threat and is of concern to us all.

In the midst of those changes and events, the
Palestinian territories are still being subjected to
intensive and expanded settlement activities designed
to destroy the geographical unity of the West Bank
and annex additional land, which will undermine the
two-State vision. Al-Quds continues to be the target of
numerous practices and procedures aimed at diluting
its Arab identity and preventing it from being a city of
tolerance and coexistence among religions and peoples.

We followed with concern the recurrent attacks
against the Al-Aqsa Mosque, in Al-Quds Al-Sharif, by
settlers under the protection of the Israeli police, who
attacked unarmed worshipers who were defending the
mosque against the attacks. The attacks against those
holy sites constitute for all Muslims new and dangerous
acts of provocation that could, in combination with the
continuing and systematic attempts to Judaize occupied
East Jerusalem and obliterate its spiritual and cultural
character, give rise to a very volatile situation.

Israel's unceasing attempts to change the
religious, cultural, demographic and architectural
characteristics of the old city include the destruction
of Bab al-Maghariba, the scaling up of archaeological
excavations under and around the Al-Aqsa Mosque, and
the desecration of holy sites. I would like here to recall
the statement made by His Royal Highness the Chair of
the Al-Quds Committee before the General Assembly:

"The Kingdom of Morocco looks forward to seeing
the international community reconsider its methods
of intervention and its modus operandi so as to halt
the Judaization of Al-Quds Al-Sharif".

All peace initiatives and terms of reference, in
particular the decisions and resolutions of the United
Nations, as well as the Arab Peace Initiative, the
Quartet road map and the Madrid principles, have
acknowledged the legitimate right of the Palestinians
to an independent State, within the borders of 4 June
1967, living side by side with Israel.

In response to international appeals, the Palestinian
side has made many concessions to demonstrate its
resolve to achieve peace through negotiations. However,
those concessions have not sufficed to induce Israel to
reciprocate with a view to ensuring the success ofpeace
efforts. On the contrary, the flexibility ofthe Palestinian
side has been met only with Israel's intransigence and
its continuous blockade of Gaza, using all international
and regional attempts to strengthen the occupation so
as to make a final, internationally agreed resolution
impossible.

The Kingdom of Morocco welcomes the fact
that the Palestinian side has opted for negotiations
and for achieving peace on the basis of international
legitimacy and the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people. We reiterate once again our support for the
legitimate right of the Palestinian people to establish
its independent State, with Al-Quds as its capital 4 a
State that is recognized by the international community
and contributes, along with other Member States, to the
achievement of the goals of our Organization.

We commend the Palestinian side for its strong
spirit of responsibility in continuing negotiations with
interested international parties aimed at discussing the
form of the Palestinian request that is to be submitted
to the General Assembly to enable it to gain full
membership in this international Organization.

The policy of blockade imposed by the occupying
authorities on Gaza since 2006 has led to untold
suffering, as witnessed by international governmental
and non-governmental organizations. We would warn
that an escalating humanitarian crisis of unprecedented
proportions is developing in the Gaza Strip and that
the Council and all influential and powerful States
must work to ensure the lifting of that inhuman and
unjust blockade. Despite the innumerable decisions,
resolutions and stances taken by the Council, the
Quartet and the General Assembly and its Committees,
the Israeli occupation continues, as does the suffering
of the Palestinian people and the inability of the
international community to find a feasible solution that
is achievable, ready and documented.

We are not alone in our conviction that there is not
much time left before the two-State solution becomes
inapplicable or impossible, given Israeli policies on
the ground. It is necessary, in the coming few months,
to accelerate the revitalization of the peace process,
bring pressure to bear on Israel to cease its settlement
activities, remove all obstacles and end all practices that
stand in the way of negotiations, contribute to helping
the Palestinians achieve a viable and independent State,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, and ensuring the
restoration of the Lebanese and Syrian territory.

Failure to resolve the question of Palestine will fuel

prolong the Arab-Israeli conflict and fuel tension and
violence in the region, which is witnessing a crisis to
which Syrians of all constituencies have fallen victim
in the past two years; neighbouring States are suffering
as well. We look to the Joint Special Representative,
Mr. Brahimi, to convince the parties in Syria to stop
the violence, even temporarily, with a view to creating
circumstances conducive to ending the infighting
and the indiscriminate destruction of homes and
places of worship and to pave the way for inclusive
and comprehensive political dialogue, with a view to
ensuring the State's independence, unity, sovereignty
and territorial integrity and building a democratic
society that respects all the rights and freedoms of the
Syrian people.

Future generations, and history, will not judge us
on the basis of rhetoric or even good-faith efforts, but,
rather, on the basis of actions that reflect a genuine
desire to conduct constructive negotiations and take
courageous decisions, particularly in terms of putting
an end to settlement activities and occupation by Israel,
with a view to achieving a just and comprehensive
peace.

We sincerely hope that the coming weeks will bring
a glimmer of hope for the Palestinians that their tragedy
is coming to an end and that they are on the road to
peace, which will enable them to realize their dream -
and ours f of achieving a safe, cooperative and peaceful
Middle East.
