Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the United Kingdom delegation for
initiating today's meeting. The situation in Yemen merits
the Security Council's close attention. Mr. Lowcock
has given us a depressing briefing on the situation in
Yemen, where the world's worst humanitarian crisis
is unfolding.

This is a structural crisis. It has done irreparable
damage to the country's economy and population.
The Emergency Relief Coordinator's dry statistics
cannot convey the full force of the critical situation
in Yemen. A majority of the population is in need of
one or another kind of assistance. Millions of Yemenis
are starving and have no access to essential medical
services or medicines. The country is once again in the
grip of a cholera epidemic. Getting humanitarian aid to
Yemenis should be one of our priorities and should be
provided on a non-discriminatory basis, regardless of
who controls the territory where they live.

We call for a comprehensive cessation of the
violence. We condemn the indiscriminate strikes on
civilian targets. We advocate ensuring unconditional
compliance with the provisions of international
humanitarian law and unfettered humanitarian access
to all parts of the country. In order to achieve that,
it will be essential to keep all of Yemen's seaports,
including Al-Hudaydah and Saleef, as well as its
airports, including Sana'a, open and functioning. It is
important to ensure that there are no obstacles to the
unimpeded movement of humanitarian and commercial
goods traffic along the main routes linking the coast
with the north of the country, where a major part of
the population lives. Russia will continue to provide
unpoliticized humanitarian assistance to Yemenis
in both the north and south. We intend to continue
working on a bilateral and multilateral basis, including
through our regular contributions to the budget of the
World Food Programme.

We operate on the principled position that it is
impossible to improve the situation in Yemen through
humanitarian measures alone and that a political solution
is essential. The Security Council cannot remain
indifferent to the suffering of the Yemeni people and
must work to influence the parties to the conflict, with
the aim of achieving a rapid resumption of negotiations
and agreeing on a ceasefire formula from which a
sustainable political process can emerge. We support
the mediation efforts of Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, and believe
that his initiative for launching the negotiation process
is important. He continues to be in contact with all of
the players involved through shuttle diplomacy. We are
convinced that reaching agreement, particularly with
regard to confidence-building measures, is still possible.
We call on all parties to Show restraint and refrain from
resorting to force. The history of the conflict in Yemen
has shown that militaristic approaches do not work.
Maintaining calm around Al-Hudaydah and halting
offensive actions should help Mr. Griffiths succeed. For
our part, we will continue to assist the Special Envoy
through our contacts with all of the stakeholders in the
conflict, encouraging them to become actively involved
in the United Nations mediation efforts.

In conclusion, we want to emphasize once again
that whether we are talking about the Yemeni conflict
or conflicts in other trouble spots in the region, these
are all the result of the lack of a comprehensive and
indivisible security architecture in the Middle East
for both the Arab States in the Persian Gulf and Iran.
Russia has long advocated for an initiative establishing
that architecture, which would enable us to exchange
the current climate of threats and confrontation for one
of dialogue and cooperation.

