Mr. Adom (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
I would like to begin by congratulating Mr. Oscar
Fernandez-Taranco, Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacebuilding Support, for the high quality of his
briefing on developments in Burundi. I also welcome
Mr. Jiirg Lauber, Chair of the Burundi configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission.

I also welcome the participation in this meeting
of Mr. Smai'l Chergui, Commissioner for Peace and
Security of the African Union, whose useful insight
gives us perspective on the tireless efforts made by
that pan-African institution to promote lasting peace
and stability in Burundi. I would also like to welcome
the presence among us of my brother and friend, Albert
Shingiro, Permanent Representative of Burundi.
cote d'Ivoire notes with great interest the generally
stable sociopolitical environment in Burundi. We
welcome the good offices of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, as well as the determination of the
Heads of State and Government of the East African
Community to continue direct consultations with all
Burundian parties, as reaffirmed at their summit held
on 1 February in Arusha.

My country remains convinced that only the
establishment ofan inclusive inter-Burundian dialogue
in the spirit of the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement for Burundi, and supported by the
international community, including the United Nations
and the African Union, will enable the brotherly
country of Burundi to face the many challenges
that are waiting to be overcome. Consequently, cote
d'Ivoire calls for the resumption of a bold dialogue
between all active Burundian forces, in order to create
a peaceful environment, which is indispensable for the
holding of transparent, free, inclusive and peaceful
elections in 2020.

The resolution of the humanitarian issue, as well as
the return of refugees and internally displaced persons
must, as much as the political and security challenges,
remain at the heart of the concerns of the international
community. In that context, the Humanitarian Response
Plan for Burundi deserves our full support in order to
facilitate the return of internally displaced persons
to their region of origin as well as that of refugees,
estimated at 352,000 by the Office ofthe United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees.

Cote d'Ivoire reiterates its call for dialogue between
the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
and the Burundian authorities, in order to dispel the
clouds of misunderstanding and mistrust, and to address,
together, concerns relating to the closure on 28 February
of the field office of the Ofiice of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights in Burundi. C6te
d'Ivoire also hopes for continued constructive cooperation
between Burundi and the Peacebuilding Commission to
forge a shared vision of current challenges and solutions
for economic and social development in Burundi. The
initiatives of the East African Community aimed at
relaunching the inter-Burundian political dialogue must
be fully supported by the United Nations and the African
Union. It seems to us that in that respect, the East African
Community has a significant comparative advantage.

I would like to conclude by renewing my country's
support for the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Burundi, Mr. Michel Kafando; Mr. Sma'il
Chergui; and the Chair of the Burundi configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Jiirg
Lauber. My delegation encourages them to persevere
in their mediation efforts and good offices for peace
and stability, in close cooperation with the Burundian
authorities and the authorities of the East African
subregion.

