Mr. Sharma (Nepal): Thank you very much,
Mr. President, for providing the general membership of
the United Nations with the opportunity to share their
views on threats to international peace and security
caused by terrorist acts.

Indeed, terrorism has become a major threat to
international peace and security. It has claimed mostly
innocent victims, whether in New York, Washington,
DC, Riyadh, Moscow, Bali, Beslan, Madrid,
Casablanca, New Delhi or Multan. Nepal, too, is being
devastated by terrorism. The so-called Maoists have
been waging a war of terror in the Himalayan
Kingdom, brutally killing ordinary people, abducting
children, destroying private property and public
infrastructure and extorting money from the people.
Besides, our people have yet to overcome their
revulsion at the slaying in cold blood of 12 innocent
Nepalese hostages by militants in Iraq. There is no
moral, ethical, political or other type of justification for
acts of terrorism, and Nepal strongly condemns
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.

Confronting terrorism requires efforts at the
national, regional and global levels. His Majesty's
Government is seeking dialogue to find a peaceful
settlement to the Maoist problem. Meanwhile, the
Government is also committed to protecting the life
and property of people by strengthening security
measures. We have recently reinforced legal provisions
to effectively combat terrorism. At the regional level,
Nepal has been working very closely with other South
Asian countries to find a durable framework and tools
to tackle the problem of terrorism. At the global level,
we recognize the centrality of the United Nations. We
support the global war on terror, and we commend the
United Nations for its efforts to address the menace of
terrorism.

The Security Council is at the forefront of United
Nations counter-terrorism measures. The Security
Council Committees established pursuant to resolutions

1267 (1999) and 1373 (2001) have been doing
remarkable work that should be continued. Nepal has
been working closely with those Committees and hopes
that the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) will be
able to support us in meeting our reporting obligations.
Resolution 1566 (2004) of 8 October 2004 added a new
building block to the United Nations endeavour to
grapple with this menace; it will help dry up the
sources of funding for terrorist acts and groups.

We sincerely hope that the working group
constituted pursuant to resolution 1566 (2004) will
help foster international cooperation, suggest practical
measures and implement a common and coherent
strategy to come to grips with terrorism. Nepal
welcomes and supports the Council's adoption of
resolution 1566 (2004). We are prepared to work in
close collaboration with the working group. That being
said, Nepal would have appreciated it if the Council
had had an open debate before a resolution of such
overarching significance was adopted.

In our View, Security Council resolutions against
terrorism are extremely important, but they are largely
stopgap measures with no legislative foundation. To
put in place a lasting framework for international
cooperation aimed at dealing with the problem of
terrorism, we need to agree on the draft comprehensive
convention on international terrorism and on the draft
international convention for the suppression of acts of
nuclear terrorism. Nepal calls on Member States to
redouble their efforts to have those draft conventions
finalized and adopted on a priority basis. The
conventions will embody humanity's collective will
and determination to confront the scourge of terrorism.
They will not be a panacea, but they will certainly go a
long way towards mitigating and minimizing the threat
of terrorist acts.

