Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka: Let me start by thanking
you, Madam President, for this opportunity to brief the
Council on my recent visit to Somalia.

Like previous speakers, I believe that Somalia
has a once-in-a-generation opportunity for both peace
and gender equality. Many of the Somalis I spoke to
are risking their lives to seize this opportunity. One
of the most important developments in Somalia is the
representation of women in public office, which is
increasing and has been helped by special measures.
Women's representation jumped from 14 to almost
25 per cent in the latest parliamentary elections,
bringing important voices to Somali politics and
bringing to the centre the fight to end child marriage,
to end female genital mutilation and to change the laws
that discriminate against women.

The participation of women in Somalia would
increase even faster if it were not left to the clan elders,
who tend to entrench the inequalities that the laws are
fighting against. Many more leaders are needed to
embrace gender equality and support women in order
to fast-track the critical changes.

In Baidoa, the interim capital of South West state,
where the Governor has been a stellar supporter of
women, I spoke with 31 female legislators in the State
Assembly, which has the highest number of women
legislators in Somalia. I saw the need for support that
the women called for. I was able to hear their pain
and their desire to change the future of their children
and their communities. These women and the people
of Somalia desperately need the continued support of
the international community so that their courageous
efforts will not be in vain.

I also saw important developments, as evidenced
by the constitutional review and the preparations
for the 2020-2021 elections, starting with a legally
binding 30 per cent quota for women. The Government
of Somaliland agreed in June to reserve 20 per cent
of seats for women in upcoming parliamentary and
local council elections. It is my strong belief that the
Security Council can and must stand with the Federal
and state Governments in their efforts to advance
gender equality, often against the objections of the
more powerful clan-based authorities. The voices of the
women of Somalia and other minorities must be heard.
They must be represented at the tables where decisions
are being taken because Somalia remains one of the
countries with some of the worst conditions for women
and girls.
Earlier this year, Somaliland followed Puntland in
adopting a law criminalizing rape, forced marriage,
trafficking for sexual slavery and sexual harassment.
Even advocates were taken by surprise when the bill
got 35 of 50 votes in the House of Elders. The Federal
Government finally agreed on a sexual offences bill,
which only needs parliamentary approval. After a 10-
year old girl bled to death, the Government announced
the first-ever prosecution of female genital mutilation,
and there is a draft bill to criminalize this practice.
These are encouraging developments.

Additionally, in the past few years we have seen
advances, including the first forensic laboratory with
capacity to test DNA in rape cases, and the Chief of
the Somali National Army issuing a command order
affirming zero tolerance for sexual violence and a
traditional dispute-resolution policy to encourage
families to take sexual violence complaints to courts
rather than clan-based informal mechanisms. A woman
has been appointed Chairperson of the National
Independent Electoral Commission. Together with
the African Union and the women of Somalia, we will
soon launch the Somali chapter of the African Women
Leaders Network. That will support the building of
women's movement among the many women in Somalia
who are hungry for change.

These landmark achievements need the Council's
support and sustained attention because the progress
that Somalis are making is not irreversible. These laws
are often ignored. Female parliamentarians are often
marginalized at the whim of clan elders. Al-Shabaab
courts are still killing women by burying them neck-
deep and pelting them with stones. In customary
courts, rapists often simply compensate the victim's
family or marry her. Impunity for sexual violence is
still rampant, but I hope that the Security Council will
investigate the impact on women of current efforts to
counter violent extremism with a view to identifying
the best ways to support women.

There are three centres to rehabilitate men who
disengage from Al-Shabaab, but none for women.
Women can play a vital role in motivating the voluntary
disengagement of Al-Shabaab members, but that work
is often an afterthought and lacks resources. With
greater support, women can make significant progress
in that area, and we stand ready to support them.
Somalia is also an important test case for the Secretary-
General's gender parity goals, because the lack of
gender balance in the United Nations has been noticed
by our Somali partners.
I expect Council members will follow up on the
implementation of the mandates they gave to the African
Union Mission in Somalia and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia earlier this year, which
include many references to gender equality, and will
support women's participation, not just in elections or
electoral reforms but also in efforts to advance national
and local reconciliation, prevent violent extremism and
reform the security sector.

Just as I have heard many times in the Council
that peace cannot be achieved by military means
alone, I know that Somalia will not have long-lasting
peace and deep reconciliation without the far-reaching
contribution, involvement and recognition of women.
We should support and help women to change the
deep structures that continue to reinforce inequality
and insecurity. That can happen when women are
fully involved.

Women's organizations in Somalia are organized,
dedicated and comprised of activists, advocates,
entrepreneurs, professionals and patriots, and they pay
the ultimate price. Let us think about them as we look
at the way in which we are supporting the changes to
enhance security in Somalia. In the many challenges
that lie ahead, women will face them and make a
difference. In Somalia, the glass is half full. Let us help
to fill the other half. I thank the Council again for the
support given to UN-Women.

