Mr. De Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Permit
me at the outset to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
bringing this matter to a public meeting of the Security
Council. I also thank Mr. Mark Malloch Brown for his
frank and critical briefing on the current situation. We
are pleased that the Council is discussing the issue of
procurement administration in peacekeeping operations,
which is one of the most important aspects in the
effectiveness and legitimacy of the United Nations.

Since the Security Council established the first
peacekeeping operation - the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization - in Palestine in 1948, the
Council has authorized the deployment of 60
peacekeeping operations, which currently involve 107
countries and some 84,000 persons who work in 18
missions on five continents.

Thus, for more than 50 years the Security Council
has been using peacekeeping operations as its main
tool for discharging its primary function under the San
Francisco Charter. It is elementary logic that, by the
principle of subsidiarity, it clearly falls within the
competence of the Council to continuously monitor the
quality of those operations. To ensure that that tool -
peacekeeping operations - is to be effective, the
Security Council is duty-bound to review its
management and any abuses, irregularities or
corruption that might possibly have occurred.

Security Council consideration of the management
of peacekeeping operations is already a practice of this
organ. Indeed, two meetings on the subject took place,
one in 2004, under the presidency of Pakistan (see S/PV.4970), and one in 2005, under the presidency of
Denmark (see S/PV.5191). Many Member States made
statements at those meetings; following the discussions,
presidential statements (S/PRST/2004/ 16 and S/PRST/2005/21) were issued as a continuation of the
Council's consideration of the matter. But this is not in
any way to overlook the fact that the General Assembly
is a principal organ that should also consider this issue.

While recognizing the exponential increase in the
number of peacekeeping operations, my delegation
shares the frustration and concern that has been voiced
here regarding conclusions set out in the recent report
of the Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS).
The report states that there were serious irregularities
in certain offices, which failed to meet the high
management standards expected of those working in
the United Nations. We fear that failure to take action
in the face of repeated irregularities could give rise to a
culture of impunity. Some of the irregularities
mismanagement are so serious that they can only be
described as fraud, which means that we are dealing
with corruption. Urgent measures must be taken to
investigate and punish these instances, and to ensure
that there is no recurrence of the situation.
The Office of Internal Oversight Services report
states that the military component has in certain cases
unintentionally hampered support for humanitarian
organizations and confidence-building among local
populations. That must come to an end. Effective
coordination is therefore needed among all the actors
involved in peacekeeping. It is important for the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to design a
consistent coordination strategy for military
participation in civilian assistance activities.

Nothing calls for Descartes's "methodical doubt"
more than peacekeeping operations in the face of the
present-day proliferation of crimes against humanity.
Are we meeting the responsibility to protect
populations in a context of the proliferation of crimes
against humanity and mismanagement? That is an
important question in a world where, as I have said,
civil conflicts are proliferating - genuine infernos of
massive violations of human rights, ethnic cleansing
and genocide. For the United Nations to act quickly to
prevent such vast human suffering and to protect
people against such crimes against humanity, we need
peacekeeping operations that are not weakened or
delegitimized by irregularities or even corruption. As
has been said, we need to put in place a zero-tolerance
system of monitoring and punishment.

