Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Sir, my delegation joins other speakers in
congratulating you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council and in particular for the
initiative taken by your country, Angola, to convene
this meeting of the Security Council on demining
efforts and the question of anti-personnel landmines.
Your country has been a mine victim, and therefore
your leadership in ensuring that the Security Council
addresses this issue is particularly appreciated.

My delegation wishes also to thank Under-
Secretary-General Jean-Marie Guehenno as well as
Ambassador Dahinden for their briefings. We wish in
particular to underscore the efforts made by Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno to present to the Security
Council at this meeting a set of proposals and
suggestions to broaden the field of action, expand
demining efforts and consolidate the normative
framework in which the international community is
working to combat the scourge of anti-personnel
landmines.

We recognize the fundamental role played in that
regard by the United Nations, which has made this
issue one of its priorities in the context of its
endeavours to bring about international peace and
security and as part of reconstruction efforts.

We recognize also the role being played by the
Geneva Centre, the United Nations Mine Action
Service, and, in particular, the work of the United
Nations Development Programme and of the United
Nations Children's Fund.

Recently, as the Ambassador of the United
Kingdom has pointed out, we witnessed, during the
Security Council's mission to Afghanistan, the
tremendous efforts being made in that country by the
United Nations in support of demining and
reconstruction. We were able also to take stock of the
enormous social and human costs to Afghanistan
associated with mines and mine victims, and the effort
and expense involved for that country and the
international community in eradicating that scourge.

We are convinced that the most effective means
of preventing the harm done by mines is to bring about
their total elimination. In that connection, Mexico
participated actively in negotiations on the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production
and Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines and on Their
Destruction.

Four years have elapsed since those negotiations
ended - negotiations in which Canada, one of the
principal sponsors of the Convention, participated
actively. Four years later, approximately 141 countries
have acceded to that instrument. However, key
members of the international community - whose
contribution to demining efforts is essential - have
not yet acceded to the Convention.

My country therefore wishes here to urge those
that have not yet ratified or acceded to that Convention
to do so, so that the international community may have
at its disposal a general and universally applicable
normative framework that very clearly establishes the
commitment of all States to eradicate these weapons,
whose principal victims are always innocent civilians.

There are also other instruments which the
international community has established. We must
continue to expand the normative framework, so as to
have, at the international level, all the instruments
necessary for bringing about the prohibition and
eradication of anti-personnel landmines.

It is estimated that there may still be millions of
mines in place, which hamper the development process
and are responsible for between 15,000 and 20,000
victims a year. It is therefore very important for the
Organization to redouble its efforts to proscribe those
deadly weapons.

Mexico welcomes the fact that Kenya will host
the First Review Conference of the Convention. It is
significant that the Conference will be held in Africa,
since the countries of that continent have been severely
affected and have made an important contribution to
eradicating the scourge of anti-personnel landmines,
which, we are convinced, should be recognized by the
international community.

Since 1993 the Security Council has made a great
many statements with regard to the prevalence of mines
in various areas of conflict throughout the world. In
that context, it has been necessary, in the mandates of
various peacekeeping operations, to include explicit
references, provide for instruments and make concrete
efforts to encourage demining activities.

Our country believes that activities in this area
are essential to peace-building efforts. Mexico has
actively participated in the implementation of the
provisions of the Convention. Mexico, together with
other nations of our hemisphere, has participated in
two demining processes in Central America. We
strongly support the establishment on the American
continent of a mine-free zone. We will continue to
work towards that end and, under the leadership of the
United Nations, to contribute to the efforts of the
international community in this area.

