Mr. Doualeh (Djibouti) (spoke in French): Djibouti
congratulates the delegation of Poland on convening
this important open debate on the crucial issue of
upholding international law within the context of the
maintenance of international peace and security.

The bloody news of the past few days proves, if
proof were needed, the vital nature of upholding
international law. Under the false pretext of legitimate
defence, Israel has systematically resorted to the use of
brutal and excessive force and violated international law
and the human rights of the Palestinians systematically
and with impunity.

We express our deep gratitude to our briefers,
especially Judge Hisashi Owada, Senior Judge of the
International Court of Justice, who will soon retire
after many fruitful years in the service of promoting
international law. We applaud his dedication and
reiterate our best wishes to him for the future.

(spoke in English)

Consistency and the full implementation of Security
Council resolutions are critical to the maintenance of
international peace and security. Regrettably, Eritrea,
a neighbour of ours, continues to cynically defy all
Council resolutions. My country continues to face the
threat to international peace and security that has been
created by Eritrea's unlawful use of force against us, the
occupation of Djiboutian territory by Eritrean military
personnel and the refusal of Eritrea to account for
Djiboutian prisoners of war captured in 2008. Threats
of force continue to emanate from the Eritrean side, and
the risk of violent confrontation is once again high.

There is an urgent need for a dispute-settlement
mechanism. We would prefer that the dispute be
referred to judicial settlement or arbitration by mutual
agreement. The result of either means of settlement
would be a legally binding judgment or award based
on international law, which would assure both parties
of a fair process and an equitable settlement that fully,
finally and permanently resolves their dispute.

In response to the President's request to make
specific contributions today, Djibouti would like to
humbly submit the following observations.

The first measure we advocate is encouraging
disputing parties to submit their dispute for binding
judicial or arbitral settlement. There is precedent for
that. The Security Council did so in 1947, and the
Court rendered the judgment that resolved the dispute.
Remarkably, since then the Council has been reluctant
to encourage States to submit their disputes to the
International Court of Justice for arbitration. There is
no good reason for such reluctance. Ironically, under the
League of Nations, the Council frequently encouraged
States to submit their disputes to the Permanent
Court of International Justice, the predecessor of the
International Court of Justice.

Some States on the Council might be reluctant
to interfere with the principle of consent. Under that
principle, no State may be compelled to submit to the
jurisdiction of a court or arbitral tribunal without first
giving its consent. That is in recognition that each State
is sovereign. However, there is no reason to be concerned
here. The Security Council would not be compelling
any State to go to court or arbitration. Rather, it would
be using its influence to have disputing States consent
to it. That is an effective means of resolving disputes
that, if left unresolved, may constitute threats to
international peace and security.

The second point concerns requesting the Secretary-
General to use his good offices to have the parties agree
to judicial settlement or arbitration. As an alternative
to working directly with the disputing parties, the
Security Council can request the intervention of the
Secretary-General and the use of his good offices to
help the disputing parties agree on the settlement of
their dispute by one of the means listed in Article 33,
including judicial settlement or arbitration. More use
could certainly be made of the good offices of the
Secretary-General.

Third is greater use ofthe advisoryjurisdiction ofthe
International Court of Justice. On numerous occasions,
the General Assembly has requested the Court to issue
advisory opinions on the legal aspects of disputes, with
the objective of assisting the Assembly in exercising its
role of promoting peaceful settlements. The Security
Council has requested an advisory opinion from the
Court on only one occasion. Nevertheless, that is an
important precedent. The Council could make greater
use of its power to request advisory opinions in order
to promote peaceful dispute settlement in accordance
with international law.

The fourth point is encouraging the ratification
of international human rights and humanitarian rights
treaties without reservations. Participation in the
world's most important human rights and humanitarian
rights treaties is still not universal. A number of
States still have not ratified major conventions, or
have ratified them subject to reservations excluding
themselves from the treaties' dispute-settlement
provisions. The Security Council could engage in a
campaign to achieve universal acceptance on the part
of those treaties and encourage States not to exclude
themselves from the dispute-settlement provisions, or to
encourage States that have already excluded themselves
to remove their reservations. Those treaties include the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide, the Convention against Torture, the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination, the Convention relating to the Status of
Refugees and the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women, and so forth.

Fifth is promoting judicial recourse under
international human rights and humanitarian rights
treaties. Where a State is responsible for horrendous
human rights abuses, such as Myanmar in its campaign
against its Muslim Rohingya population, the Security
Council could consider encouraging one or more States
that are parties to the same conventions as Myanmar
to invoke their rights under the dispute-settlement
provisions of the conventions to bring Myanmar before
an international court or arbitral tribunal.
My sixth and last point is encouraging States
to accept the jurisdiction of the International Court
of Justice. More than 70 States have voluntarily
submitted declarations accepting the jurisdiction
of the International Court of Justice under its so-
called optional clause, Article 36, paragraph 2, of the
Statute, vis-a-vis other States that have made similar
declarations. That is still a minority of States, however.
The Security Council could encourage other States to
accept the Court's jurisdiction. That would not violate
the principle of consent, because there would be no
compulsion, and submission to the Court's jurisdiction
would be entirely voluntary.

