I wish to thank the Russian presidency for arranging this important debate on the women and peace and security agenda and for its excellent leadership of the Security Council this month. As we celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the landmark resolution 1325 (2000), I congratulate the Council and all States Members of the United Nations on their contribution to the women and peace and security agenda. I thank the Secretary-General for his statement (annex 1), and I take note of his 2020 report on women and peace and security (S/2020/946). I also thank the briefers for sharing their useful insights with us today. Bangladesh aligns itself with the statement submitted by Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security (annex 27). I wish to recall the pioneering role of Bangladesh, as a non-permanent member of the Security Council, in the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, in October 2000. It was during Bangladesh's presidency in March 2020, under the leadership of Ambassador Anwarul K. Chowdhury, that press statement SC/6816 was issued on 8 March 2000 - International Women's Day - recognizing the role of women in peacemaking and peacekeeping. That eventually led to the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). There have been significant qualitative changes in United Nations peacekeeping with the participation of women peacekeepers. Women's participation has been found to make peacekeeping more humane, robust and sustainable. Women peacekeepers have a different level of outreach with women, children and families and can bring different life experiences and perspectives to the communities that they serve. With the changing nature of conflicts and the wider responsibilities that peacekeepers are undertaking, the utility of women in uniform is increasing, with specific roles that are more suited to women peacekeepers. Bangladesh also had a pioneering role in deploying women to peacekeeping missions. The feedback that we get from our women peacekeepers only strengthens our conviction in the indispensability of women in peacekeeping operations. Women peacekeepers contribute to reducing gender-based violence and to preventing conflict in areas where they serve. They provide a higher sense of security, especially to women and children, who often come forward and share their suffering and miseries with women peacekeepers. That builds greater trust between the host communities and the peacekeepers, which has an important bearing on the success of peace operations. Women peacekeepers have proved to be particularly effective in post-conflict settings where sexual violence is rampant and mostly not addressed. On many occasions, the victims, who are usually silenced by the societal norms, have gathered courage and spoken out to the women peacekeepers. We all know that breaking the silence is the first step in the journey to justice. In line with its firm commitment to advancing women's rights and gender equality, Bangladesh adopted its first national action plan on resolution 1325 (2000) in 2019. Our national action plan recognizes the adverse effects of conflict on women and girls and prioritizes gender equality in all aspects of our engagement in international peace and security, including peacekeeping and peacebuilding. As a leading troop- and police-contributing country, Bangladesh is also one of the front-runners in sending women peacekeepers, with more than 1,700 deployed in various missions. We are also taking measures to deploy more women officers to fulfil the target set by the United Nations of 15 per cent staff officers/ military observers in United Nations peacekeeping missions. Along with other partners, we are championing the women, peace and security priorities of the Action for Peacekeeping. We strongly support the Uniformed Gender Parity Strategy 2018-2028 of the Department of Peace Operations and the Secretary-General's efforts towards ensuring gender parity in senior appointments under the system-wide strategy on gender parity. However, there is clearly much more to be done in enhancing the number of not only women peacekeepers on the ground but also women in leadership positions in peace negotiations. We earnestly hope that, in keeping with his commitment to achieving gender parity in women's representation in senior positions in the United Nations system, the Secretary-General will also appoint women as Force Commanders/Special Representatives of the Secretary-General in field operations and political missions. Increasing women's leadership in peacekeeping would require a holistic approach to women's role in peace as a whole, in both civilian and military capacities. Women need to participate equally and meaningfully at all stages of the peace process, from the making of peace to its implementation on the ground. They also need to be adequately trained to take up higher responsibilities. In the same vein, ensuring a women-friendly space and environment in the mission setting is also an important prerequisite to having more women in peacekeeping. Implementation of the women and peace and security agenda is the key to achieving all the aforementioned elements. While national Governments need to accelerate their efforts by developing and implementing their respective national action plans, the international community, especially the United Nations, also has an important role to play. The women and peace and security agenda must be internalized across the United Nations system, particularly in United Nations country programmes. Let us step up our collective efforts to that end. In that regard, Bangladesh underscores the importance of the increased, sustained, flexible and coordinated funding for the full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and the women and peace and security agenda. Bangladesh has been making its best efforts to ensure women's empowerment and participation in all spheres of our lives. In our endeavour to further strengthen the women and peace and security agenda, we are willing to learn from the best practices around the world and are ready to share our experiences with others.
