Mr. Kikwete (United Republic of Tanzania): My
delegation welcomes the opportunity to address the
Security Council on a matter of vital concern to Africa.
Tanzania regards it as a special honour, Sir, to have had
your Prime Minister lead our discussions yesterday.

His presence served to underline the interest and
commitment of your country to the development of
Africa. It should, hopefully, also serve to re-energize our
collective commitment to the pursuit of peace, stability
and development for Africa. We also want to commend
the Secretary-General for his current progress report on
the implementation of the earlier report on the causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa.

 

An opportunity to take stock of developments that
have taken place since the Secretary-General issued his
earlier report in 1998 is timely and urgent. Today Africa
continues to face a host of challenges. But the greatest of
these remains the preservation of peace and stability and
the pursuit of human-centred economic development,
targeting in particular the imperative of eradicating poverty.

Notwithstanding the odds, Africa has not succumbed
to its fate. Lately African leaders have increasingly taken
the lead in dealing with the development question and
conflicts. Under the umbrella of the Mechanism for Conflict
Prevention, Management and Resolution of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), subregional
groupings have established their respective mechanisms for
conflict prevention, management and resolution. While this
is not meant to absolve the United Nations - and, more
important, the Security Council - of its responsibility for
international peace and security, it is a growing recognition
of the fact that Africa has to bear some responsibility for
finding solutions to African problems.

It is in this regard that the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement of 10 July 1999 on the Democratic Republic of
the Congo - brokered by the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) - was concluded. In the
same vein, our collective support is required if the people
of the Congo and its neighbours are to obtain enduring
peace, security and stability. The continued support of the
Council is therefore not only expected, but critical. We
therefore commend the commitment of the Council to
support the process by providing a peacekeeping force as
envisaged under the Lusaka Agreement. It is vital that the
momentum of cooperation with, and support for, the sub-
region and the parties involved in the conflict be sustained
in order to avert the collapse of the process.

Now that we have secured the concurrence of all
parties, as embodied in the Agreement, the Council must
move with speed to deploy the monitors, observers and
peacekeepers. We recognize that some internal
arrangements on the implementation modalities remain to
be finalized. This, however, need not - and, indeed, must
not - stand in the way of the United Nations fulfilling its
role. These matters will be worked out as we proceed in the
implementation phase, which will require substantial
resource outlay. We urge the Council to provide the
requisite financial support, and we hope that it will.

Last week, in his address to the General Assembly,
my President, His Excellency Mr. Benjamin W. Mkapa,
noted that the Burundi peace process, initiated by the region
and now being pursued with the facilitation of Mwalimu
Julius Nyerere, was proceeding well in Arusha. He also
expressed the hope that the coming round of talks to start
on 1 November would resolve some of the sticky issues
so that a peace agreement could be reached and
implemented as soon as possible. I reiterate my
President's appeal to the international community to
continue to urge the full participation of all the key
players in the peace process. This is a call we continue to
make even to the Council.

In Angola, what was once a promising peace
process has collapsed. Jonas Savimbi has defied not only
the will of the Angolan people, but that of the
international community as a whole and of this Council
in particular. In the meantime, innocent civilians, mostly
women and children, continue to die and suffer as a result
of the intransigence of one person. The humanitarian
tragedy in Angola requires getting serious with Savimbi
and his clique. Why, and for how long, will Savimbi be
allowed to defy the world, and in particular the Council?
We appeal to the Security Council and the international
community as a whole to assist in bringing his
intransigence to an end. As a result of his atrocities,
Africa has condemned Savimbi as a war criminal. The
Council should do likewise and resolve to take specific
measures to bring him to account for his actions and his
continued intransigence. It is indeed an affront to the
United Nations, and the Council in particular.

Elsewhere, the Organization of African Unity has
played a very critical role in the conflict between Ethiopia
and Eritrea. Even as we continue to urge the parties to
exercise restraint and implement the OAU peace plan, it
is our hope that the OAU framework agreement will be
a catalyst for durable peace between the two sisterly
States. Likewise, the roles played by the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) in the
peace process in Sierra Leone and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) in the conflict in
Somalia are to be welcomed, as we welcome a
breakthrough in the long-standing Lockerbie crisis, which
has brought so much hurt and suffering to the people of
Libya. We commend the flexibility of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, France, the United Kingdom and the United
States, as well as the facilitative role of the then President
of South Africa, Mr. Nelson Mandela. We therefore hope
that the Security Council will consider the appeal by the
OAU for the lifting of sanctions against Libya.

While Africa has put effort and resources into
peacemaking, it has been demonstrably clear that it faces

 

a serious challenge regarding its peacekeeping capability.
Undoubtedly, therefore, Africa requires far more concrete
support in building its capacity to enable it to play a more
meaningful role in the prevention of conflicts and, where
necessary, peacekeeping. We would like to underscore the
need for the Security Council to look into better ways and
modalities of working with and supporting African regional
initiatives. Experience has demonstrated that existing
support mechanisms, such as the trust funds and the
standby arrangements, are inadequate and increasingly
ineffective. The Council should therefore seriously look into
how better, efficient and more resourced arrangements can
be worked out. Such arrangements should also permit
broader participation, especially of the African countries
and peoples.

It would appear that African conflicts have created a
ready market for arms merchants. More than that, it is also
clear that the intensity of these conflicts would have been
restrained if the flow of arms were more restricted. These
arms have ravaged countries and peoples. They have
usurped resources to breed death, pain and suffering instead
of prosperity. Innocent civilians continue to suffer because
of this immoral trade, which has wrought nothing but
anarchy and instability. We must condemn the arms
merchants, as we do those who sustain war in Africa.

The relationship between conflict situations and
refugees is painfully obvious to Tanzania. The
predominance of conflicts in Africa, according to the
January 1999 report of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, has generated 7.2 million
refugees. This figure does not include millions of internally
displaced persons. This is a sad human tragedy. Tanzania
is currently hosting at least 890,000 refugees. This number
includes those hosted by the UNHCR in the camps, those
taken care of in refugee settlements and those being hosted
by the local population. This is an enormous burden on a
poor country like mine in economic, social, political and
environmental terms. It is especially so as we struggle to
cope with this daunting task while weighed down by a
colossal debt burden and important debt challenges.

Even in the face of such monumental challenges, we
continue to patiently carry the burden of refugees, with its
far-reaching consequences on the host local communities.
While we have never refused entry and refuge to anyone
running to save his or her life, and have not negotiated
refugee quotas for those that seek refuge in our country, our
people are becoming increasingly concerned about the
inordinate burden we shoulder. We, however, continue to
take them in, not because they are Africans, but as a
humanitarian gesture, in the African way, and we also
take them in as our international obligation.

But we are also becoming concerned that we cannot
sustain the sacrifice we have been making without
increased international support. I should here again
reiterate the appeal made by my President for greater
support for the efforts and resources expended by our
Government, as well as for UNHCR and other relief
agencies working in Tanzania.

Tanzania is very conscious that while refugees are
a product of conflict, they are also often potential causes
of a vicious cycle of conflict. We have at times learned
in dismay of charges about our country being a hotbed of
elements within refugee camps bent on overthrowing
authorities in their mother country: a case of abused
hospitality.

The refugee aspect is important, because it is our
belief that the problem has not obtained sufficient
attention as a humanitarian problem, at least not in Africa.
And yet this remains a problem with a severe
destabilizing effect, both internally for the host country
and in the region as a contributing factor to conflicts in
the continent. We cannot afford to pick and choose those
to whom we should render assistance. The legitimacy of
our collective effort rests in our shared faith in the dignity
and worth of the human person.

While there is no denying that only good
governance, human rights and genuine democracy can
stem the haemorrhage of citizens from one's country, with
its attendant problems, support for the necessary
structures of governance and the rule of law continue to
be an important factor for success, peace and stability.
But it also needs to be underscored that Africa is not, and
must not be seen to be, inherently unstable and riven by
conflict. The Secretary-General notes in the current
progress report that good governance, accountability,
transparency and the rule of law are gaining ground in
each region of Africa. We fully agree with his View
expressed in paragraph 97 of the report (S/l999/1008)
that

"What the outside world may not have noticed is
that much of what it has been calling for is now
happening."

Africa does not need more exhortations. It needs support
in strengthening its structures of governance and the rule
of law. What it needs is more concrete resources to

 

enable it to pursue meaningfully the course of action it has
chosen for itself.

In his report on the causes of conflict in Africa, the
Secretary-General quite rightly identified poverty as a
source of conflict. It is no coincidence that most of the
conflicts in sub-Saharan Africa are confined to countries
with a high illiteracy rate and a per capita income of no
more than $260. It is important that as we devise strategies
to assist Africa overcome its present difficulties we should
be mindful of its debt burden as one of the obstacles to
poverty alleviation. While we welcome the various debt
relief initiatives undertaken by the donor community, far-
reaching measures need to be taken if an impact on poverty
is to be made.

The importance of addressing poverty eradication as
a part of the strategy to prevent conflicts is obvious to all
of us. Needless to say, a lot of effort is being made in our
own countries as a contribution to this endeavour. This has
ranged from specific measures designed to increase
domestic resources earmarked for development to the
empowerment of our people and communities to participate
in designing and managing programmes for sustainable
development. The pursuit of this endeavour has often been
taken at great political risk, but it is taken in the belief that
creating favourable domestic conditions to spur investment
and development is primarily our own responsibility.

Our hope is, however, that the conducive material
conditions we create locally will be a catalyst to spur
investment and assistance that will, in the long run, render
that assistance unnecessary. This should also help generate
economies in Africa that will act as models for conflict-
prone regions. But Africa cannot undertake this Herculean
task unaided. We recognize with magnanimity the best
intentions made here and in other well-meaning forums. It
has often, however, been noted that the best of intentions
and goodwill have to be matched with the provision of
adequate resources for an effective fight against poverty in
the continent. The Secretary-General rightly observes, in
paragraph 104 of his report, that

"More decisive action on debt is an urgent
requirement."

This is the challenge we face.

In conclusion, Tanzania welcomes concerns about
Africa at the level of the Security Council. It is our hope
that this present dialogue will live up to the expectations it
is generating. We also believe Africa is bound to turn
around, and that the prosperity of Africa will create
opportunity not only for Africa, but for the international
community at large. Most of us are today labouring hard
to heal ethnic divisions, care for refugees, build a civil
society and establish structures for genuine democracy.
Most of our leaders and peoples now understand that the
future of our countries depends on trade, science and
technology. Many are labouring to ensure good
governance and transparency and to introduce structural
reforms. Progress towards this end may not come as
swiftly as we may wish, but we owe it to Africa and the
humanity we all share to assist as much as we can.

This is Africa's hour of need. The help rendered to
Africa would be a credible investment for all of us.
Africa has great promise as well as potential. Dismissing
this promise and potential is to act to the detriment not
only of Africa, but also of the international community.

