Mr. Amorin (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, I would like to thank Viet Nam, current President of the Security Council, for convening today's timely debate to consider the role of the Charter of the United Nations in the maintenance of international peace and security. I would also like to thank Mrs. Robinson and the Secretary-General for their briefings. The Secretary-General, through his reform initiatives, works actively to achieve the objectives of the Charter. Nearly 75 years ago, the United Nations was established with the aim of achieving global peace and unity among States, which were to resolve their conflicts by peaceful means and through cooperation and friendly relations. The Charter entrusts the Security Council with the task of maintaining international peace and security. Article 24 of the Charter states that, in order to ensure prompt and effective action by the United Nations, its Members confer on the Security Council the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, and agree that the Council acts on their behalf in carrying out its duties under that responsibility. The Charter confers upon the Council responsibility for the maintenance of peace and security, and such responsibility must be fulfilled under international law, while respecting the principles set out therein. The most fundamental principle of the system we created is the promise to refrain from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State and to settle disputes by peaceful means. To that end, the Security Council has a central role to play and must, at all times, work in cooperation with the General Assembly. In that regard, relations must be strengthened with the International Court of Justice, the principal judicial organ of the United Nations tasked with dispute settlement. In that context, the Security Council must encourage the settlement of disputes, in particular legal ones, when other means, such as negotiation, mediation, conciliation, have not been effective. It is also crucial to prioritize preventive diplomacy, which Secretary- General Guterres fervently advocates to prevent the outbreak of major conflict. As a member of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group, Uruguay has advocated for transparency in the work of the Security Council during the period in which we had the honour of being a non-permanent member of the Council. At that time, we ensured that we always worked to uphold legality and transparency. International law - an essential component of modern international relations, whose main source, within the Organization, is the Charter - spawns stability and predictability. More important, compliance with international law protects us from abuses by the most powerful and facilitates the peaceful changes required by the international community. In compliance with the responsibility conferred upon it, the Security Council must ensure respect for human life in conflicts, when they could not be avoided. It must promote respect for humanitarian law in its relevant resolutions and, consequently, impose the necessary sanctions with a view to observance of humanitarian law. One aspect that is not unrelated to the maintenance of international peace and security is the promotion of international criminal justice. Our guide should be strict respect for human rights, and when violations are flagrant, the Security Council should assume a more active role in prosecuting such violations and their perpetrators. Pursuant to the Rome Statute, the Council must, where appropriate, refer complaints of atrocity crimes to the International Criminal Court and promote the corresponding investigations, thereby pursuing the punishment of perpetrators and the fight against impunity. On that point in particular, there is unfortunately much talk of assigning criminal responsibility to the perpetrators - in other words of ensuring accountability - but we should do more to take concrete action. The deterrent effect that a properly functioning international criminal justice system would have on potential perpetrators and warlords is unquestionable. The international community can remain at peace through a balance that depends on each of the States that comprise it and on respect for the law emanating from this Organization, which is a common law that differs from domestic law and is made up of international norms or generated through the repetition of behaviour that is accepted and followed by all. At present, we are witnessing with concern a dangerous trend - the failure of many Member States to comply with the resolutions adopted by the Security Council, which shows no or very little attachment to the law emanating from that organ and the system as a whole. In complying with those rules, account must be taken of the scope and functions of the Security Council, which must not exceed its remit. We must not lose sight of the principles of non-intervention and self-determination when dealing with internal conflicts. The Council must act in keeping with the means and scope provided for in the Charter and when the conditions and situation so require, and it must give special consideration to proportionality when adopting its measures. As has already been said, the Council's resolutions must be inspired by and focused on the protection of individuals and on the unrestricted observance of international humanitarian law and international human rights law. The use of the veto to protect purely national interests when international law has been violated does not contribute in any way to the transparency of the Organization, while it weakens the Council and leaves those most affected in any conflict - the civilian population - without legal protection. At times like these, when we are trying by various means to strengthen preventive action, the Security Council must use all the tools available to it, within the limits of the law, for the maintenance of peace. Perhaps we should seek new and imaginative ways of doing so and promote additional forums for dialogue that would start from the Council and engage the General Assembly in a permanent dialogue. Such innovation is especially urgent given the emerging challenges to international peace and security, such as migration and climate change. Uruguay believes that it is time for a necessary change of pace in the Security Council so that, through its collective action - within the framework of the law and without exceeding its mandate - it can achieve greater unity of action and increase its effectiveness, while continuing to respect all the guiding principles of the Charter that gave rise to the Organization, the pillar of multilateralism.
