I would like to thank you, Sir, for organizing today's open debate on addressing the linkages between terrorism and organized crime. We also thank the other briefers for sharing their perspectives on this important subject. My delegation would nonetheless like to make the following additional remarks in its national capacity. The nexus between terrorism and organized crime facing the international community flourishes where governance and State presence are weak. Terrorist and organized criminal networks use similar approaches to develop and run illicit economies, and often develop and exploit territories beyond the reach of law enforcement agencies, where they can safely recruit members and raise funds. Terrorism and organized crime not only finance conflict but also promote corruption and undermine institutions. There are growing concerns that terrorists can benefit from organized crime, whether domestic or transnational, through activities such as trafficking in arms, persons, drugs, artefacts and cultural property; the illicit trade of natural resources and wildlife; the abuse of legitimate commercial enterprise, non-profit organizations, donations and crowd-funding; and the proceeds of criminal activity, including kidnapping for ransom, extortion, bank robbery, as well as transnational organized crime at sea. Through its various resolutions, the Security Council has addressed the linkages between some type of organized crimes and terrorist activities, such as kidnapping for ransom and illicit trafficking in persons, firearms, cultural property, oil, charcoal and drugs. However, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has diverted the attention and resources of national authorities to address the new challenges that have emerged. That includes the limited ability of law enforcement to conduct operations, as well as implications to border security as transit patterns shift towards irregular routes due to air travel restrictions. The COVID-19 pandemic has indeed presented challenges for regional cooperation, with many State institutions under considerable strain to respond to the health, economic, political, social and security dimensions of the crisis within their own borders. As countries take necessary emergency measures to provide economic safety nets for their citizens and businesses, organized criminal networks are exploiting gaps and opportunities and becoming increasingly complex in their operations. Global border closures and transportation shutdowns are impacting patterns of human and wildlife trafficking and migrant smuggling. Cybercrime is also on the rise as many have turned to the Internet as their primary link to the world. We acknowledge that the Security Council, through resolution 2482 (2019), has provided much-needed leadership to give impetus to the fight against terrorism and organized crime. In Africa, the African Union (AU) underscores the need for collective approaches among member States to fight against terrorism and transnational organized crime and urges its member States to sign and ratify all existing AU and relevant international instruments on the prevention and combating of terrorism, violent extremism and organized crime. The Committee of Intelligence and Security Services of Africa, the African Centre for the Study and Research on Terrorism and the African Police Cooperation Organization are part of the security apparatus set up in order to build collective synergies to promote and enhance coherence and complementarity - rather than duplicate efforts - through the sharing of information and intelligence among the relevant security agencies of its member States. At the subregional level, the Economic Community of West African States continues to emphasize the importance of investing more in promoting effective border-control and surveillance technologies, including through introducing biometric identity documents. It also stresses the importance of effective regulation while bearing in mind the need to protect basic human rights and fundamental freedoms, especially freedom of movement among its member States. Furthermore, with the support of the international community, West African Governments have concentrated efforts to enhance the capacity of national justice systems, cooperation between and among border police and financial intelligence units, as well as the involvement of civil society and local communities in efforts to prevent and combat terrorism and organized crime. Nigeria continues to take important steps in its efforts to fight terrorism in the north-east of the country. We have endorsed an action plan for strengthening our criminal justice response to terrorism and organized crime. The action plan identifies concrete steps to strengthen our capacity to effectively screen and prosecute, as necessary, persons associated with Boko Haram in accordance with international standards and good practices. The implementation of the action plan is supported by the technical and capacity-building assistance of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, as well as the help of several partners to implement mechanisms such as the National Drug Control Master Plan for 2015 to 2019, a key strategy document on drugs that promotes a balanced and evidence-based response to drug control in the country. The UNODC is currently supporting the development of the next Master Plan for the 2020-2024 period, which stresses the importance of cooperation. At this juncture, let me state that the issue of illicit financial flows and organized crime is twofold. The first part is the immediate need to track bilateral and multilateral aid disbursements and safeguard them from fraud and theft. That is why it is critical during this period to enhance our focus on illicit financial flows at the national, bilateral and multilateral levels. Nigeria commends the African Union for its role in convening and coordinating continental police forces and actions, as well as marshalling international solidarity and mobilizing resources. In conclusion, with the support of UNODC, Nigeria is aligning its national legislation with the provisions of international counter-terrorism conventions and protocols, and is developing appropriate legal frameworks in line with the key Council resolutions that address the linkages between terrorism and organized crime and identify areas for further action.
