Mr. Nzita (spoke in French): First, I would like to
thank the presidency for giving me this opportunity to
come and speak here. It is a great honour for me to be
speaking for the first time before the Security Council
in order to make my modest contribution and share my
personal experience, as well as the experience of my
compatriots with whom I endured the ordeal of forced
recruitment. But before that, I would like to express
my full appreciation to the people and organizations
who have worked, and who continue to work, so that
the voice of the child victims of recruitment into armed
groups, who are Victims of war, are heard, and the
scourge of recruiting children into armed groups and
armed forces can be eradicated.

As I speak to the Council today, I must say that
I have lived through these torments myself. I still
have difficulty in finding the right words to describe
this ordeal, which stole my childhood from me. I was
a victim of recruitment by the armed group called
Alliance des forces democratiques pour la liberation du
Congo-Zaire, created in North Kivu to overthrow the
dictatorial regime of President Mobutu. I was 12 years
old. I and several of my friends were forcibly recruited
in our school, and we waged war, in spite of ourselves,
in order to overthrow the Mobutu regime.

The recruiters gave us expedited training. We were
sent to the front. We killed, we looted and we destroyed
infrastructure that was useful to the population. We did
everything that we were asked to do, violating the rules
of international humanitarian law. We transported cases
of ammunition, we walked thousands of kilometres on
foot withjust one belief: we must fire on everything that
moves lest we be fired upon ourselves. Innocent lives
were destroyed for no reason. Allow me to reiterate my
apologies for all the harm that we caused to our fellow
human beings. I continue to regret it.

In order to make us more capable of performing that
dirty work, our recruiters succeeded in awakening in us
animal instincts that were slumbering there. In magic
ceremonies, they convinced us that we were invincible,
but reality always showed us that the opposite was true.
Many of my brothers-in-arms are no longer alive after
having climbed very high on the ladder of violence. I
was associated with the group for 10 years, and I waged
war for 3 of those years.

The hardest thing was to see young children of my
age playing on a football field not far from the plot of
land where I was standing guard. And at night, when I
was standing guard in the cold outside the gate, I saw
again the image of those children playing, and pain
filled my heart. My eyes full of tears, I asked myself
very softly: "Oh God, what did I do that I cannot be
like them?"

Fate intervened and in 2006 I was able to be
demobilized and was called upon to be reintegrated into
the society through a programme run by the national
commission for disarmament and reintegration, with
the assistance of the international community, the
Congolese Government and civil society. In that regard,
it is important to emphasize that, although my years as
a child soldier were an ordeal for me and other child
soldiers, demobilization and reintegration enabled me
to rebuild myself psychologically in order to face life
with confidence and to turn the page on my past. I was
able to resume my studies and take control of my life. I
also attempted to tell the story of what I lived through
in my book, IfMy Life as a Child Soldier Could Be Told.

Urged on by this confidence, I decided to create
a non-governmental organization (NGO) called Peace
for Childhood, which does a lot of work to promote and
protect the rights of the child. For those who would like
to know more about our association they can go to our
website: https://paixpourlenfance.wordpress.com.

I am dedicating my life to helping children and to
helping my country to rebuild a better future. In my
country there are still thousands of children who are
living through an anxiety that I know all too well.
Personally, I decided to fight to the end so that what I
went through myself will no longer happen to others. A
little more than a year ago, I was appointed as a Goodwill
Ambassador for the implementation of the action plan
to end child recruitment into the armed forces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and, more broadly,
to end the recruitment and use of children by armed
groups in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I am
also an ambassador for the campaign "Children, Not
Soldiers" and for the Congolese campaign "No More
Kadogo".

In October 2012, by signing an action plan with
the United Nations, the Government of the Congo
committed itself to bringing an end to and preventing
the recruitment of child soldiers in the Forces armees
de la republique democratique du Congo (FARDC).
For me, who was a member of an armed group that
was integrated into the FARDC, the commitment of
the Government of my country to bring an end to the
recruitment and use of children is historic, and represents
an opportunity that has the potential to protect the lives
of thousands of children. In the Democratic Republic
of the Congo the progress of the Government forces are
undeniable, but there are still dozens of armed groups,
particularly in the east of the country, that continue to
recruit thousands of children.

While awareness-raising about the problems is
important at the international level, it is also essential
at the local level. We must dismantle false beliefs and
we must develop a consensus in post-conflict countries,
so that everyone understands that the place of a child is
with his or her family, in school, and not on a battlefield
or supporting military operations. Everyone must know
that children must be protected.

As a Goodwill Ambassador for the implementation
of the action plan and through my NGO, and with
the support of diplomatic missions in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, I have spent recent months
leading outreach meetings in schools in order to combat
the recruitment of children into armed conflicts and
to invite Congolese youth to commit themselves to
assisting and facilitating social reintegration of former
child armed forces and armed groups over the long
term. I also travel throughout the world to share my
experience and to spread awareness about the problem
of child recruitment.

To be a child soldier is to be torn from one's life as
a child and to be forced to become an adult. In order
to succeed in reclaiming one's life path, a former child
soldier should be Viewed as a person in need of healing.
I would like to stress the importance demobilization
and reintegration programmes.

I cannot conclude my statement without commending
the tireless efforts of the United Nations and all the
organizations devoted to the protection of children,
especially UNICEF and the departments of child
protection of the various peacekeeping missions, in
particular that of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, along with the diplomatic missions in my
country, my country's own missions and those of civil
society. Without them, we would be what our recruiters
wanted us to be. I hope they feel duly recognized by my
humble contribution to this debate and that this meeting
will be the occasion to set in motion solid strategies
capable of saving the thousands of children who await
our help.

