The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of August, I should like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Mr. Hasmy Agam, Permanent
Representative of Malaysia to the United Nations, for his
service as President of the Security Council for the month
of July 1999. I am sure I speak for all members of the
Security Council in expressing deep appreciation to
Ambassador Hasmy for the great diplomatic skill with
which he conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Bosnia and Herzegovina in which she requests to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite that representative
to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President,

Mrs. Kalajdzisalihovic (Bosnia and Herzegovina) took

a seat at the Council table.


The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council
is meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/1999/834, which contains the text of a draft resolution
prepared in the course of the Council's prior
consultations.

It is my understanding that the Security Council is
ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
(5/1999/834) before it. If I hear no objection, I shall put
the draft resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Argentina, Bahrain, Brazil, Canada, China, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Malaysia, Namibia, Netherlands,
Russian Federation, Slovenia, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as

resolution 1256 (1999).

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.40 pm.

