Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): I make my remarks
today on behalf of Sweden and Kuwait as co-penholders
for the humanitarian track of the Security Council's
work on the situation in Syria.

I would like to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock once
again for a very sobering update. We share his sense
of urgency following the adoption of resolution 2401
(2018) last weekend to fully take advantage of the 30-
day pause so that the United Nations and its partners
can dispatch life-saving aid convoys and begin medical
evacuations. Since the resolution's adoption, we have
been asked, as penholders, when the resolution would
take effect and to whom it would apply. We are very
clear: the resolution took effect upon its adoption and
applies to all parties across the entire country. The
clock is ticking. There is no time to lose.

Let me also sincerely thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman
for his briefing today. We share his deep concern
concerning reports of the flagrant lack of compliance
with the ceasefire in eastern Ghouta.

We would like to extend our sincere appreciation
to all members of the Council for their constructive
cooperation, which enabled the adoption of resolution
2401 (2018). The resolution represents decisive and
meaningful action by the Council in response to
the calls from the United Nations, the humanitarian
community and, above all, the civilian population
in Syria. However, the value of a resolution is not in
its adoption, but in its implementation. We must now
all build on the spirit of cooperation that led to the
resolution's adoption and work together to ensure that
it is enforced. Compliance with the resolutions of the
Security Council is not optional; it is an obligation of
all Member States.

The humanitarian community stands ready to do
its part. Having adopted this resolution, the Council
must do its part. For the next few weeks, let us seize the
opportunity that this resolution represents and focus
on its implementation. We would like to make four
concrete recommendations on the way forward.

First, existing de-escalation agreements must be
complied with most urgently in eastern Ghouta. We
call on the three Astana guarantors to spare no effort
to achieve this end. Resolution 2401 (2018) clearly
demands that all parties cease hostilities; air strikes,
the ground offensive and shelling must stop.

We take note of the initial positive indications from
armed opposition groups in eastern Ghouta that they
are ready to comply with the resolution. We also note
their commitment to expel the Al-Nusra Front from the
area. We must build on this, and we call on those with
influence over armed opposition groups to secure their
commitment to the cessation of hostilities. Clearly the
Council has demanded in resolution 2401 (2018) that
the Syrian Government cease all military operations
without delay.

Secondly, as Mr. Lowcock has told us, the United
Nations and its implementing partners in the field
are ready to commence life-saving convoys and
medical evacuations. We urge the Syrian authorities to
immediately issue facilitation letters for the convoy to
Duma to proceed this week as a necessary first step.
It can no longer be business as usual; the Council has
demanded weekly convoys to all areas and populations
in need.

Thirdly, existing structures to strengthen
compliance with and monitoring of the cessation must
urgently be activated. We look to the Chairs of the
Task Force on the Ceasefire of the International Syria
Support Group to undertake more frequent meetings,
which are needed at least on a weekly basis. The
Amman operations room should also be utilized. We
see merit in making a clearer link between monitoring
mechanisms and the Security Council.

Fourthly, the Council must remain actively seized
of this matter. Sweden and Kuwait will request an
open briefing from the incoming presidency on the
Secretary-General's report on implementation and
compliance that is due 15 days after the resolution's
adoption. We should also stand ready to meet and take
appropriate action at any time necessary so as to ensure
implementation of this resolution.

Finally, we welcome any efforts to de-escalate
violence and to allow and facilitate humanitarian access
in Syria, but let us be clear - resolution 2401 (2018)
demands a 30-day, nationwide ceasefire, with immediate
access for weekly convoys and medical evacuations. A
five-hour ceasefire does not meet the requirements of
the resolution. The resolution is not primarily about
the evacuation of civilians, but demands humanitarian
access to civilians and medical evacuations. The
cessation of hostilities must be implemented fully and
without delay. It is imperative that all parties uphold
their obligations under international humanitarian law
and international human rights law at all times.

Last Saturday's unanimous action reinforced the
legitimacy and credibility of the Security Council (see S/PV.8188). Today's briefings demonstrate that there is
no time to rest on the laurels of this achievement. We
must now move without delay to ensure our action here
last Saturday is translated into the relief and assistance
expected by the millions of people affected by this
conflict. It is now incumbent on all the parties and all
those with influence over the parties to spare no effort
and use all channels available in order to advance the
full implementation of resolution 2401 (2018).

