Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay has always expressed its desire for most of the
meetings of the Council to be held in an open format,
whenever possible. That is why we are especially
grateful to the presidency for making today's meeting
public and open to the full membership. This is a
topic of utmost importance for all of us. We are not
only addressing the regular monthly report of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) on the chemical dossier of Syria (S/2017/9l6, annex), but also topics such as the expiration of the
mandate of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM) within a few days and the publication
of its seventh report (S/2017/904, annex).

I thank the Under-Secretary-General and High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs, Ms. Izumi
Nakamitsu, and Mr. Edmond Mulet, Head of the
Leadership Panel of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism, for their comprehensive briefings.

During the two years that Uruguay has been part
of the Security Council, we have condemned in the
strongest terms any use of toxic chemicals as weapons
in the Syrian conflict. The use of chemical weapons,
wherever it occurs, constitutes a serious threat to
international peace and security and a grave violation
of international law. For that reason, we reaffirm that
those responsible for such aberrant crimes must be held
accountable before the courts.

We reiterate that until all of the Syrian chemical
arsenal, whether declared or not, has been irrefutably
destroyed or safeguarded, the chemical dossier of Syria
cannot be definitively closed in the Security Council. In
that regard, we encourage Syrian authorities to cooperate
with the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons to clarify once and for all the omissions and
discrepancies in the initial Syrian declaration. We
received good news from Mrs. Nakamitsu regarding the
inspection of the two sites that had been inaccessible
until recently.

Two weeks ago, the Council did not reach the
necessary consensus to renew the mandate of the JIM.
Uruguay is confident that a satisfactory agreement can
be reached in the next few days to renew its mandate
for at least one year, which will enable it to advance its
work, taking into account that there are dozens of cases
awaiting investigation.

Yesterday, the OPCW Fact-finding Mission in the
Syrian Arab Republic informed us that there was a
new confirmed case of the use of chemical weapons,
on 30 March in the village of Ltamenah. It has been
determined that it is highly probable that sarin gas was
used once again against the Syrian civilian population.
With that, we have at least one case that should be
investigated by the JIM. in the coming months to
determine the perpetrators. Unfortunately and surely,
others will arise. As a result, we must reinforce our
conviction that the JIM. has been a useful and efficient
tool and that it must pursue its investigations until no
incidents of chemical weapons in Syrian territory use
are confirmed by the OPCW.

Regarding the seventh report of the JIM, which was
published on 26 October, we take note of its content
and call on all members of the Council to take action
in that regard, which should result in sanctions for
those identified as responsible, namely, the authorities
of the Syrian Government and the terrorist group, the
Islamic State.

Since the day the incident in Khan Shaykhun took
place, we have asserted that Uruguay did not have
the information necessary to identify, one way or
another, the perpetrators. As such, we have expressed
our complete confidence in the serious, independent,
impartial and objective work of the JIM, whatever its
conclusions. With the results on the table, we reiterate
our full support for the work done by Mr. Mulet and
his entire team. We have complete faith in their ethical
integrity, professional competence and impartiality. We
encourage them to continue their quest for truth and
pursuit of justice for the victims of those crimes.

We must avoid repeating the scenario we witnessed
in 2016, when after the third and fourth report the
Council was unable to reach a consensus that would
allow measures to be taken to punish those abhorrent
crimes. Similarly, the Council spent weeks to reach
an agreement to the renew the mandate of the JIM,
resulting in a gap of six months before the JIM. was able
to resume its operations. Those were six months lost. It
was a serious failure on the part of the Council for the
Syrian people and international humanitarian law, and
we still have time to avoid its recurrence.

