Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): On
behalf of my Government, allow me to express our
deep sorrow and concern in regards to the bombing of
the United Nations building in Abuja. This act must
certainly be strongly condemned. Allow me also to
express our condolences to the Government of Nigeria,
the Nigerian people, the United Nations family and, of
course, the families of all the victims.

At the outset, we would like to thank India for
having organized this important debate, and the
Secretary-General for his important contribution today.

As the key instrument of the Security Council and
a collective undertaking of Member States committed
to maintaining international peace and security,
peacekeeping has evolved into an enterprise complex
in the scope of its mandates, size and nature. In order
to retain their credibility and effectively discharge their
mandate, missions must be based on a clear and
common understanding of the guiding principles of
peacekeeping: the consent of the parties, non-use of
force except in self-defence, and impartiality.

Peacekeeping missions must be provided with
clear, credible and achievable mandates, matched with
adequate resources, in order to fulfil their mandated
tasks. With significant peacebuilding tasks in their
mandates, such multidimensional peacekeeping
missions now include diverse activities and require
manifold expertise. Coordination between the
peacekeeping mission and other stakeholders must be
exercised in a coherent and integrated manner.

From its inception phase, the mission needs to
anticipate and analyse which structures of the host
Government should be supported in order to provide
sufficient capacity to gradually take over
responsibilities from a peacekeeping mission. The
issue of consent and its possible implications for the
concept of State sovereignty are of vital importance
where the concerns and priorities of the host
Government must be taken into account.

Building the capacities of regional and
subregional organizations is an important additional
aspect, in which the transfer of knowledge, training
and the application of lessons learned from previous
peacekeeping missions are crucial. Additionally,
integrating mission expertise and experience and
improving the consideration of and reflection on early
peacebuilding tasks in the mandates and composition
of peacekeeping operations will lead towards a better,
more successful and effective transition from a
peacekeeping mission to other forms of United Nations
presence.

More efficient exchange of information and
consultations among the Council, the Secretariat and
troop- contributing countries (TCCs) and police-
contributing countries (PCCs) are indispensable. In that
way, the Council can receive credible information from
the field that is relevant to the decision-making
process, while TCCs and PCCs can optimize their
contributions. We believe that regular meetings
between the Council members and TCCs and PCCs
before the mandate renewal should include a detailed
agenda to encourage discussions on operational
challenges and mandate implementation on the ground.

The Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations
has an important role as a forum for the exchange of
views on enhancing cooperation among the TCCs and
PCCs, the Secretariat and the Security Council. We
believe that the concrete and practical
recommendations of the forum should be taken into
consideration by all relevant stakeholders. Briefings by
heads of military components or on the mandate
implementation of individual peacekeeping missions
should contribute not only to a better understanding of
operational challenges, but also to how available
capabilities influence mandate implementation.
Member States should continue to improve their
efforts in responding to requests for the provision of
personnel to United Nations peacekeeping operations.
They need to be fully aware of requirements related to
the force generation process, particularly in the early
stages of mandate formulation.

As a troop- and police-contributing country,
Bosnia and Herzegovina has always emphasized the
importance of cooperation, consultations and exchange
of views with troop- and police-contributing countries
in order to reach a common understanding of a
mission's mandate and implementation. That is also
necessary for mobilizing and generating the support of
Member States with regard to skills, equipment or
capacity.

In order to make peacekeeping more effective, all
stakeholders must be meaningfully engaged. They need
to optimize their performance, increase or make the
best use of available resources, and, finally, constantly
assess, build upon and advance that complex enterprise
mandated to perform tasks for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

