Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the convening of this meeting at the request
of the delegation of Ukraine and are grateful for the
informative briefings, which provide the Council
with a complete picture of the current situation in the
Ukrainian regions of Donetsk and Luhansk. We also
welcome the presence of the Permanent Representative
of Ukraine and, through him, congratulate President
Volodymyr Zelensky on his recent election.

We express our concern about the recent Russian
decree allowing for the expeditious granting of Russian
nationality to residents of certain areas of the Donetsk
and Luhansk regions, bearing in mind that they are
occupied by separatist groups.

Furthermore, we note the recent adoption by the
Ukrainian Parliament of a law to strengthen the use of
the Ukrainian language, which could affect the rights
of linguistic minorities in the country, such as the ones
in those regions.
For Peru, the Minsk agreements continue to be the
legal basis for reaching a political solution to end the
conflict in eastern Ukraine. In that respect, we reiterate
our support for the package of measures for their full
implementation, which the Council endorsed more than
four years ago.

In that regard, we call on all the parties and
stakeholders concerned to fully implement the
commitments of the agreements, while refraining from
measures that impede their implementation, exacerbate
tensions and prevent resumption of the necessary
dialogue. In that connection, we welcome the continued
efforts being made under the Normandy format and the
Trilateral Contact Group to facilitate dialogue between
the parties in line with the principle of the peaceful
settlement of disputes.

Similarly, we acknowledge the role of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Special Monitoring Mission, which between January
and March alone reported more than 83,000 ceasefire
violations. We reiterate the need for the parties to honour
their commitments and comply with that provision, as
well as the removal of heavy artillery and mines, which
are often in populated areas.

The civilian population, particularly women,
children, the elderly and those living on either side of
the line of contact, continue to be the main victims of
the conflict. In only five years, the conflict has claimed
the lives of more than 3,300 civilians and injured
more than 9,000 people and has destroyed critical
civilian infrastructure.

As noted by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, more than 5.2 million people
are affected by the conflict and more than 3.5 million
require humanitarian assistance, in addition to more
than 1.6 million internally displaced persons.

I conclude by reiterating our commitment to the
independence, territorial integrity and sovereignty
of Ukraine, including its Government's control of the
conflict area, in line with the Charter of the United
Nations and the Minsk agreements.

