Mr. Dos Santos (Mozambique): Allow me to
begin by congratulating you, Sir, upon your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council and for the
brilliant manner in which you have been conducting the
affairs of the Council during the month of October.

I would also wish to congratulate your
predecessor, Ambassador Jean-David Levitte of
France, for his excellent work during the month of
September.

I join previous speakers in welcoming the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and thank him for his comprehensive statement.

We would like to commend the Secretary-
General's report on the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) for its clarity and comprehensive nature.

We also thank the Secretary-General for his
continued efforts and dedication to the cause of peace,
not only in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, but
also in many parts of the world.

The timely visit by the Secretary-General to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region has
given the necessary impetus to the peace process and
demonstrated the United Nations commitment and
dedication to the cause of peace in that nation and
region. We equally commend Mr. Amos Ngongi, the
newly appointed Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, for his work on the ground.

As is clearly underlined in the report, the peace
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
remains on the right track as the ceasefire has been in
effect since January and the disengagement of forces
and their redeployment to agreed defensive positions
are almost complete. It is equally clear, however, that
the peace process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has not yet reached the irreversible point
leading to long-lasting peace.

Many challenges still lie ahead in the full
implementation of the Lusaka Agreement, aimed at
promoting lasting reconciliation among all Congolese
and at turning a new page in the history of that sister
country and, indeed, in the history of the region.

The continued fighting in the eastern part of the
country, mainly involving armed groups, constitutes a
serious threat to the fragile ceasefire and to the peace
process as a whole. It is imperative to address the
problem of armed groups operating in that part of the
country and elsewhere. This will require well-
organized and coordinated efforts of disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation, resettlement and
reintegration, both by MONUC and by all parties
involved, with a view to presenting an attractive
alternative aimed at encouraging combatants to choose
to abandon their weapons and start a new life.

In this regard, we welcome the recommendation
of the Secretary-General that the Security Council
authorize the beginning of phase III with the
deployment of MONUC in Kindu. Indeed, phase III is
crucial to meaningfully address the many challenges
that the peace process is confronted with in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, including the need
to create confidence and trust among the parties and to
give a sense of security to the population, which would
allow a return to normalcy.

It is important to note that, although the parties
are responsible for creating an environment of security,
the strong presence of MONUC in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, particularly in the areas of
persistent fighting, will also contribute to the building
of confidence and security in the country.

The Security Council and the international
community at large must demonstrate their seriousness
and commitment to the peace process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo by supporting the
launching of a robust phase III with the adequate level
of force and resources. This will represent a major step
towards the long-awaited and deserved lasting peace
for the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the subregion and the continent.

The inter-Congolese dialogue represents an
important step towards lasting peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It is through this dialogue that
all political actors in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo will be able to address all issues of national
reconciliation and to establish a new political
dispensation, both in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and in the region.

Even though the discussions in Addis Ababa have
been adjourned, we believe that all parties must
continue to demonstrate a genuine spirit of conciliation
and compromise, as was the case in the preparatory
meeting held in Gaborone in August. We commend the
facilitator of the inter-Congolese dialogue, Sir
Ketumile Masire, for his unflinching efforts in
preparing and launching this dialogue. We also
commend the Organization of African Unity for
supporting the facilitator in his endeavours, as well as
for its role in the peace process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

We urge the international community to provide
the necessary financial and material assistance to the
facilitator to enable the continuation of the inter-
Congolese dialogue in an expedited manner, in view of
its crucial importance for promoting lasting
reconciliation and peace for the Congolese people.

The efforts of the international community, both
to keep the dialogue alive and to create conditions of
security in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
must receive a positive response from the parties to the
conflict and other countries of the region.

The efforts of the leaders of the Southern African
Development Community in working together with the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
both bilaterally and within the framework of that
regional organization, are clear testimony to the sense
of responsibility of our leaders in the region towards
peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in
the region. This should be matched by the undivided
support of the Security Council and the United Nations
as a whole. We owe it to the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and to Africa.

