Mr. Stuart (Australia): Allow me to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council. Australia looks forward to working closely
with Singapore and, indeed, with the other new
members of the Council that have begun their terms
this month.

We welcome in particular the opportunity to
contribute to this debate and commend Singapore's
initiative in convening it. The issue of strengthening
cooperation with troop-contributing countries is an
important one for all Member States and a key element
in improving the overall effectiveness of United
Nations peacekeeping.

The need to consult with contributors or potential
contributors of troops to United Nations operations was
recognized in the Charter. Over the last decade or so,
the growing demands and complexity of such
operations has led Member States to give more
attention to improving consultation between the
Council and troop contributors. The Council's track
record in this area has, however, been a mixed one. It
was therefore a welcome development when the
Brahimi report on United Nations peace operations
gave renewed emphasis to the importance of timely and
effective consultation with troop contributors.

This has also been a prominent theme of the
reports of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations in recent years, including its report to the
General Assembly of 4 December on the Brahimi
report. Indeed, during the course of the Special
Committee's deliberations at its extraordinary session
last year, there was probably no other issue that
enjoyed such strong and broad support.

There is a direct correlation between the
willingness of the Security Council and the Secretariat
to share information and their thinking with troop
contributors, and the degree of confidence that
Governments have in the concept of operations,
planning and management of proposed peacekeeping
missions. This should not lead us to assume that an
improvement in the frequency and quality of
consultation with Member States will necessarily
translate into an increase in participation rates in
peacekeeping operations. Governments will always
make decisions to participate, or not to participate, on
the basis of a number of considerations, and there will
continue to be operations where the perceived level of
risk or other factors will deter some from contributing
troops.

That being said, the absence of effective
consultation will almost certainly result in potential
contributors turning away because of lack of
information or lack of opportunity to contribute to the
development of a concept of operations or a Council
mandate. This can serve only to complicate the task of
both the Council and commanders in the field.

We see two essential elements to more effective
consultation and cooperation with troop contributors:
two-way communication and timeliness. Meaningful
consultations require active listening by all parties. It is
not sufficient to go through the motions of a
consultative process that amounts to little more than
troop contributors being informed of Secretariat
planning or the Council's position. All parties stand to
gain from an effective two-way dialogue, not least
Council members and military planners in the
Secretariat who can benefit from the input of Member
States, which will not only have legitimate concerns as
troop contributors, but in many cases also have
expertise in the theatre of operation that can greatly
assist the planning process.

The timing of consultations is critical. Prior
consultations should be regarded as indispensable in
situations where the Council is changing the status of
an existing operation or amending rules of engagement.
Failing to consult Governments that have troops on the
ground in such circumstances would be, in effect, a
breach of faith. Consultations should also precede the
establishment of a mandate - in that case, involving
potential troop contributors - and consultations
should be a part of the process of developing and
refining the concept of operation for a mission.

We recognize that the Council often faces
pressures to make speedy decisions and must balance a
range of conflicting considerations and national
positions. In looking at ways to strengthen the
consultation process, we do not advocate burdensome
processes or structures that would undercut the
Council's ability to make effective and timely
decisions.

Finding the right balance presents a challenge -
for the Council, the Secretariat and Member States -
which will require that all parties approach
consultations in a constructive way. On the one hand, if
the Council hosts consultations which do no more than
present troop-contributing countries with faits
accomplis, the process will be undermined; on the
other hand, if troop contributors were to use the
process cynically or were to hold up decision-making
without regard to broader interests, this would also do
peacekeeping a disservice. It is crucial, therefore, that
all parties concerned approach the consultation process
in a cooperative spirit.

It would be remiss not to acknowledge that some
improvements have been made over the years. We
commend in particular the effort of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations to enhance the frequency and
the quality of its consultations with troop contributors,
including the recent initiative to issue briefing notes
when the issues are complex or unfamiliar. These have
been worthwhile steps in the right direction.

We again thank you, Mr. President, and the
delegation of Singapore for initiating debate on this
important topic, and we look forward to contributing to
further work on it.

