Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic of Korea): Let me first
express my gratitude to you, Sir, for convening today's
meeting on the human rights situation in North Korea.
I appreciate the opportunity to participate in this
important meeting. I also thank Prince Zeid Ra'ad Al
Hussein, United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, and Mr. Miroslav Jenca, Assistant Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, for their informative and
comprehensive briefings.

One year ago in this Chamber, I made my first
statement (see S/PV.7830) as Permanent Representative
of the Republic of Korea on this issue of great
significance for the future of our divided nation. I did
so with a heavy heart and an earnest desire to see a
genuine improvement in the human rights situation
in the northern half of the Korean peninsula, but no
progress has been made during the past year, which is
indeed a source of profound disappointment and regret.

Even at this very moment, systematic, widespread
and grave human rights Violations are being committed
somewhere in North Korea, and many North Koreans
continue to risk their lives to cross the border in search
of freedom and a dignified life as human beings. Last
month, we even witnessed with our own eyes a North
Korean soldier being shot by his fellow soldiers during
his dramatic escape from the north. Fortunately, he was
brought back to life from the brink of death thanks to
the soldiers in the south who took a measured response
with sound judgement in a situation in which sharp
tensions could have triggered a military clash.

At long last, he was given a priceless opportunity
to live the new life for which he had desperately
yearned. More than 30,000 defectors, including that
soldier, have escaped from North Korea and settled in
the south over the past decades. That simple fact is an
eloquent testimony to how grave and dire the human
rights situation in North Korea is today. Words cannot
describe the pain and suffering of those who, for
whatever reasons, were forced to be sent back to North
Korea after attempting to escape from the north.

The report of the Secretary-General on the
human rights situation in North Korea (see A/72/279)
submitted to the seventy-second session of the General
Assembly this year states that the North Koreans
repatriated to their country are constantly at risk of
torture and ill-treatment and that some women are even
subject to unimaginable human rights violations, such
as forced abortion.

The root cause ofthose human rights abuses suffered
by the North Korean people is the preoccupation of the
North Korean regime with its own security, for which it
is ready to employ whatever means available, including
through the development of nuclear weapons, while
completely ignoring the basic human rights of its own
people and turning a blind eye to their livelihoods. This
year, yet again, North Korea conducted a nuclear test
and 15 ballistic missile launches. A huge amount of
money, which should have been invested in the well-
being of its people, has been squandered on developing
weapons of mass destruction. Such irresponsible
behaviour threatens the very survival and the dignified
life of its people, who are already at risk.

Resolution 2375 (2017) also expresses deep concern

over North Korea's massive diversion of its scarce
resources towards the development of nuclear weapons
and missile programmes and the grave hardship that it
has brought to its people. The reason that the Security
Council has been discussing the North Korean human
rights situation for four consecutive years is also
because it Views this matter not only as a human rights
issue but also as an issue that poses a serious threat
to international peace and security. The North Korean
nuclear and human rights problems are two sides of
the same coin. Seeking to improve the human rights
situation in North Korea without addressing the root
causes behind the deterioration of the situation is as
irrational as climbing a tree to catch a fish.

North Korea should abandon its nuclear and
missile programmes, abide by international norms and
recommendations, including all the relevant Security
Council resolutions, and invest more of its resources
in the livelihood and welfare of its people. The
international community, for its part, must continue
to raise its voice of concern and compassion so that
North Korea changes its course and makes substantial
improvement in protecting and promoting the human
rights of its own people.

While I was listening to the briefings on the human
rights situation in North Korea earlier this morning,
I was overwhelmed by deep sorrow and painfully
realized anew that our brothers and sisters in the North
are living such strikingly different lives from our own.
Such human suffering, caused by the division of our
nation, however, is not confined only to those of our
compatriots in the North.

Most of those who suffered from the separation of
their families due to the Korean War seven decades ago
have already passed away, and those who survived are
now over the age of 80. To the Koreans, the anguish of
that family separation is the most urgent humanitarian
and human rights problem, which needs to be addressed
without further delay. It is my earnest desire that,
sooner than later, those Koreans who were separated
from their families against their will and have longed
for reunion with them their entire lives can rejoice
in being united with their loved ones, hugging and
caressing each other's cheeks.

In his address in Berlin last July, President Moon
Jae-in stated: "Before more members of separated
families leave us behind, we must wipe their tears."
Once again, we urge the North Korean authorities to
respond immediately to our proposal for the resumption
of family reunions.

The Third Committee draft resolution on the
human rights situation in North Korea, adopted on
14 November, refers to another significant humanitarian
issue, that is, the human rights problem of so-called
non-Democratic People's Republic of Korea citizens
detained in North Korea, including six South Koreans.
The families of those detainees are struggling day and
night with anxiety and worry, as they have no idea
whatsoever where and how their lost families are living.
The North Korean authorities should provide them
with adequate protection, allow them to contact their
families and immediately take the necessary measures
for them to return to their beloved families as soon as
possible. That is an imperative humanitarian call.

I believe that only when the people of North Korea
can enjoy a normal life as ordinary citizens like the rest
of us, pursuing their dreams and visions and having the
opportunity to realize their potential as human beings,
will peace on the Korean peninsula be sustainable.
In that regard, the endeavours of the international
community to improve the human rights situation in
North Korea are also linked to the establishment of
peace on the Korean peninsula, including through the
resolution of the North Korean issue. More opportunities
should therefore be provided for North Koreans to
communicate and to interact with the outside world so
that they can pursue a normal, dignified life, enjoying
their basic human rights.

As was seen by the recent visit to North Korea by
the Special Rapporteur on the rights of persons with
disabilities, North Korea has been showing an interest
in working with the United Nations human rights
mechanism, albeit in a limited way, and that has drawn
due attention from the international community. We
urge the North Korean authorities to further expand
their cooperation with the international community
with a view to making progress in protecting the human
rights of their people. The international community
will wholeheartedly welcome North Korea sincerely
heeding its call.

I have a firm conviction that the day will definitely
come when all Koreans, on both sides of the divide,
will live in a unified country together as compatriots
sharing the same blood. I sincerely hope and expect that
the international community will continue to watch
the human rights situation in North Korea until all its
people, including in particular the children who will
take part in building our shared future, can enjoy a
dignified, healthy and happy life.

The meeting rose at 11.35 am.
