Mr. Winid (Poland): I would like to thank the
French presidency for convening today's open debate.
Let me commend also Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, and Ms. Yoka Brandt, Deputy
Executive Director of UNICEF, for their tireless
work. I would also like to thank the other briefers
today, especially Mr. Junior Nzita for his very moving
testimony and his activities in the field.

We reiterate our strong support for the United
Nations "Children, Not Soldiers" campaign. We also
welcome the fact that the United Nations Security
Council systematically holds debates on this issue.

While Poland aligns itself with the statement made
by the observer of the European Union, I would like to
make additional remarks in our national capacity.

The preamble of the Convention on the Rights of
the Child expresses our desire to raise children in "a
family environment, in an atmosphere of happiness,
love and understanding". The international community
should undertake every possible effort to eradicate
the root causes and consequences of the engagement
of children in armed conflict. Abductions, killings in
attacks against schools, military use of schools, the
recruitment of children as soldiers, sexual assaults - all
of these violent and cruel crimes, often committed
against children by non-State armed groups, have to
be addressed and punished. All those responsible for
violations and abuses of children's rights in armed
conflict should be held accountable, including by
referring the most severe cases of such violations and
abuses to the International Criminal Court.

The United Nations is guided by Security Council
resolution 1612 (2005), but it is also important that
other United Nations partners, including regional
organizations, implement it in their field activities. In
that regard, I would like to draw the Council's attention
to the document adopted this past Monday, 23 March,
by the NATO North Atlantic Council, entitled "The
Protection of Children in Armed Conflict: Progress
Achieved and the Way Forward". The recommendations
contained in that document highlight the need to include
resolution 1612 (2005) in the process of planning and
conducting NATO missions.

In Poland's opinion, child protection should also be
addressed in all peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts
in which we are involved. In November 2014, the United
Nations celebrated the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child - a universal
treaty initiated in 1989 by my country. On that occasion,
Poland's First Lady, Mrs. Anna Komorowska, visited
the United Nations and appealed for decisive steps of
international community to protect children. As she
pointed out:

"Our concern for children should be a priority
on both the national and international levels. The
adoption of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child was one of the main Polish achievements in
the field of international human rights promotion.
The United Nations could now consider the
establishment of international ombudsman on the
rights of the child. His/her mission would be to
investigate atrocities committed against children,
as well as participate in procedures before
international organs like the International Criminal
Court."

Finally, let me also reiterate that all countries should
sign, ratify and effectively implement the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict, with
a View to preserving the dignity of children.

