Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank you, Sir,
for successfully managing the work of the Security
Council this month. By the same token, I would also
like to thank the ladies and the gentleman who briefed
us at this meeting.

Today, the Syrian people are celebrating the
sixty-seventh anniversary of Syria's independence
from French colonizers. I take this opportunity at the
Security Council table to salute the soul of the first
martyr who fell in the fight against the colonizer, who
was then the Minister for Defence, Yousef Al-Azmeh. I
would like to assure him that the legacy he entrusted to
the Syrian people is in capable hands.

The people of my homeland, Syria, oppose
occupation and reject dominance and subjugation, as
everybody knows. Anyone who may think, even for
a moment, of turning back the clock is delusional,
because the people of Syria, who have thousands of
years of history, will not allow anyone - however great
or mighty, working openly or covertly, old or new, near
or far - to threaten their sovereignty, dignity, political
independence and national unity. Although there are
some differences in the way Syrian citizens love their
homeland, they are all determined to stand united in
the face of any attempt to undermine Syria's dignity, its
political independence and its well-established national
principles.

Allow me to thank Ms. Valerie Amos, Ms. Margaret
Chan, Ms. Ertharin Cousin, Mr. Antonio Guterres and
Mr. Anthony Lake for the appeal they issued on behalf
ofthe United Nations in the New York Times on 15 April.
We applaud the humanitarian feeling they expressed
towards Syria and its people. We would have wished that
their appeal had touched upon the core issues causing
the suffering of the Syrian people and addressed the
state of the unilateral, coercive and illegal measures
imposed on them. We would also have wished that it
had mentioned what Syrians are experiencing in terms
of the dangers, challenges and threats stemming from
the spread of international terrorism on Syrian territory
and the impact of that indiscriminate terrorism, as
illustrated by the mass killing, displacement and
destruction of not only infrastructure and human beings,
but of all that Syria represents in the region, namely,
coexistence, social harmony, religious tolerance and
cultural and ethnic diversity. Syria has a balancing role
to play in a volatile and sensitive area of the world. The
region's many assets are being trampled by the bloody
confluence ofArabs who live in an era ofignorance and
Israel's interests and its protectors.

The crisis in Syria has revealed serious flaws in the
system of international relations and the mechanisms
for applying the principles of international law and
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
All the challenges and risks faced by Syria are being
considered in a manner riddled with unprecedented
double standards and scandalous political hypocrisy.
There is no longer any doubt that the mechanisms of
so-called international action function in a selective
manner. The indiscriminate terrorism that is battering
my country finds zealous supporters here among us:
those who are working to give it legitimacy in the
media, as well as politically and diplomatically. They
give legitimacy to that terrorism as part of a movement
in my country, while they claim to be fighting the same
terrorism in Mali, the African Sahel and Libya.

There are also those who defend and seek to give
legal status to the economic blockade that is stifling
my country's capabilities and undermining the living
conditions of its people, while at the same time the
European Union is discussing purchasing Syrian oil,
which rightfully belongs to the Syrian people, from
the terrorist groups that control certain oil wells in
Syria. I would like to take this opportunity to say that
the Government of Syria will bring before the Council
all those who finance terrorism in my country, either
by purchasing stolen oil from terrorist groups or in
any other manner. Our charge against them will be
financing terrorism rather than eliminating it.

We therefore wish to say today that there is no
justification for any Western Government to ignore
the terrorists among its citizens crossing international
borders into Syria and actively participating in the
shedding of Syrian blood. After today, the Syrian
people will not forgive those who have facilitated the
movement of thousands of European and other Western
terrorists and jihadists, who are sponsored by well-
known intelligence agencies, across the borders of
dozens of countries - from Australia to the United
States of America - with the ultimate goal of reaching
the Turkish, Lebanese and Jordanian borders with Syria,
where they are sheltered and accommodated in training
camps and then enter my country and spread destruction
and sabotage and shed innocent blood. We also cannot
forget the Israeli partnership with Salafist, Takfiri and
terrorist groups, which enables those armed groups to
cross the separation line into the occupied Syrian Golan
and to have their wounded treated in Israeli hospitals
before returning them to Syrian territory, once again
across the separation line.

Those States and parties, through the actions I
just mentioned, seek to have their illegal and immoral
actions damage the sovereignty, role and status of Syria
in the United Nations. Legal and political scholars
may have plenty of time to study the case of Syria, a
founding State Member of the United Nations, and what
it was subjected to at the hands of political wheelers and
dealers.

My Government emphasizes its commitment to its
obligations towards the United Nations in accordance
with the 2013 humanitarian response plan, which
helped deliver humanitarian assistance to various
regions of Syria, including the A'zaz area, which is
approximately 1 kilometre from the Turkish border. We
are undertaking such actions with the United Nations
within the framework of General Assembly resolution
46/182.

The ability of the Syrian Government to fully
comply with the humanitarian response plan has been
hampered by poor funding and the conditions imposed.
The commitments announced by donors in the media,
including those undertaken at the Kuwait meeting
held in January and at a number of other international
forums, remain unfulfilled. We all know that the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs has
received only 34 per cent of the requisite funding. That
confirms what we have said many times before, namely,
that those pledges are nothing but media propaganda
promoted by crisis mongers and those who spread lies.

In response to the cooperation of the Syrian
Government, there are parties, known to everyone,
who shamelessly insist on contributing to sustaining
the cycle of violence in my country through support
to terrorist groups affiliated with Al-Qaida, which
is a clear threat to peace and security in Syria, the
region and the world. Many reports indicate that some
Governments' consciences have been bought off by
petrodollars and that they have opened their borders
to the passage of weapons to be delivered to groups
responsible for indiscriminate acts of terrorism in my
country. Those weapons are purchased by Qatari and
Saudi petrodollars from several sources, which are well
known to everyone, and smuggled to this day across
the borders of some of Syria's neighbouring countries
from Libyan arms depots, according to the final
report (S/2012/163) of the Panel of Experts on Libya
established pursuant to resolution 1973 (2011). I have
a copy of that report with me here, which refers to the
smuggling of weapons from Libya and other places,
with financing from the United Arab Emirates, Qatar
and Saudi Arabia. This is not a report prepared by my
Government, but by the Council's own experts.
I would like to emphasize the exclusive responsibility
of the Syrian Government for protecting its citizens,
in accordance with the principles of international
law and in a manner that safeguards its sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity and restores its
constructive leadership role on the international stage.

The crude and excessively compliant and
aggressive propaganda that some Governments are
seeking to promote is intended to justify their attempts
to interfere in Syria's domestic affairs - in breach of
Syria's sovereignty - on pretexts such as humanitarian
intervention, imposing no-fly zones, establishing
safe humanitarian corridors and the concept of the
responsibility to protect.

Some States hosting Syrian refugees seek to
exacerbate the Syrian refugee crisis by preventing
them from returning to their homeland and are trading
on their suffering, despite the repeated and continued
requests of the Syrian Government to the Governments
of those States to allow Syrians who want to return to
their homes to do so.

With regard to sexual violence, I would like to
recall the statement that I delivered on behalf of my
country to the Security Council yesterday, 17 April (see S/PV.6948). I should like to add that, throughout its
history, Syria has never witnessed such heinous crimes
as those being perpetrated today by jihadist thugs
and bandits. Women in Syria used to take pride in the
secure and safe environment provided to them to play
their natural role in society. Syria used to rank third
in the world in terms of safety. However, the complex
phenomenon of sabotage has entered Syrian society and
has destroyed that way oflife in Syria. Armed terrorist
groups with Wahhabi, Salafist and Takfiri ideologies
imported from petrodollar Gulf countries entered from
neighbouring countries. Such groups, backed by the
extensive financial, intelligence, military and media
support and weapons provided by certain Arabs from
a bygone era of ignorance and Western collusion, in
partnership with Israel, have worked deliberately and
systematically to sabotage the security and safety of
Syrians, including women and children.

Dozens ofpolitical and media reports, as well as the
testimonies of well-known non-governmental groups,
have shown that armed terrorist groups have resorted to
recruiting children into their ranks. They force them to
take up arms, participate in terrorist acts and carry out
the orders of the leaders of the armed groups in order to
perpetrate acts of murder and sabotage against public
and private property. That is in addition to the burning,
looting and destruction of more than 3,000 schools and
kindergartens and dozens of hospitals and hundreds of
laboratories - 1,500 laboratories, in fact, in Idlib and
Halab, have been displaced to Turkey - about which
we have sent an official complaint to the Council. That
represents a blatant attack on the rights of an entire
generation of children to the education and knowledge
that will enable them to help build the country in the
future.

During the deliberate attacks by terrorist armed
groups on educational institutions and teachers in
Syria, there have been documented cases of people
being directly and indirectly threatened and prevented
from sending their children to school, owing to terrorist
groups bombing schools with improvised explosive
devices or deliberately targeting schools with missiles.
Those incidents were repeated at the start of the school
year in Syria.

The Syrian Arab Republic has respected its
obligations under the Convention on the Rights of the
Child and its Optional Protocol on the involvement of
children in armed conflict since 2003.

Regrettably, no speakers have mentioned the
terrorist suicide bombings that have frequently struck
Syrian cities. They have not talked about the attack on
Halab University and the killing of the engineering and
architecture students in Damascus. All those incidents
were not carried out by ghosts; they were undertaken by
terrorist groups financed and supported by foreigners
and trained abroad. There are no ghosts carrying out
terrorist acts in Syria.

While States continue to strengthen their societies
on the basis of diversity, pluralism, harmony and true
citizenship, we see strong, subversive Powers seeking
to shatter the social contract in our region, which
is famous for its diversity, richness and plurality, by
promoting a culture of religious, sectarian and factional
divisions and encouraging the concept of slaughtering
people on the basis of their identity. Such Powers seek
to displace significant parts of our societies outside
their homeland. There is no Christian member of Iraqi
society in Iraq, or any Christian in Palestine. The
conspirators against my country are about to succeed
in removing our Christian citizens.

Such matters are extremely important in the work
of the Security Council. Hundreds of churches in Syria
have been burned, as well as in Iraq and other places.
Hundreds of mosques have been destroyed. All those
acts exist on the YouTube terrorist archive. Some accuse
the Government of such heinous acts.

In that connection, I wish to emphasize that Syria
will not allow another Sykes-Picot Agreement at the
expense of the peoples of our region. Syria will remain
the strongest link in dealing with any attempt to impose
any new reality that is foreign to our region and its
peoples, who have lived in harmony and coexistence
with one another for centuries and have taught
humankind that belonging to a homeland and respecting
one's land are the greatest and most enduring emotions.

In conclusion, I would like to say that enough is
enough. After two years of trading on the fate of Syria
and the blood of its citizens, there must be sincere
action to help my country, people and Government to
move forward towards the political solution endorsed
by the United Nations in resolutions 2042 (2012) and
2043 (2012) and approved in the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex). My Government insists on the
implementation of that political solution through a
Syrian-led inclusive national dialogue in which all
Syrian people are represented. Such a dialogue will echo
their voices internally, regionally and internationally,
telling the entire world that enough is enough and to
stop manipulating a country whose citizens have only
shown goodness and love for all citizens of the world
throughout their history.

A year ago, I addressed the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and drew the Council's attention to the
existence of Al-Qaida terrorism in Syria, but no one
paid heed. Today, however, we have heard that there will
be cooperation between Al-Qaida in Iraq and Al-Qaida
in Syria. What we said a year ago was correct, and our
reading of the political map was also correct.

Mr. Guterres, thankfully, stated that the crisis in
Syria is not humanitarian in the main. That is true; the
crisis in Syria is a humanitarian and political crisis
in the main. Unless we deal with the main political
dimension of the crisis, we will not be able to assist
the Syrian people at the humanitarian level. Yes, there
is a humanitarian crisis in Syria; we have mentioned
that time and again. However, we need a correct legal
reading of what is transpiring in the country, one that
will put an end to the arrogance of and violations of
international law by certain Powers that are very well
known to all.

The smuggling of weapons was reported to the
Security Council over a period of more than a year and
a half. Those weapons, transported on ships from Libya
via Lebanon and Turkey, were confiscated, and the
information was submitted to the Council, but no one
lifted a finger. Billions of dollars are spent on financing
terrorism by means of the Gulf petrodollar, with
everyone's knowledge. Weapons are being purchased
in Croatia, financed by Saudi Arabia, transported
to Jordan and then, via Turkey, to Syria. But no one
responds. We are talking about the excruciating
suffering of children and women here, and that is
important and significant. We hope that the crisis will
cease and that all criminals - Syrian and non-Syrian
alike - will be brought to justice.

What about those who spend billions of dollars on
funding terrorism? What about the resolution, adopted
by the so-called League of Arab States, financing
terrorism - a resolution adopted by an Arab summit
to finance terrorism. The League pretends that it has a
special envoy, Lakhdar Brahimi, pursuing a peaceful
solution. How can he pursue a peaceful solution while
the Arab League is financing terrorism in Syria?

I wish to make one more comment, and I apologize
for taking so long.

Two days ago I was watching Al-Arabiya, the Saudi
channel. The channel hosted a terrorist who leads an
Islamist group affiliated with Al-Qaida. It hosted that
terrorist from Istanbul and held a dialogue with him
from there. When the journalist asked him, "What will
you do with the minorities in Syria if you take over?"
He responded: "We will judge them according to the
sharia". When asked what he meant by that, he said
that "the individuals belonging to those minorities can
eitherjoin Islam and pay a tax, or we will kill them with
a sword". That terrorist, located in Istanbul, was hosted
by the Saudi Al-Arabiya channel. Many people watched
him; many innocent people in Libya and Tunisia, who
come to Syria to kill and be killed, watched him. That is
the right image of what is going on in Syria, and I leave
it to the Council for its kind attention and consideration.

