Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at the outset to convey to you, Sir,
the gratitude of the delegation of the Syrian Arab
Republic for convening this important meeting on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

My delegation also thanks Mr. Egeland, Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, for his
comprehensive and important briefing this morning. I
believe that the most noteworthy elements of his
briefing are the specific ideas that he offered, which we
feel are worthy of Security Council endorsement as
official Council documents.

We also associate ourselves with you, Sir, in your
strong condemnation of the terrorist act that took place
in Moscow today. We extend our sincere condolences
to the Government and people of friendly Russia and to
the delegation of the Russian Federation to the United
Nations.

The Security Council's decision to maintain
today's item at the top of its agenda is proof of the
great importance it attaches to the issue at hand,
especially since civilians are the principal victims of
contemporary conflicts. In that regard, I must refer to
the important resolution 1502 (2003), introduced by
Mexico and adopted by the Council under Syria's
presidency last August, on the protection of United
Nations personnel, associated personnel and
humanitarian personnel in conflict zones.

Sadly, women and children constitute a large
percentage of those affected by such conflicts. More
than 2.5 million people have died over the past decade,
while more than 30 million have been displaced or
uprooted from their homelands by armed conflicts. In
his most recent report on this subject, the Secretary-
General noted that the number of dead and wounded
among innocent civilians has risen to a level that can
without exaggeration be described as terrifying.

International humanitarian law requires warring
parties to distinguish between combatants and
civilians. Unfortunately, despite the fact that the
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War was adopted more
than 50 years ago and that most States have acceded to
it, there remains a wide gap between its provisions and
the implementation thereof in armed conflicts. Some
States invoke certain situations as a pretext to pursue
practices that contravene international humanitarian
law. The Syrian delegation affirms in this regard that
there is no acceptable pretext for killing or displacing
innocent civilians. It is necessary to treat the root
causes of armed conflicts and to prevent violent
retaliation.

The question of access to vulnerable groups in
many conflict zones poses a major challenge and is
among the most pressing issues relevant to the
protection of civilians. It involves a complex and
multifaceted process requiring appropriate security
arrangements, such as guarantees for the unimpeded
delivery of humanitarian assistance to groups entitled
to it, which necessarily entails guarantees for the safety
and security of humanitarian and associated personnel.
The Council must continue to impress on all parties to
armed conflicts - governmental and non-
governmental actors alike - the necessity of shielding
such personnel from harassment.

Special attention must be given to the suffering of
women and children in armed conflict. The Security
Council must accord the highest priority to their
situation and explicitly take that issue - including
their subjection to sexual violence and exploitation -
into account when drafting the mandates of
peacekeeping operations.

My delegation attaches great importance to
depriving the perpetrators of gross violations of
international humanitarian law of their impunity. That
can be accomplished by adopting and using effective
arrangements to investigate such violations at the local
and international levels and by arresting and bringing
the perpetrators to justice, as well as through
cooperation among States to that effect.

The disarmament, reintegration and rehabilitation
of ex-combatants are important factors in countering
the culture of violence. My delegation affirms the need
to address that issue not only at the local level, but also
at the regional level. States bordering on conflict zones
must recognize their responsibility to provide
assistance in that regard.

The Middle East offers the clearest example of
the suffering of civilians, in this instance as a result of
Israel's ongoing occupation of Arab territories. In the
past three years alone, Israeli occupation forces have
killed some 3,000 Palestinians, mostly women,
children and the elderly. Israel's policy has also
extended to the murder of United Nations staff
members, including six from the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA). Israel has imposed restrictions on the
freedom of movement of UNRWA and other
humanitarian personnel, thereby increasing the
suffering of the Palestinians, in total disregard of all
international norms, conventions and appeals to halt
such practices.

Moreover, the occupying Power has widened its
oppressive measures against Palestinian civilians
through its ongoing construction of the racist,
expansionist wall. It has flouted United Nations
resolutions calling on it to halt the construction of the
wall, which will affect the lives of more than 200,000
Palestinian civilians in 65 villages and towns on both
sides, whose access to their land and water will be fully
or partially blocked. The wall will also impede their
access to humanitarian assistance. These facts have
been noted in the Secretary-General's reports,
especially that on the expansionist wall. We thank
Mr. Egeland for touching on this critical issue in his
statement.

We must not forget the suffering of the African
continent, which has experienced and continues to
experience armed conflicts that have had devastating
effects, for the most part on innocent civilians.
Examples of such effects can be seen in the suffering of
civilians in recent years in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Rwanda, Burundi and other countries. We
are pleased to welcome the progress achieved in those
countries, as well as in Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire,
following the deployment of United Nations forces,
and the success in Sierra Leone.

In that regard, we would like to recall that the
United Nations has made great headway in recent years
in addressing this issue. However, there is still a long
way to go to achieving the desired goal. Doing so
requires political will and determination. That means
that, if the Organization is to effectively and soundly
tackle this problem, the protection of civilians in armed
conflict must remain an important item on the agenda
ofthe United Nations in the future.

My delegation would like to express its gratitude
for the efforts made by the United Nations Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. We welcome
the road map that has been prepared in relation to this
issue. We believe that, along with the aide memoire to
be adopted by the Council in the next few days through
a presidential statement, the road map will constitute
an important and effective instrument to facilitate the
Council's consideration of issues relating to the
protection of civilians. My delegation also supports the
10-point plan based on the road map that was referred
to by Mr. Egeland in his statement. We hope that the
Council will adopt it as soon as possible, as it includes
elements that have the unanimous support of the
members ofthe Council.
