Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina is extremely concerned at the crisis between
Israel and Lebanon and at the serious events that have
taken place in the Gaza Strip in recent weeks. Those
two crises, as we see it, have the potential to
destabilize the entire Middle East region.

We therefore deem it essential for all parties
involved to take urgent measures to put an end to the
escalation of violence and to resolve their differences
through dialogue and negotiation.

Within that framework, we welcome the decision
taken by the Secretary-General to send a team of three
special envoys to the region to help find a solution to
the present conflict. We believe that all parties must
cooperate fully with Ambassadors Nambiar, Roed-
Larsen and De Soto.

Argentina condemns the Hizbollah attack that
took place on the morning of 12 July during which two
Israeli soldiers were kidnapped and others were
wounded or killed. We wish to reiterate here that the
abducted soldiers must be released immediately and
unconditionally.

My country also condemns once again the
launching of Katyusha rockets from Lebanese territory
into Israel. We would note here that as a result of one
of those attacks, on 13 July Monica Lerer de Saidman,
an Argentine citizen, died in the city of Nahariya, in
northern Israel. My Government extends its deepest
condolences to her family and to the families of Israeli
and Lebanese victims, as well as victims of other
nationalities.

The Lebanese Government must assume its
responsibilities in the south of the country, taking the
necessary measures to put an end to violations along
the Blue Line, on the Lebanese side. We reiterate our
appeal that the resolutions of the Council be
implemented without any further delay, in particular
resolution 425 (1978) and 1559 (2004), as well as other
subsequent resolutions.

Argentina does not deny the fact that Israel has
the right to defend itself against foreign attack.
However, we also believe that it must do so in
accordance with international law and in particular
with the provisions of international humanitarian law.

My country is extremely concerned at the Israeli
military actions that have taken place in recent days,
and in particular at the excessive use of force, the
imposition of collective punishment, the destruction of
civilian infrastructure - in particular the destruction
of airports, power stations, bridges and roads - as
well as attacks against populated areas that endanger
the lives of innocent civilians, and the imposition of a
sea, air and land blockade against Lebanon. Continued
violations on the part of Israel along the Blue Line are
also a source of concern for us. We believe that those
practices must cease immediately.

My country, Argentina, was deeply perturbed to
hear of the death of four Brazilian citizens, including
two children, in the city of Srifa. All four, who
belonged to the same family, were Victims of Israeli
military action, which we condemn. We believe that
this represents further proof of the consequences of a
disproportionate response that has led to the loss of
innocent lives among the civilian population. We
extend our condolences to the family members of the
victims and to the Government of Brazil.

Given that the crisis has the potential to
destabilize the entire region, it is essential for the
parties to act with the utmost caution and avoid taking
any measures that might increase levels of tension and
violence. We call on the leaders in the Middle East and
those of the countries with influence on the parties to
do everything in their power to contain the conflict and
to contribute positively to the release of the detained
soldiers and to putting an end to military operations
and terrorist attacks.

This crisis makes it clear once again that it is
vital that we renew our quest for a lasting peace in the
Middle East before it is too late and before the door is
opened to a regional conflict of unforeseeable
consequences for all of humankind. Such an endeavour
should be based on Security Council resolutions, the
Madrid terms of reference and the principle of land for
peace.

