Mrs. Haley (United States of America): When
members of the Security Council speak about the use
of chemical weapons, it is pretty amazing because there
is unity in the fact that we need to be concerned about
chemical-weapon use in Syria and elsewhere. That is
why the blocking of the draft resolution (S/2017/l72)
today is so troubling.

Russia and China made an outrageous and
indefensible choice today. They refused to hold Bashar
Al-Assad's regime accountable for the use of chemical
weapons. They turned away from defenceless men,
women and children who died gasping for breath when
Al-Assad's forces dropped their poisonous gas. They
ignored the facts. They put their friends in the Al-Assad
regime ahead of our global security.

The Security Council banned the Al-Assad regime
from holding onto any chemical weapons in 2013. Still,
Al-Assad arrogantly continued to use these savage
weapons. The Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons sent a fact-finding mission to Syria
to investigate. The fact-finding mission confirmed
that chemical weapons were used, but it lacked a
mandate to say who was responsible, and therefore
the Security Council unanimously agreed to set up the
Joint Investigative Mechanism to answer this obvious
question: If chemical-weapon attacks are happening in
Syria, who is involved? At that time, everyone on the
Security Council, including Russia and China, said that
they wanted to know who used chemical weapons.

The question was answered. However, Russia and
China did not like the answer. The investigators spent
a year collecting mountains of evidence, speaking to
witnesses and verifying testimony. The conclusion was,
and remains, irrefutably clear: the Al-Assad regime
used chemical weapons three times from 2014 to 2015,
and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) used
chemical weapons once. Those are of course only the
attacks that could be confirmed with limited time and
resources. There are credible reports that Al-Assad
used chemical weapons many more times. Amazingly,
members are willing to condemn ISIL for the one
incident, but turn a blind eye to the Member State
Syria, which committed this crime at least three times.

Russia and China now say they have questions
about the investigation. They sat through almost a year
of briefings by the investigators and they never objected
to their work. But now they suddenly say that the
investigation was just not enough. Russia's suggestion
is for the Al-Assad regime to investigate itself for
use of chemical weapons. Are we going to have ISIL
investigate itself too? There is nothing wrong with the
investigation. Russia just does not want to criticize the
Al-Assad regime for using chemical weapons. That is
the truth.

What is the message we are sending to the world?
China and Russia will cover the backs of their friends
and allies who use chemical weapons to kill their
own people. Some say we should focus more on ISIL.
The United States condemns any use of chemical
weapons - by ISIL or any other non-State actor. We
are determined to defeat ISIL, and we will defeat ISIL.
Its use of chemical weapons only adds to the urgency
of doing that. But the barbarity of ISIL is no excuse
for Al-Assad's own barbarity. Both used chemical
weapons. Both should face the consequences.

Other Council members say the timing is not right
for a resolution, or that we should delay the vote for the
sake of Council unity. But let us remember: because
the Al-Assad regime used chemical weapons, people
died in one of the most brutal ways possible. We got
confirmation of the Syrian regime's involvement. The
question should not be whether to wait longer; the
question should be why we have not acted sooner.

Let us step back from the Security Council. The
reason we all should care about this draft resolution is
that we want to make sure that no one ever thinks about
using chemical weapons. Watch some of the videos
online from the regime's chemical-weapon attacks in
Syria. Watch the rows of parents and children lying on
the ground suffocated to death. Watch Syrians gasping
for breath in makeshift hospitals, desperate for oxygen
to stop from gagging on chlorine. The suffering is
inhumane. It is grotesque. It should shake every one

of us to our core. None of us should hesitate to impose
consequences for these attacks. No one else should get
the idea that they can use chemical weapons.

Shamefully, today's draft resolution was not
adopted. The names of people and companies involved
in Al-Assad's use of chemical weapons are public - all
listed in the annex of the draft resolution for everyone
to see. The United States has already designated for
sanctions every person and every entity listed in
the annex. We will work with our European Union
and other like-minded partners to push for similar
sanctions as soon as possible. We will not forget the
overwhelming suffering caused by Al-Assad's use of
chemical weapons.

For my friends in Russia, this draft resolution is
very appropriate. It is a sad day in the Security Council.
When members start making excuses for other Member
States killing their own people, the world is definitely
a more dangerous place. Today the international
community can look no further than the Security
Council for contributing to that.

