Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) (spoke in French): I
should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
appointment as Permanent Representative of the great
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to the United Nations and on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of March. I also wish to thank
you for having organized this debate on the issue of
peace and security in Africa, to which both of our
countries attach particular importance.

I should like to thank Mr. Romano Prodi for
presenting the highlights of the report (S/2008/813) of
the panel that he chaired under the mandate set out in
resolution 1809 (2008) of 16 April 2008. We are
grateful to him and to other members of the panel for
that contribution, which is part of the overall efforts to
strengthen the African Union's capacity to meet the
challenges facing Africa in maintaining peace and
security. I should also like to thank Ambassador
Ramtane Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and
Security of the African Union, for his important
statement, to which my delegation fully subscribes.

My delegation studied with great interest the
report of the African Union-United Nations panel on
modalities for support to African Union peacekeeping
operations. We welcome the approach that it
recommends, which reflects our desire to see a
strategic relationship between the United Nations and
the African Union develop on an equal and coordinated
basis founded on an approach aimed at optimizing
comparative advantages.

I should like to emphasize that the strategic
partnership envisaged between the United Nations and
the African Union arises from the manifest willingness
of the Union's member States to take their destiny into
their own hands by honouring their commitments and
by directly and collectively addressing the factors of
instability in the region. Here, I should like to
commend the initiative taken by South Africa in April
2008 to propose this agenda item to the Security
Council, of which today's discussion is a part, and to
welcome the presence of Foreign Minister Dlamini
Zuma.

The African Union, by virtue of its role as a
federative body, has invested significant resources in
order to assume its share of the burden of promoting
peace, security and stability in the region. However,
given the many challenges that Africa must overcome,
the needs are considerable, and the mobilization of the
scarce resources available on the continent is not likely
to meet them. That raises the issue of the choice that
African countries must make between the increasing
needs of development and the demand for conflict
prevention. Both require a certain level of resources
that are in desperately short supply, particularly in the
current context of economic and financial crisis.

It was with that in mind that, in January 2007, the
Assembly of the African Union requested the United
Nations to consider, in the context of Chapter VIII of
the Charter, the possibility of financing through
mandatory assessed contributions peacekeeping
operations carried out by the African Union or under its
authority and with the consent of the United Nations.

In that regard, Algeria welcomes the
recommendations of the panel chaired by former Prime
Minister Prodi, in particular the two proposals for
financing mechanisms that it suggests. We are pleased
by the warm welcome that they have received today
and, in particular, by the emphasis placed by most
speakers on the need to ensure predictable, stable and
flexible funding for support operations conducted by
the African Union.

With regard to other recommendations, my
delegation would like to stress that the report
highlights the need for Africa to move from being a
beneficiary of aid to being a full-fledged global
security actor. In that regard, the panel cited the
measures taken in recent years by the United Nations
aimed essentially at linking the African Union and,
more specifically, the Peace and Security Council more
closely to its decision-making, strategic and planning
process. The report also identifies areas in which
United Nations assistance has proved valuable, while
specifying that such effort should be carried out with
other institutional and non-institutional actors capable
of providing a range of services.

My delegation wishes also to draw attention to
the complexity of the modalities by which
administrative and financial decisions are taken in the
United Nations and to the relatively heavy
administrative and financial controls to which those
decisions are subject. Transposing those modalities into
the African context risks unnecessarily making current
African Union procedures more onerous; this could
have a negative effect on the broadly acknowledged
comparative advantage the Union enjoys in being able
to react quickly to crisis situations, even in the absence
of all necessary elements.

In conclusion, Algeria expresses its support for
the panel's proposal that a joint African Union-United
Nations team be established to examine in detail the
panel's recommendations. My delegation also supports
the draft presidential statement that has been proposed
for adoption by the Council following this debate.

