Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda for
her briefing, and to convey Spain's congratulations to
the International Criminal Court (ICC) on its work,
particularly regarding the Sudan.

In reading the Prosecutor's report, I get a clear sense
of the level of frustration there. We are marking the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1593 (2005),
and in that context I find the failures that have occurred
to be striking. On 31 March 2005, the Security Council
addressed this situation by adopting that resolution,
but today we find ourselves in a situation in which the
message we must convey is extremely important. We
must send a message to those responsible for violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law
that impunity cannot be allowed to continue.

The report we heard today is the Prosecutor's
twenty-first, and it tells us that there have been
nine communications of the Court concerning
non-coopeation, none ofwhich have been responded to,
and six outstanding arrest warrant. This information
is most unsatisfactory, and represents 10 years of
ongoing defiance on the part of the principal accused
and the authorities of the Sudan. The Prosecutor's
report for the most recent six-month period describes
very discouraging results. There have been some 500
reported incidents, leading to 1,200 violent deaths,
more than half of them civilian; increases in the
numbers ofindiscriminate aerial bombardments; a rise
in the number of diplaced persons and cases of sexual
violence. Arbitrary detentions and attacks on human
rights defenders and humanitarian personnel, as well as
the staff of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur, have continued.

I should note that the report mentions a climate
of impunity. While that refers to a specific situation,
it is unfortunate that we can say that the description
can be extended to the whole of Darfur. This situation
is unacceptable, particularly in the light of recent
developments in international penal law, which has
given us the International Criminal Court, the most
sophisticated instrument in history for ending impunity.
In the Sudan, the Court has carried out its work to the
extent that its resources allow. It must have the support
it needs to enable it to complete that work. In its
9 March decision on its finding of non-cooperation, the
Court's Pre-Trial Chamber was very clear. If there is no
follow-up from the Security Council, there can be no
accountability for the crimes that have been committed.
Our objective is to put an end to impunity, and without
the necessary support, the ICC cannot fulfil that part
of its mandate under Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter.

As Ms. Bensouda noted on Friday, 26 June, the
Pre-Trial Chamber issued another ruling finding
non-cooperation by the Sudan in the case of Abdel
Raheem Muhammad Hussein, launched on 1 March
2012. As the Chamber noted, Hussein, who was the
Minister of Defence at the time the warrant for his
arrest was issued, continues to hold public office and
positions of important in the country. In its ruling,
the Chamber requested that the President of the Court
refer the situation to the Security Council. That would
be a new opportunity for the Council to respond to the
situation.

With regard to the events of 13 and 14 June in
South Africa last month, we echo the comments of the
spokesperson of the European Union. We must never
forget the vital importance of State cooperation with
the International Criminal Court.

In conclusion, I reiterate my Government's
gratitude to the Prosecutor and the Court. They deserve
our full recognition for their tireless work in Darfur and
numerous other areas in the world in fighting impunity
and finding justice for victims.

