Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Belgium welcomes the adoption of resolution 2480
(2019), which renews the mandate of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and better reflects the
two main challenges to stability in Mali, that is, the
slow implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali and the situation in the centre
of the country.

Belgium attaches great importance to MINUSMA,
as demonstrated in particular by the fact that MINUSMA
remains the principal commitment of the Belgian army
across all United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Belgium welcomes the fact that the resolution states
that the responsibility for stabilizing the country rests
primarily with the Malians themselves.
Belgium also thanks all members for responding to
the appeal of the member countries of the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-S Sahel) for facilitating MINUSMA
support for the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. An evaluation of
that mechanism in 12 months' time is also something to
be welcomed.

Nevertheless, Belgium regrets the fact that the
resolution does not sufficiently recognize the negative
impact of climate change on the security situation.
The evidence of climate change as a multiplier of risks
in Mali and the Sahel is clear. I call upon Mali and
the United Nations to take climate change and other
environmental changes into account in their activities,
programmes and strategies.

Lastly, Belgium congratulates France for its
willingness to shorten and clarify the mandate.

Allow me to say a few words of thanks to
Ambassador Delattre. I must say that I have been very
impressed by his team's invasion of the Council's seats.
The presence of the French team is not only tribute
to the exceptional diplomat that Mr. Delattre is, but
it also demonstrates the excellent way in which he
has represented his country for the past five years in
New York. I would like to thank him personally and
on behalf of my Mission and my country and from the
bottom of my heart for his commitment, friendship
and collaboration. He has inspired all of us, not only
with his critical mindset, eloquence and, even, I would
say, his elegance, but also through his humane and
fair approach. I wish him every success in heading the
Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs at the Quai
d'Orsay. I ask him to come back to see us very soon
during the high-level week. I thank him very much.

