Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): Let me begin by warmly congratulating you, Mr. President, on your country's assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of March. We also appreciate your thoughtful invitation to hear from African voices on today's very important topic. We thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Ambassador Fatima Mohammed and Mr. Abdoulaye Dieye for their insightful briefings. We welcome the adoption earlier today of presidential statement S/PRST/2020/5, on the issue of countering terrorism and extremism in Africa. Terrorism is a global menace. Terrorists continue to adapt their tactics, generate financing, wreak havoc and retain considerable sway across national boundaries. May I take this opportunity to denounce, in the strongest terms, the assassination attempt on the Prime Minister of the Sudan. We express our solidarity with the people and the Government of the Sudan. The enormous challenges we face in the fight against terrorism should compel us to forge meaningful international cooperation to counter and prevent violent extremism. However, it is important to note that the root causes of radicalization and extremism are very much local. Terrorists thrive where there is social exclusion and socioeconomic marginalization of minorities and disadvantaged groups, and where State authority is either weak or inexistent. The rise of intolerant speech and _ hate-filled narratives, disseminated through the Internet and social media, also contribute to increasing social and political polarization, at times leading to communal conflicts. Unless we deal with those and _ other underlying causes, our efforts will always come up short. Accordingly, our strategies and efforts to combat terrorism and extremism must be holistic and comprehensive. Those efforts should be deployed in tandem with proactive steps to promote socioeconomic development, especially employment for youths, as well as effective poverty reduction and intercommunal violence-prevention strategies. Young people are often portrayed as the unfortunate victims or perpetrators of terrorism. However, as we have seen across Africa, young people are at the forefront of demanding change and better opportunities. They are our strongest partners in socioeconomic development. We must listen to their hopes and worries about the future. Most important, we must ensure that women and youth are actively and meaningfully involved in decision-making at all levels of society. The Security Council has continually emphasized the need for the full implementation of international legal frameworks and sanctions regimes by all Member States. That is indeed vital for the strengthening of global cooperation. However, it is equally important that stakeholders recognize that developing countries continue to face huge difficulties in properly implementing those legal frameworks. We believe that tangible capacity-building and technical assistance are needed for the effective implementation of international legal frameworks and to help Member States stay one step ahead in countering the ever-evolving terrorist threat. The rise of terrorism and violent extremism in Africa continues to cause enormous loss of life and widespread destruction. The United Nations should continue to reinforce its partnership with the African Union (AU) and other regional and _ subregional organizations through dialogue, technical support and joint activities to respond to terrorist threats. The United Nations-AU partnership on the Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020 - one of the flagship projects under Agenda 2063 - must be further strengthened and expanded to other areas in line with all the targets of the Sustainable Development Goals. Climate change is further exacerbating competition over increasingly scarce resources, leading to communal conflicts and creating opportunities for terrorists to exploit. The effects of both terrorism and climate change transcend national boundaries. We need robust inter-State cooperation to deny the merchants of terrorism safe havens. Stronger regional cooperation is needed in the areas of information- and intelligence-sharing and mechanisms for joint-border management. Such cooperation could also take the form of regional economic integration, the development of joint infrastructure projects and investment corridors. The Horn of Africa has turned a page for the better. Countries in the region are engaged in robust cooperation to consolidate peace and promote economic and social development, including through a comprehensive plan to combat and neutralize terrorism and other common threats they face, such as arms and human trafficking and drug smuggling. The international community must encourage and support those efforts. Al-Shabaab continues to inflict destruction in Somalia and remains a serious threat to the wider region. It continues to possess a significant capacity to raise revenue and conduct lethal attacks. To eliminate that threat once and for all, we must continue to support the African Union Mission in Somalia, invest in strengthening the capacity of the Somali National Army and redouble our support for the Government of Somalia in this pivotal election year. The Intergovernmental Authority on Development is coordinating a regional response to the threat of terrorism through its comprehensive regional strategy, in line with the Secretary-General's Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism. International partners should reinforce their efforts through technical support and capacity-building, including in areas involving strategic communications. Finally, Ethiopia is currently engaged in considerable legal, economic and political reforms. A number of repressive laws, such as the charities and societies proclamation, the anti-terrorism law, the national election law and the mass media proclamation, have been revised and fundamentally amended to close gaps in the implementation of counter-terrorism measures. Measures have also been taken towards establishing a system of accountability for serious human rights abuses and accelerating the reform of the criminal justice system and the security service to make them independent of political control and influence. We understand that we must not remain complacent as a result of our modest successes. My Government is committed to building a just and equal system of governance that genuinely upholds the rights of citizens and ensures that the benefits of economic development are equally shared by all of our citizens. Let me take this opportunity to underline Ethiopia's commitment to multilateralism, counter-terrorism collaboration and regional partnerships to address the structural root causes of extremism and terrorism.
