Mr. Quifiones Senchez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): It really was never the intention of my
delegation to take the floor for a second time in this
debate. However, I believe it necessary and timely to
respond to the deceptive comments made by the
representative of Israel with regard to the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM) and its firm position regarding the
cause of the heroic Palestinian people and the situation
in the Middle East.

First, I would like to emphasize that the Cuban
delegation makes this statement in its capacity as Chair
of the NAM. Coordinating Bureau. You can be sure,
Mr. President, that we could have included many more
elements in our national capacity.

This is not the first time that the Israeli
representative has made offensive and distorted
statements with regard to the position of the Movement
on the issue before us today. I would like to make it
clear to the representative of Israel that the speech read
out in the Chamber by Cuba's representative just a few
minutes ago represents the opinion of the 118 members
of the Movement.

Israel is once again attempting to divert attention
from truly important issues and to hide the facts about
the daily occurrences in the occupied Arab territories,
especially the crimes committed in the Palestinian
territory. Distortion and manipulation will not prevent
the Non-Aligned Movement from setting out its
principled position on the situation in Palestine and the
Middle East in all the relevant international forums,
including the Security Council.

The Non-Aligned Movement will continue to
express its resolute opposition to the illegal Israeli
occupation, as well as its full support for the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, throughout the entirety of
the Palestinian territory occupied by Israel. We shall
continue to denounce the occupying Power's non-
respect for international law as the main obstacle to the
success of the efforts intended to achieve a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace.

We shall continue to demand that Israel withdraw
fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to the 4 June
1967 borders. We shall not be silent on the issue of
Israel's relentless aggression and its grave violations of
Lebanon's sovereignty and territorial integrity. We
hope that, at some point, the Government of Israel will
demonstrate genuine political commitment to making
progress in the peace process - not just with rhetoric,
but with concrete actions.
08-28224
As it always has, the Non-Aligned Movement
will continue to firmly support the peace process in the
Middle East on the basis of resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973), 425 (1978), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003) and
the principle of land for peace.
08-28224

