Miss Durrant (Jamaica): The Jamaican
delegation associates itself with the statement made by
the Permanent Representative of Namibia in his
capacity as coordinator of the non-aligned caucus in
the Security Council.

Jamaica voted in favour of the draft resolution
contained in document S/2000/1171, in which the
Council would have expressed its determination to
establish a United Nations force of military and police
observers to be dispatched throughout the territories
occupied by Israel since 1967, with the aim of
contributing to the implementation of the Sharm el-
Sheikh agreements, the cessation of violence and
enhancing the safety and security of Palestinian
civilians.

My delegation is deeply disappointed that the
draft resolution did not receive the necessary votes to
enable its adoption. We believe that the adoption of the
draft resolution and the subsequent deployment of the

S/PVAZAS

 

United Nations observer force could have served as a
deterrent to further violence and as a confidence-
building measure between the parties, and furthered the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1322
(2000).

We remain concerned at the increasing number of
casualties and injuries - for the most part among the
Palestinian civilian population, especially children -
as well as at the serious humanitarian and economic
situation.

The Jamaican delegation commends the strenuous
diplomatic activities of the Secretary-General, as well
as of leaders of several countries, to restart the peace
process. We are therefore pleased to learn that the
parties have agreed to attend discussions in
Washington, DC, later this week under the aegis of
the President of the United States. It is against that
background, and within the context of the Council's
responsibility for international peace and security, that
Jamaica co-sponsored the draft resolution contained in
document S/2000/1171. It will be noted that the draft
requested the Secretary-General to consult both sides
on the modalities of the deployment and functioning of
such a force, and to report to the Council no later than
8 January 2001. Only then would a decision on further
action have been taken.

Jamaica continues to encourage an end to the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict through an active
negotiating process that takes into account the right to
security of all the States in the region, including Israel,
as well as the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people. We will continue to support the efforts to
achieve a just and lasting peace within the framework
of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973). We believe that the establishment of a United
Nations force of military and police observers would
have contributed to this process.

