Ms. Loj (Denmark): I should like to join others
in welcoming the High Representative, Dr. Schwarz-
Schilling, and the acting Prime Minister of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Mr. Adnan Terzie, to the Council. I thank
both of them for their interesting statements on the
developments on the ground in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

I would like to associate myself with the
statement to be delivered later by the Permanent
Representative of Finland on behalf of the European
Union. I will limit myself to three brief points.

First, we are encouraged by the peaceful and
orderly conduct of the elections in Bosnia and
Herzegovina last month and look forward to the timely
formation of a coalition Government. It is our sincere
hope that this Government will pursue a genuine
course of reform and thereby pave the way for the
deepening of Bosnia and Herzegovina's relations with
the European Union and NATO. In our view, reform is
the only viable path for true progress for the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, regardless of ethnic
background.

This brings me to my second point, which is the
need for further progress on internal reforms. In spite
of deadlocks and occasional setbacks, Bosnia and
Herzegovina has, overall, made continuous and very
commendable progress since the signing of the Dayton
Peace Accord almost 11 years ago. The reform of the
defence forces in 2005 is a case in point of that
progress. However, today two areas are particularly in
urgent need of reform, namely the constitution and the
police force. There has been progress in both of these
areas, but constitutional reform has been stalled since
April 2006 and the police reform of October 2005 has
not been implemented.

It is our hope that the elections and the formation
of a new Government will break the deadlock and pave
the way for implementation of the reforms. If reforms
are implemented and if full cooperation with the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) is ensured, it will hopefully
contribute to new momentum and allow the conclusion
of the Stabilization and Association Agreement with
the European Union.

Thirdly, we support the approach taken by the
High Representative to restrict the use of the Bonn
powers to the extent possible, thus allowing the local
authorities the greatest degree of responsibility and
ownership. We appreciate that there is a fine balance
between, on the one hand, using the Bonn powers
proactively, and on the other hand, ensuring an
appropriate gradual transfer of responsibility and
political ownership to the political leaders of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We support the decision of the Peace
Implementation Council in June of this year to close
the Office of the High Representative by June 2007,
subject to review by February 2007. The simultaneous
development of the role of the European Union Special
Representative is of utmost importance.

Denmark remains committed to assist as best we
can, as Bosnia and Herzegovina and indeed the whole
Western Balkan region further develops democracy and
stability. In this regard, we lend our full support to the
High Representative, Dr. Schwarz-Schilling, and the
approach he has outlined. Over the last months we
have seen a deadlock on important issues. We have also
seen regrettable rhetoric surface during the election
campaign. However, we strongly urge Bosnia and
Herzegovina's newly elected leaders to look ahead and
to focus on tangible progress for the people, regardless
of ethnicity.

