The President: I shall now make a few
comments in my capacity as the representative of
Denmark.

Denmark has always been, and remains, a firm
supporter of the Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia
and Rwanda. I would like to make three points today.

First, the transfer of the remaining high-level
fugitives to The Hague and to Arusha is key in
enabling the Tribunals to fulfil their tasks. We have all
been aware of this for too long, with too little to show
for it. Denmark reiterates its call on all countries -
within and outside the respective regions - to
cooperate fully, unconditionally and swiftly with the
Tribunals.

The Government of Serbia and, within Bosnia
and Herzegovina, that of Republika Srpska are
particularly well placed to ensure the apprehension of
Mladic and Karadzic. We strongly encourage both
Governments to act on this immediately. Full
cooperation is critical to the Tribunals' ability to
function. For the countries of the former Yugoslavia, it
is also a precondition for their integration into
European and trans-Atlantic structures.

Secondly, Denmark supports the measures taken
by the Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia to speed up
the trials. I want to thank President Pocar for his
leadership in that regard. These steps are necessary to
keep the length of the trials within a reasonable time
limit, and we trust that they can be taken without
compromising either the legitimate needs of the
victims or those of the Prosecutor in building up cases
of command responsibility.

Thirdly, the President of the Rwanda Tribunal has
asked the Security Council and the General Assembly
to extend the terms of its permanent judges until the
end of 2008. Denmark fully supports his request. We
believe it to be both sensible and pragmatic at this
critical juncture of the Tribunal's work.

In my capacity as President of the Security
Council for this month, I have circulated a draft
resolution to that effect for the consideration of
Council members. We hope to be able to adopt this
draft resolution shortly.

The Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and for
Rwanda provide invaluable contributions in our
collective fight against impunity, and they provide
invaluable contributions in the maintenance of
sustainable peace and stability in the former
Yugoslavia and in Rwanda after two of the most
abhorrent conflicts since the Second World War.
Denmark will continue to actively follow the work of
the Tribunals and looks forward to the next set of
reports from them.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Zoran
Loncar, Minister of Public Administration and Local
Self-Government of the Republic of Serbia.

