Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, Mr. President, I would like to
begin by thanking you for convening today's meeting
and for the manner in which you have been leading the
work of the Security Council this month. My delegation
endorses the statement delivered by the representative
of the Islamic Republic of Iran, who spoke on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement.

Yet again, we are meeting in the Security Council
to discuss the subject of the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. Yet again, we state our deep
solidarity with that brotherly people. Year after year, for
over 60 years, at various times, we have denounced the
illegal occupation by Israel and its expansionist policies,
which continue to undermine all efforts to achieve
peace and reject the establishment of a Palestinian
State that is sovereign and independent. Now more than
ever and subsequent to the adoption by the majority
of the international community of General Assembly
resolution 67/ 19, we are inescapably committed to
rectifying the historic injustice committed against
Palestinian people. We consider that the vote in favour
of the resolution by the majority of Member States
constitutes a statement by the international community
that Palestine complies with all the criteria laid down in
the Charter to be a full Member State ready to assume
its responsibilities as a nation that loves peace.

Our delegation voted in favour of the resolution
out of solidarity and based on our position of principle
in support of the Palestinian cause, which Nicaraguan
president Daniel Ortega Saavedra has always supported.
Since the 19805, Nicaragua has fully recognized the
existence of the Palestinian State. Unfortunately, such
full recognition has not yet been achieved owing to the
lack ofpolitical will on the part of certain countries that
are members of the Security Council, which, through
the use of their veto power, stand in the way of that
legitimate aspiration of the Palestinian people. As the
veto remains the main obstacle to the achievement of
peace and security, it is time for the Security Council
to give thought, in a positive and unconditional manner,
to the Palestinian State's request for full membership.
We must continue to support all Palestinian efforts so
that, sooner or later, Palestine can sit beside us as the
194th State Member of the United Nations.

Israel, following the decisive recognition by the
General Assembly ofPalestine's status as a non-member
observer State, has, as a reprisal, stepped up its policy
of occupation and its criminal blockade, continuing the
construction of settlements and refusing to dismantle
existing ones. Ignoring the will of the international
community and causing the peace process to stagnate,
in an attempt to impose conditions on negotiations,
it continues to alter the demographic and religious

makeup of the Palestinian territory, which represents a
serious violation of international law.

Peace in the Middle East does not mean that we
need only resolve the Palestinian-Israeli conflict; a
solution must also include the situation in the Israeli-
occupied territories in Lebanon and Syria. Moreover, it
should include peace in all countries of the region.

Nicaragua reiterates its appeal for respect for the
right ofPalestinian refugees to return to their homeland,
consistent with General Assembly resolution 194 (III),
and calls on Israel to comply with all relevant Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions.

We also reiterate our solidarity with Palestinian
prisoners and political detainees, particularly women
and children, who are being held in Israeli prisons and
subjected to inhumane ill-treatment by those authorities.
That has led to hunger strikes and even to the deaths of
some detainees. We call for the immediate release of all
Palestinians arbitrarily imprisoned by Israel. We call on
the international community to continue its efforts in
the context of a global campaign to show our solidarity
in connection with this important problem.

We would like to take this opportunity to thank
the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, of which Nicaragua
is a member, and the Government of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela for the efforts made to ensure
the successful outcome of the recent meeting held in
Caracas in solidarity with the Palestinian people and the
achievement of the Palestinian State. The declaration
adopted at that meeting will give a solid impetus to
efforts undertaken in 2013, emphasizing the decision,
as the Chairman of our Committee has just said, to
request the General Assembly to make 2014 the year of
solidarity with Palestine, in order to undertake a global
campaign to put an end to the Israeli occupation.

We also welcome the regional Palestine seminar to
be held in Ecuador in the coming year, which represents
a unique opportunity for the Latin American and
Caribbean region to show once again its full support
for the Palestinian State.

Nicaragua reiterates its full solidarity with the
Palestinian people in their quest to achieve their

freedom and the exercise of their inalienable right
to self-determination, including with respect to the
establishment of a Palestinian State based on the
pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
laying the foundation for a just and lasting peace
in the Middle East with both States, Palestine and
Israel, living in peace in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations and the aspirations of
all peace-loving countries.

Lastly, we reiterate that it is time to put an end
to the policy of double standards used by some
permanent members of the Security Council and their
allies. In Syria, instead of promoting dialogue and
reconciliation, they are promoting violence and the
militarization of the conflict, arming extremist groups
with a view to achieving regime change. Such violence
and militarization will have serious repercussions
throughout the Middle East, but nonetheless those
same members engage in delaying tactics so as to not
recognize a Palestinian State, whose recognition and
establishment would lead to the just and lasting peace
that is so needed in the Middle East region.

