Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank Under-
Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo; the Charge
d'affaires ad interim of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, Serge Christiane; and
Ambassador Karel van Oosterom for their informative
briefings. I would also like to welcome the participation
of Secretary of State Pompeo in our deliberations here.
My delegation is pleased to note the following positive
elements of the sixth report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/1089) on the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015).

First, the report very correctly and accurately
notes the great importance and historical role of the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), as
delineated in resolution 2231 (2015), which was adopted
unanimously. My country is proud to have contributed
to that historic negotiation process by organizing two
rounds of constructive negotiations in Almaty in 2013.

Secondly, the report very clearly notes Iran's
unwavering commitment to its nuclear obligations in the
framework ofthe JCPOA, which has been confirmed 13
times by the relevant reports of the International Atomic
Energy Agency. We welcome the Secretary-General's
view and appeal to all parties, including the people of
Iran, that everyone should benefit from this agreement.
In that regard, we join in the welcome accorded to the
aspirations of the parties to the agreement to ensure the
freedom of their economic operators to cooperate with
Iran, as stipulated in the JCPOA.

Thirdly, the report very appropriately notes the
confident support of the majority of the international
community for further preserving and implementing the
JCPOA. That is a very clear signal that its success has
justified the means, and current achievements should
be consolidated and built upon. In that regard, we once
again agree with the Secretary-General that issues
not directly related to the Plan should be addressed
without prejudice to and with a view to preserving the
agreement and its accomplishments.

Let me point out other aspects that are of concern
to us. First, we unfortunately continue to observe that
the Secretary-General's report contains notifications
and claims from Member States that do not allow us
to reach the unconditional conclusion that Iran has
violated the requirements of resolution 2231 (2015). In
our opinion, such points only dilute the content of the
report and weaken its validity. All paragraphs about
such notifications conclude with the provision that the
relevant claim requires further analysis and verification
by the Secretariat. The mechanism of interaction of
the Secretariat with the Security Council regarding
the checking of such notifications from Member
States, as well as special trips for examining physical
evidence, remains unclear. As the Secretariat does not
have a direct mandate to carry out such actions, we
should seriously consider how to deal with responses
to Member States' notifications of alleged violations
of resolution 2231 (2015) in the future. Secondly, we
would like to see in the report a full reflection of both
annexes of resolution 2231 (2015). That issue has also
been raised by Council members for several years.

Turning to notifications of alleged violations, we
advocate that issues not involving clear restrictions or
prohibitions under resolution 2231 (2105), including
controversial issues related to Iran's ballistic-missile
activities, should be discussed, in case of serious need,
separately and without prejudice to prospects for the
further implementation of the JCPOA and resolution
2231 (2015).

Kazakhstan reiterates its support for the JCPOA,
as stipulated in President Nazarbayev's policy address,
which we presented to the Security Council last year
(see S/PV.7857). We believe that it plays a very vital
role in ensuring primarily nuclear security in the
region, and thereby opens up prospects for cooperation
with Iran in many other areas. That is not in violation
of the current restrictive measures of the Security
Council, which are respected and strictly executed by
Kazakhstan. We are interested in developing active
cooperation with all countries of the region, owing to
our geographical location and transit potential. Thanks
to our multilateral agreements, we are observing a
revival of trade and economic cooperation, leading to
regional development.

To conclude, I would like to congratulate the
Facilitator for the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015), Ambassador Karel van Oosterom of the
Netherlands, on the completion of his duties, and
commend his committed and tireless efforts to ensuring
that resolution 2231 (2015) fulfils its objectives. As we
come to the end of our term on the Council, we remain
hopeful that the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015) will
continue to make their contributions to strengthening
the non-proliferation regime and ensuring stability and
peace in the region.

