Mr. Woldeyes (Ethiopia): We express our
appreciation to the Equatorial Guinea presidency for
organizing this open debate on an important agenda
item the implementation of which has paramount
significance for the peace and stability of our continent.
We also commend your delegation, Mr. Minister, for its
important role in facilitating negotiations on resolution
2457 (2019), which was unanimously adopted by the
Council today. As a former African member of the
Security Council and Chair of the initial debates on
the issue of the Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative
at the African Union (AU) level in 2013, Ethiopia is
pleased to have worked with you, Sir, in that endeavour.
We thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-
General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, and
Mr. Vasu Gounden, Founder and Executive Director of
the African Centre for the Constructive Resolution of
Dispute, for their briefings. We are also very grateful
for the briefing by Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, High
Representative of the African Union for Silencing the
Guns in Africa, whom we have always appreciated for
his distinguished service in the field.

Ethiopia associates itself with the statement made
by the representative of Benin on behalf of the Group
of African States.

The issue of silencing the guns in Africa is very
important. It is one of the building blocks of the African
Union's Agenda 2063, its 2013 fiftieth-anniversary
solemn declaration, and its strong Vision 2020, aimed
at ending all conflicts on African soil by 2020. Today's
debate builds on the important discussions held at
the level of the Council's Ad Hoc Working Group on
Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa, which
Ethiopia chaired in 2017 and 2018. We should also
recall that the three African members of the Security
Council, together with other partners, organized
an Arria Formula meeting on the topic last year.
Furthermore, the issue was on the agenda of the twelfth
annual consultation between members of the Security
Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council, in which the two Councils exchanged views
on their possible cooperation in implementing the AU
Master Roadmap of Practical Steps to Silence the Guns
in Africa by the Year 2020.

Achieving the goal ofa conflict-free Africa- making
peace a reality for all our people, freeing the continent
of wars, civil conflicts, human rights violations,
humanitarian disasters and violent conflicts, and
preventing genocide - is an important commitment that
our leaders have made. As the concept note (S/2019/169, annex) rightly indicates, that is indeed the overarching
objective guiding the efforts of the African Union to
ensure a peaceful and secure Africa while laying a solid
foundation for the implementation of Agenda 2063, the
AU's strategic framework for inclusive growth and
sustainable development. The AU Agenda 2063 is in
line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and the sustaining peace agenda, and it will contribute
significantly to helping to realize the solemn pledge in
the Charter of the United Nations to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war.

We note the measures so far taken to implement the
goal of silencing the guns in Africa by African Union
member States and regional mechanisms, as well as by
other relevant stakeholders. We particularly appreciate
the adoption of the African Union Master Roadmap in
the context of the implementation of the African Peace
and Security Architecture and the African Governance
Architecture. While we know that many have their
doubts about the realization of this noble objective,
there have indeed been recent positive developments
that have rekindled our hope and optimism about the
possibility of achieving the objective of silencing
the guns in Africa. In our region, the signing of the
revitalized peace agreement between the parties in
South Sudan has restored belief in the possibility of
ending the fighting that has been going on there for
the past five years. We are confident that the recently
reported clashes will not lead to an unravelling of the
situation in that sister country.

The rapprochement between Ethiopia and Eritrea
has not only ended the long-standing no-war-no-peace
situation between our two countries, it also heralds a
new era of regional peace and stability in the Horn of
Africa. Our two countries are working to solidify the
recent gains by taking concrete steps to cement the
relations between our peoples. Djibouti and Eritrea
have also started to restore their bilateral relations,
thereby also strengthening regional peace and stability.
Ethiopia and the entire region remain actively engaged
in facilitating the normalization of relations between the
two countries. As the United Nations and the African
Union have recognized, those positive developments
represent a significant milestone with far-reaching
positive consequences for the Horn of Africa and in the
context of Vision 2020.

Besides this, the recent signing in Khartoum of a
global agreement for peace and national reconciliation
between the Central African Government and 14 armed
opposition groups is an essential and decisive step
forward, as Special Representative Parfait Onanga-
Anyanga recently told the Council (see S/PV.8467).
The peaceful holding of elections and transfer of
power in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
also a welcome development. Those and other positive
developments are not only encouraging us to do more
but also enabling us to renew our efforts to silence the
guns on our continent.

We know full well that there are no quick fixes
or easy solutions to the complex peace and security
challenges that we are facing, and that situation is
further compounded by new and emerging challenges.
That said, we have no option but to continue striving
to achieve this noble objective in order to realize our
aspirations for socioeconomic development. It requires
that we strengthen the African Peace and Security
Architecture, and the ongoing reform efforts in the
African Union are also expected to help strengthen
Africa's capacity in the areas of peace and security. In
particular, the efforts being made to mobilize resources
from within the continent through the revitalized
Africa Union Peace Fund in order to finance Africa's
needs in the area of prevention and mediation to ensure
long-term peace and security are a significant step in
the right direction.

We of course recognize that the building of a
conflict-free Africa essentially rests with us Africans.
That is why we will continue to strive to find home-grown
solutions to our problems. That notwithstanding,
international cooperation and partnership are vital
to effectively addressing every threat to peace and
security in Africa and to accelerating progress towards
silencing the guns. That is the fundamental reason
that we believe the partnership between the African
Union and the United Nations is an absolute necessity.
Implementing the important resolution (2457 (2019))
that the Council adopted earlier today will certainly go
a long way to enhancing the partnership of the African
Union and the United Nations in the areas of peace and
security by strengthening their efforts to coordinate
their engagement in a mutually supportive manner
across the range of possible responses to conflict,
from prevention and mediation, to peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, and to post-conflict recovery and,
subsequently, development.

In conclusion, we very much hope to see our
organizations' enhanced cooperation and partnership
in the coming years, and we appreciate the dedicated
leadership of both Secretary-General Antonio Guterres
and Chairperson Moussa Faki Mahamat in that regard.
We also hope the Council will move from rhetoric
to action by taking concrete steps to strengthen its
cooperation and partnership with the African Union
Peace and Security Council. The adoption of resolution
2457 (2019) is a very important step. We trust that the
Council will take a further decisive step towards the
financing of African-led peace support operations in
due course.

