Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): At the outset,
I would like to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, and Ms. Susana
Malcorra, Under-Secretary-General for Field Support,
for their insightful briefings. I would also like to thank
the Permanent Representative of Somalia for his
statement. My delegation also welcomes the
participation of the Permanent Observer of the African
Union at this meeting.

Taking stock of the gravity and complexity of the
current situation in Somalia, my delegation remains
deeply concerned about the ongoing violence in and
around Mogadishu, as reflected by intensified attacks
by insurgent groups, most notably Al-Shabaab and
Hizb al-Aslam, against the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG) and the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM). Those armed attacks have led to
the deaths and injuries of many peacekeepers and
civilians. We are also gravely concerned about the
extremely alarming humanitarian situation, with over
lmillion people internally displaced and more than
3 million on the verge of starvation.

Given the suffering that is being visited upon the
civilian population and the continuing deterioration of
the security and humanitarian situation in the country,
there is obviously an urgent need for immediate and
vigorous international support for the TFG's
endeavours to repel the onslaught of extremist forces,
which are intent on destroying the Djibouti peace
process and spoiling the efforts to bring peace and
stability to Somalia through political reconciliation.
Member States of the United Nations are urged to fulfil
the pledges they made in Brussels last April to provide
the TFG with adequate assistance, in particular much-
needed funds and assistance to rebuild Somalia's
security institutions and to train its security forces.

Viet Nam supports the TFG's call for the
mobilization of additional troops for AMISOM. in order
to enable it to withstand insurgent attacks. We highly
appreciate the efforts made by the Governments of
Uganda and Burundi in contributing to the maintenance
of the security in Mogadishu. In that connection, we
welcome the pledges made by the Governments of
Sierra Leone, Nigeria, Ghana and other African Union
countries to contribute troops to AMISOM. We hope
that those precious commitments will be realized in a
timely and fruitful way.

For its part, the Security Council has decided to
provide logistical support to AMISOM. We are
encouraged that, on 25 June, the Fifth Committee of
the General Assembly approved that decision in the
amount of over $138 million. We see reasons for hope
coming from the common interest and concerted efforts
of the Security Council in the current situation in
Somalia.

Further deterioration in Somalia, with Al-Shabaab
fighters and fighters linked to Al-Qaida controlling
much of the southern and central parts of the country,
would have regional implications and could escalate
the conflict. More dangerously, it could run the risk of
turning the region into a safe haven for international
terrorists. We must work together to prevent the spread
of that danger, end the scourge of violence and advance
the cause of peace and stability.

For that effort to succeed, it is necessary to work
for closer cooperation and a more effective partnership
among the United Nations Political Office for Somalia,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
African Union and the League of Arab States to
address the challenges that confront Somalia and to
bring about lasting peace and security in the region.
The United Nations should continue to be a strong
partner in that endeavour.

