Mr. Acosta Bonilla (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish): The Security Council has all the world's
citizens in suspense. Its wisdom and its ability to act
will largely determine its future, which is seriously
threatened by war, by economic crisis and, in wide
areas, by hunger. Another factor is the uncertainty of
humanity's future. The relative tranquillity of the post-
war and post-cold-war periods is now being lost, as
events have called into question the institution created
specifically to ensure global peace and harmony.

During the past half-century that we have
experienced, the main role has been played by the
United Nations, which, despite its limitations and
weaknesses, has finally been able to tackle the long list
of conflicts of conflicts and crises that mankind has
faced over the past 50 years. What concerns everyone
now is that the United Nations is paralysed and that
this uncontrolled situation may cause its ultimate
destruction. The hope for a democratic world that
respects human rights seems to be dissipating in an
atmosphere charged with destructive and violent
forces.

Hondurans want to enjoy universal peace and a
world governed by law and providing opportunities for
advancement to all the men and women on the earth, so
they may enjoy civilized life and prosperity. In order to
make this a reality, it is absolutely necessary for the
United Nations to continue to operate with legal force
and efficiency in order to resolve problems of any kind
that may injure humankind.

Hondurans have hope the Security Council will
bring to bear its authority to ensure that current
differences are promptly overcome and that confidence
in the Council's unity remains, so that it may correctly
address the world affairs on its agenda. What is in
jeopardy is infinitely more valuable - morally,
culturally and economically - than the matters that
have led to division which should be overcome
promptly and properly.

The Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, in his
heroic struggles at the beginning of this current tragedy
correctly stated that it is an urgent necessity to ensure
that humanitarian assistance is not interrupted for those
in need, and that, above and beyond any other
consideration, the institution's procedures must be
reorganized so as to continue the delivery of medicines,
foodstuffs and shelter to the children, women and
elderly who require them. We cannot allow the tragedy
to take on inhuman dimensions in the twenty-first
century. The Security Council must immediately
support the Secretary-General and establish the
necessary provisions to meet the needs of the millions
in need.
The Security Council must, together, or each
member individually, make the maximum effort to
ensure a promising and satisfactory future for the
millions of human beings who aspire to such a future.
It also has the unavoidable obligation to salvage the
institution of the United Nations, which is the
safeguard ensuring that individuals and States, large
and small, can continue to live harmoniously and in
peace. May there be peace for the benefit of all
peoples.

