Mr. Viinanen (Finland): 1 have the honour to
address the Security Council on behalf of the Nordic
countries, namely, Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway
and Sweden, which all sponsored resolution 1998
(2011), which the Council adopted this morning.

We are particularly pleased, Mr. President, with
your effective approach to turning country situation
reports into timely Security Council recommendations.
This is crucial for the recommendations to have real
impact. Good examples in that regard are the country
conclusions regarding Afghanistan and Chad, which
were approved in March and in April. As a positive
follow-up, in the past few months both countries
committed themselves to action programmes to end the
use of child soldiers. All in all, this shows that the
monitoring and reporting mechanism can be a powerful
tool for ensuring that all rights of all children are
respected. We should use it and related resolutions to
provide the widest possible protection to children
affected by armed conflicts.

In that regard, the increased attacks against
hospital and schools and their personnel are of extreme
concern to us. It is our view that both institutions
should be equally respected as humanitarian space,
including during conflict. This is a fundamental
prerequisite for fulfilling the right of all girls and boys
to education, as well as a basic requirement for
promoting schools and hospitals as zones of peace and
as vehicles for psycho-social support and recovery for
children in unstable situations.

Finally, access to health care and education,
especially for children, is a fundamental building block
of lasting peace and sustainable development. Attacks
on schools and hospitals, the denial of or restrictions
on safe access to those facilities by armed groups,
using them as shields, for military purposes or as
recruitment grounds, and other disruptions to
educational and medical facilities should trigger listing
in the annexes of the Secretary-General's reports on
children and armed conflict.
11-41151

Relevant sanctions committees are increasingly
engaged in the agenda of children and armed conflict.
We commend the efforts of the Special Representative
in this regard. We urge the Council to continue to find
ways to hold perpetrators to account through existing
sanctions regimes and to explore new ways of ensuring
accountability for violations committed in conflicts.

In order to acquire the necessary information on
attacks and threats, the Security Council should ensure
that all relevant United Nations peacekeeping
operations, special political missions and
peacebuilding missions include specific provisions on
monitoring and reporting violations by child protection
advisers.

