Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, let me warmly thank Jeffrey Feltman for his
illuminating presentation of the Secretary-General's
report on the threat posed by Da'esh. I also convey, on
behalf of France, my most heartfelt condolences to all
of our partners who have suffered from the terrorist
attacks of the last two weeks.

Nothing can justify the targeting of civilian
populations and cowardly attacking innocent people,
as occurred in Manchester, Baghdad, Kabul, Manila,
London, and, yesterday, in Tehran - to cite just the
most recent examples. More than ever before, we must
be completely committed to fighting terrorism and
to curbing the barbarism of Da'esh. The President of
the French Republic, Mr. Emmanuel Macron, has
strongly reaffirmed that this fight is a priority and has
announced that France will step up its efforts in that
area, in particular by establishing a coordination unit
that would report directly to him.

The Secretary- General's report (S/2017/467) clearly
points out that Da'esh has continued to suffer major
defeats in Iraq and Syria, due in particular to the efforts
of the international coalition. We must continue to fight
Da'esh terrorists in their strongholds in Syria and Iraq
and prevent them from extending their control over
other areas in the Middle East, Libya and, importantly,
the Sahel. In that regard, the start of the battle to retake
Raqqa, which has led to the planning of attacks to be
carried out in France and Europe, is a major issue and a
top priority for my country.

But above and beyond our military efforts, I would

like to emphasize three areas in which we can and must
do better.

First of all, the fight against the financing of
terrorism must remain a top priority, in line with
resolution 2253 (2015). Although it cannot be denied
that Da'esh is facing financial difficulties, we should not
underestimate the ability of the group and its supporters
to adapt and diversify their sources of income. We must
therefore remain fully committed to drying up the
sources of Da'esh financing. That will require specific
and concerted efforts to monitor suspicious funds and
transactions, reduce anonymity, limit the use of cash
in the economy and strengthen cooperation among all
institutions concerned.

Secondly, the dynamic flows of foreign terrorist
fighters must compel us to constantly adapt our
legislation and systems. Apart from the need to
continue to prevent radicalization and stop people
from leaving, we must anticipate the risks posed by
those who might return and by fighters who decide to
remain in a third country. That would mean improving
our detection tools, strengthening information-sharing
and devising an appropriate response when fighters and
their entourage seek to return to our countries. It is an
extremely complex exercise because every situation is
different. In the case of France in particular, there are
many women and children to be taken into consideration.
We must be able to respond to that challenge; we are
working on to address it.

Finally, we must continue and step up the fight
against ideas. Since terrorists use digital technology
to their advantage, we must also change the way we
respond. Combating Da'esh via the Internet is a new
element in our fight. We must therefore continue to have
frank discussions with major Internet groups on ways to
counter deadly Da'esh propaganda. Above and beyond
the commitment from Governments, the effectiveness
of our efforts also depends on the participation of
civil society. The contradictions espoused by terrorist
groups must be explained on the ground.

To counter those who wish to destroy our way of
life, freedom and democracy, let us all be resolute in
our multi-pronged fight, while maintaining respect for
our values and the law. That will show that the United
Nations is also engaged in the fight against terrorism
and Da'esh.

