The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of May, I should like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to Mr. Adolfo Aguilar Zinser, Permanent
Representative of Mexico to the United Nations, for his
service as President of the Security Council for the
month of April 2003. I am sure I speak for all members
of the Council in expressing deep appreciation to
Ambassador Aguilar Zinser for the great diplomatic
skill with which he conducted the Council's business
last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Burundi

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Burundi, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nteturuye
(Burundi) took a seat the Council table.


The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council congratulates the
Burundian parties on a peaceful transition of
power in accordance with the 2000 Arusha Peace
Agreement. The transition in presidency
represents a major milestone in the
implementation of the Agreement.

"The Security Council believes that it is
now crucial to follow up this positive
development with the implementation of those
Arusha provisions that are still outstanding, such
as meaningful security sector and judicial
reforms. Resolving such pressing and other
related issues is the only way to ensure that the
36-month transitional period is a success.

"The Security Council condemns the 17
April and 25 April attacks on Bujumbura and
other cities by the forces of CNDD-FDD
(Nkurunziza). The Council takes note of the
CNDD-FDD's 27 April statement that it will
refrain from attacking unless attacked and urges
all Burundian parties to observe the terms of the
ceasefire agreements and implement them
without delay.

"The Security Council reiterates its
demands that FNL (Rwasa) lay down its arms and
immediately enter into a ceasefire with the
Government of Burundi without preconditions.
The FNL's unwillingness to date to seek a
peaceful resolution of this conflict makes it
difficult for the international community to accept
the legitimacy of its concerns.

"The Security Council urges all relevant
regional parties and actors to continue their
efforts to bring about a lasting peace in Burundi
and stands ready to consider steps against those
that are found to continue to support armed
attacks by the Burundi rebels.

"The Security Council also expresses
support for the speedy deployment of the African
Mission in Burundi to facilitate the continuing
implementation of the ceasefire agreements. The
Council appeals for adequate and sustained
international assistance to the African Mission in
Burundi, while underscoring the importance of
providing the donor community with as many
details as possible to enable it to make
determinations regarding the best way to assist
the Mission.

"The Security Council urges donors to
support the economy of Burundi, to honour the
engagements taken at the Paris and Geneva
Conferences, and, within their abilities, to
provide as a matter of the utmost urgency
budgetary and balance of payments support to the

Government of Burundi and to contribute
generously to the transitional debt relief fund,
with continued strong performance on economic
reforms by the Government of Burundi.
"The Security Council urges the Burundian
parties to take serious, meaningful steps to
address human rights and accountability issues.
In this regard, the Council welcomes the approval
by the Burundian Senate on 23 April of
legislation on genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity, and legislation establishing a
truth and reconciliation commission. The Council
looks forward to their effective implementation.

"The Security Council reaffirms the vital
importance of the Burundian parties themselves
taking ownership of the process to address the
devastating impact of impunity, as detailed in the
Arusha Accords. The international community
pledges its willingness and readiness to assist in
efforts to build up the Burundian capacity for
promoting respect for human rights standards and
the rule of law.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to continue to support the
peace process in Burundi, including the
immediate and full implementation of the
ceasefire agreement signed by the Burundian
parties."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2003/4.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.35 pm.

