Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I wish to acknowledge
the presence of the Foreign Minsiters of Australia,
Luxembourg and the Netherlands.

I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for giving my
delegation the opportunity to address the Council
at this point in time. I also wish to thank all Council
members, in particular the delegation of Australia, for
their efforts in coordinating and presenting resolution
2166 (2014). We welcome its unanimous adoption by
the Security Council today.

As one of the countries most severely affected by
the tragedy of Flight MH-l7, Malaysia attaches great
importance to the resolution. For my delegation, the
resolution lays the groundwork for the approach to be
taken by the international community, in particular the
United Nations system and its mechanisms, towards
addressing the many questions raised by the downing
of Flight MH-l7. I wish to underscore that no number of
measures will ever compensate or assuage the grief and
suffering of the families and loved ones of the victims
who were on board Flight MH-l7. It is incumbent
upon us, as members of the United Nations family, to
honour the Victims by undertaking a full, thorough and
independent investigation into the downing of Flight
MH-l7.

Last Friday, during the Council's emergency
meeting on Ukraine (see S/PV.72l9), I informed the
Council that Malaysia would immediately dispatch a
team to Kyiv with a View to assisting in the investigation
of Flight MH-l7. That team arrived in Kyiv on Saturday,
19 July. The Malaysian team in Kyiv has joined other
national teams from the Netherlands, the United
Kingdom and the United States in what is known as the
joint international investigation team.

Malaysia regrets to note that, as of today, the joint
international investigation team has yet to be given
full access to the crash site. Malaysia finds that lack
of full access unacceptable and reiterates its call on all
States and actors in the region to cooperate fully in the
conduct of the international investigation, including by
being given immediate and unrestricted access to the
crash site. It also calls for full guarantees to be provided
for the safety and security of the investigation teams.

At the same time, all parties must exert all efforts
to preserve the integrity of the crash site with a view
to facilitating the work of the investigation teams.
Such guarantees must also extend to the dignified and
respectful treatment of the bodies and remains of the
victims. For Malaysia, one of the key mission priorities
of our investigation team is the recovery, identification
and repatriation of the bodies and remains of the
victims. That is to ensure that their families and loved
ones can have closure and that the victims are accorded
the dignity ofa proper burial.

Flight MH-I7 was a civilian airliner. If it is
subsequently established that the plane was indeed shot
down, we demand that those responsible for downing
the plane be held to account and be swiftly brought to
justice. We believe that the current resolution paves the
way for such efforts and, as such, we firmly supported
it by co-sponsoring resolution 2166 (2014). We now
look forward to its full implementation by all concerned
parties.

