Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the presidency of the United States for convening
this debate and for presenting resolution 2177 (2014),
which we adopted today and which Chile co-sponsored.
I also wish to thank the other speakers and presenters
who have preceded me.

Chile regrets that this tragedy has cost thousands
of human lives and has affected West Africa, mainly
Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. Our solidarity goes
to the affected families and the Governments of those
countries. A "public health emergency of international
concern" was how the World Health Organization
identified Ebola a few days ago, and yesterday, a senior
official of that agency declared that the crisis that we
are facing is "unparalleled in modern times", pointing
out that the numbers of those infected have doubled in
21 days.

The epidemic has been undermining the social
and economic stability of those countries, which
are emerging from conflict, at a time when they
have been pushing ahead with determination in their
respective peacebuilding processes. The threats to
international peace and security have extended beyond
the traditional borders of armed inter- and intra-State
conflicts. Therefore, whenever there is a genuine threat
of any type or origin to the stability, security and peace
in an area or region that is in the process of building
peace and supported by United Nations missions, the
Council, within the purview of its competencies and
representing the international community, must adopt
the necessary decisions that will ensure the conditions
needed in order for those affected countries to adopt
and implement the technical measures and specific
policies they need to tackle the emergency.
The international community must act with the
resources and institutions at its disposal, such as the
Peacebuilding Commission, since those three countries
are part of its agenda. There also must be the necessary
coordination among the affected States, the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations
and between the States and donor agencies so as to
avoid duplication of efforts and to optimize the use of
resources.

Although Chile recognizes that a peace mission is
not a public health operation, we should look into how,
as in the case of Liberia, we can adjust the work of that
mission on the ground so as to afford the necessary
collaboration with the authorities of the affected
countries without overlooking the need to ensure the
protection and security of humanitarian workers for
health and peacekeeping.

One of the critical points that we need to address
in this crisis is to find effective mechanisms to break
the chain of transmission of the virus, which has
affected, to a large extent, women and vulnerable
groups. In that regard, we should place emphasis on the
education of the population and medical personnel so
as to eliminate erroneous prejudices about the virus,
avoid stigmatization and ensure that communities and
families play their rightful roles.

Based on the study published yesterday by the
World Bank Group, if the virus continues to expand
in the most affected countries, the economic impact
in those countries could increase eight times over,
with potentially catastrophic consequences, and
the study recommends the implementation as soon
as possible of measures to contain and to provide
multi-sectoral responses that will at the same time
reduce the uncertainty. For that reason, it is necessary
to issue a call that no restrictions be imposed on the
flow of persons and trade, interrupting airline and
maritime services, which would cause a blockade that
would exacerbate the negative economic impact in
those countries and increase fear in the society with
unforeseen consequences. Such measures are not
supported by studies, which indicate the danger of such
operations.

Finally, Chile appreciates and underscores the
international solidarity of various countries, such as
Cuba, the United States and the United Kingdom, as
well as the African Union, among others, whose rapid
responses are contributing in this direction. Likewise,
we are pleased by the correct decision of the Secretary-
General to appoint Dr. David Nabarro as Coordinator
of the organization to tackle the virus, and we will
support his work and initiative to establish a global
coalition against the epidemic.

