Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): It is a tremendous
joy to see you sitting in that chair, conducting this
meeting, Mr. President. I must apologize. I have been
practising my Arabic, but when I came here, I forgot
all of it, so I cannot greet you in Arabic. But it is a
tremendous joy to see you there, Sir. On behalf of our
delegation, we wish to congratulate you on assuming
the presidency for the month of June 2002.

On 2 June 2002, a ministerial delegation of the
Non-Aligned Movement visited Ramallah and met with
President Arafat in an expression of solidarity with the
President and the people of Palestine.

President Arafat briefed the Ministers ofthe Non-
Aligned Movement on the latest developments,
including the implementation of new restrictive
measures against the Palestinian people, which have
effectively resulted in the balkanization ofthe occupied
territory.

The ministerial delegation of the Non-Aligned
Movement reiterated the movement's outrage at the
intensification of the illegal Israeli occupation, the
killing, the vast destruction, the economic strangulation
and other atrocities committed against Palestine and its
people, including the continuation of settlement
activities, especially in and around East Jerusalem.

The ministerial delegation of the Non-Aligned
Movement reiterated the movement's support for the
principle of the right of the Palestinian people to self-
determination and the establishment of their
independent State with East Jerusalem as its capital.
They reaffirmed the need for Israel to withdraw to the
1967 borders.

The delegation of Ministers congratulated
President Arafat on the signing of the Basic Law of
Palestine, which is an important step towards the
establishment of a constitutional law of Palestine.

The ministerial delegation of the Non-Aligned
Movement also expressed its support for all
international efforts aimed at achieving a just,
comprehensive and lasting solution.

In that context, the Movement unequivocally
affirmed its support for the Arab peace initiative and
for the effort of the "quartet". The Non-Aligned
Movement delegation of ministers noted that those
efforts by the international community should form the
basis of an international conference aimed at the
establishment of a road map for the attainment of a
lasting peace and on the basis of Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 425 (1978) and
of the Madrid Conference terms of reference on land-
for-peace principles. The Non-Aligned Movement
delegation of ministers concluded the visit by wishing
President Arafat and the people of Palestine success in
their endeavours to find a peaceful solution to this
long-standing conflict.

Now that the Non-Aligned Movement has
actually visited Palestine and has seen for itself the
situation on the ground, its sense of urgency is even
greater. The Non-Aligned Movement remains
convinced that something will have to be done about
restarting peace negotiations in the Middle East, or the
world will risk a regional conflagration with potentially
devastating consequences.

As the Council is aware, the Israeli Army has
once again attacked the headquarters of the Palestinian
Authority in Ramallah, directly endangering the life of
President Arafat in the process. The fact that the Israeli
Army enters and leaves Palestinian cities and refugee
camps should be an even greater cause for alarm. The
reason is that the Israeli Army believes that by
maintaining a quiet siege of the Palestinian territories,
it can fool the international community into believing
that the situation is actually improving. In actual
practice, Israel has long since carved the occupied
territories into a series of bantustans, has forced the
closure of offices of foreign representatives in
Ramallah, and has barred diplomats and journalists
from access to a number of sites in the West Bank and
the Gaza Strip.

The ongoing military incursions, curfews and
blockades serve only to deepen the humanitarian crisis
and to paralyse the already devastated Palestinian
economy. Those violent actions, therefore, inevitably
generate further frustration, desperation and violence.
The time has come for Israel, the occupying Power, to
acknowledge that the legitimate aspirations of the
Palestinian people for self-determination cannot be
thwarted by military might or by attacks on their
legitimately elected leader.

We fail to see how the Palestinian Authority can
be expected to implement effective reforms and to
establish conditions of common security if the Security
Council does nothing to prevent the wholesale
destruction of the Palestinian Government's
institutions. We therefore call on the Council to take
action immediately to ensure full compliance with its
resolutions, particularly resolutions 1402 (2002) and
1403 (2003).

Perhaps even more importantly, the Council
should seriously consider visiting Palestine, as the
Non-Aligned Movement has already done. The Council
should speak to people on the ground and assess the
situation for itself, as the Movement has done.
Otherwise, the world will always conclude that the
Council will remain idle while Israel pursues the
hopeless task of trying to guarantee security by
perpetrating illegal acts of collective punishment
against a civilian population. All acts of violence
against innocent civilians, whether they are Israeli or
Palestinian civilians, should be condemned, regardless
of who perpetrates them.

The Non-Aligned Movement wishes to reaffirm
once more its principal position that Israel's security
and peace in the Middle East will not be achieved until
the people of Palestine have a State of their own with
East Jerusalem as its capital.

