Mrs. Nakamitsu: I thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013), on the elimination of the chemical-weapons programme of the Syrian Arab Republic. Since my most recent briefing, on 10 September (see S/2020/902), the Office for Disarmament Affairs has continued to maintain regular contacts with its counterparts at the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) on its activities related to this matter. To date, the Office for Disarmament Affairs has not received any further information from the Permanent Mission of the Syrian Arab Republic concerning issues related to resolution 2118 (2013) for this period. As I have previously informed the Council, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic continues to impact the OPCW's ability to deploy to the Syrian Arab Republic. Nonetheless, the Technical Secretariat has continued with its mandated activities related to the elimination of the Syrian chemical-weapons programme and its engagement with the Syrian Arab Republic in that regard, including a new deployment of the Declaration Assessment Team to Damascus, which just concluded on 3 October. The OPCW Declaration Assessment Team is continuing its efforts to clarify all outstanding issues regarding the Syrian Arab Republic's initial declaration to the OPCW. In response to the letter sent by the OPCW Director General on 21 April 2020, the Syrian National Authority provided information concerning eight of the 22 outstanding issues, including two amendments to its initial declaration, through a letter dated 25 August 2020. I have been advised that during its deployment in October 2019, the Declaration Assessment Team collected samples with a view to resolving one of the 22 outstanding issues related to the Syrian Arab Republic's initial declaration. However, a deterioration of the samples was observed at the OPCW laboratory. The OPCW Director General informed the Syrian National Authority and provided information on the measures taken by the OPCW Technical Secretariat to document and preserve the integrity of the seals applied to the samples. Furthermore, a representative of the Syrian Arab Republic visited the OPCW laboratory, where he observed the integrity of the seals and received related documentation. A technical meeting was subsequently convened with experts of the Syrian National Authority to agree on next steps. During the deployment to the Syrian Arab Republic concluded on 3 October 2020, the Declaration Assessment Team continued to address the outstanding issues related to Syria's initial declaration as well as the information provided by the Syrian National Authority to the OPCW Technical Secretariat. The outcome of that deployment will be shared with the OPCW Executive Council in due course. I have been advised that the OPCW Technical Secretariat still plans to conduct two rounds of inspections of the Barzah and Jamrayah facilities of the Syrian Scientific Studies and Research Centre (SSRC) in 2020. However, the undertaking of those inspections will be subject to the evolution of the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on OPCW activities. I understand that the Syrian Arab Republic has not yet provided sufficient technical information or explanations that would enable the OPCW Technical Secretariat to close the issue related to the findings of a Schedule 2 chemical detected at the Barzah facilities of the SSRC. The OPCW Technical Secretariat will continue to engage with the Syrian authorities and will inform the OPCW Executive Council of any progress in due course.I note that the OPCW fact-finding mission in the Syrian Arab Republic is still in the process of studying all available information related to allegations of the use of chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic and continues its engagement with the Syrian Government and other State parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction (CWC) with regard to a variety of incidents. I was just informed by the OPCW Technical Secretariat that the fact-finding mission issued, on 2 October 2020, two reports on its investigation regarding separate incidents of the alleged use of toxic chemicals as a weapon in Aleppo on 24 November 2018 and in Saraqib on | August 2016. As I have previously informed Council members, further deployments of the fact-finding mission will be subject to the evolution of the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on OPCW activities. The Investigation and Identification Team continues its investigations into incidents in which the fact-finding mission has determined that chemical weapons were used or likely used in the Syrian Arab Republic and will issue further reports in due course. I have been advised that the OPCW Technical Secretariat has yet to receive a response from the Syrian Arab Republic to the letter sent to the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of the Syrian Arab Republic by the OPCW Director General on 20 July 2020 outlining the obligations of the Syrian Arab Republic under OPCW Executive Council decision EC-94/DEC.2 and indicating the readiness of the OPCW Technical Secretariat to assist the Syrian Arab Republic in the fulfilment of those obligations within the required period of 90 days. The OPCW Director General will report to the Executive Council and all States parties to the CWC within 100 days of that decision on whether the Syrian Arab Republic has completed all of the measures contained in the aforementioned decision. As I have said many times before the Council, there is an urgent need to not only identify but also hold accountable all those who have used chemical weapons, in violation of international law. Without such an action, we are allowing the use of chemical weapons to take place with impunity. It is imperative that the Council show leadership in demonstrating that impunity in the use of such weapons will not be tolerated. The Office for Disarmament Affairs stands ready to provide whatever support and assistance it can. Before concluding, I wish to echo the Secretary- General's appeal for a global ceasefire and for an end to hostilities across the Syrian Arab Republic.
