Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Gabon for its initiative in
organizing today's meeting, and to welcome President
Bongo Ondimba in coming to preside over it. I also
wish to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and the
Executive Director of the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), Mr. Michel
Sidibe, for their statements.

HIV/AIDS poses a serious threat to human life.
In recent years, thanks to the joint efforts of the
international community, great progress has been made
in the prevention and treatment of HIV/AIDS.
However, there are still more than 60 million people
worldwide living with or infected with HIV/AIDS. The
situation is especially serious in sub-Saharan Africa. In
some countries in conflict or post-conflict situations,
poverty, lack of medical facilities and massive
population displacement are all factors likely to worsen
the spread of HIV/AIDS, which in turn affects the
economic development and social stability of the
countries concerned.

I would like to make four points.

First, it is important to strengthen international
cooperation and implement in earnest the relevant
declarations and resolutions adopted by the General
Assembly and the Security Council. In 2001 the
General Assembly held a special session on HIV/AIDS
and adopted a Declaration of Commitment (resolution S-26/2). Tomorrow, the Assembly will once again hold
a high-level meeting on HIV/AIDS and will adopt a set
of outcome documents. Since 2000, the discussion of
HIV/AIDS in the Council has also raised the profile of
this issue on the international agenda. Now the
international community must translate commitments
into concrete action and make greater efforts in the
fight against HIV/AIDS.

Secondly, developed countries must honour their
commitments effectively and provide the necessary
financial and technical assistance to developing
countries. HIV/AIDS medicines, treatment and care are
costly, and developing countries face serious
difficulties with their HIV/AIDS response in terms of
financing and technology. The developed countries
should therefore extend a helping hand
to them. International organizations and funds,
including the United Nations, must strengthen their
cooperation and assist developing countries, especially
those in sub-Saharan Africa, in their fight against
HIV/AIDS.

Thirdly, it is important to give special attention to
the issue of AIDS in countries in conflict or post-
conflict situations. The Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission must give adequate
attention to the needs of the countries on their agenda
with regard to dealing with HIV/AIDS. In addition, the
consequences of HIV/AIDS must be fully taken into
account when drawing up plans for post-conflict
reconstruction, security sector reform and the
reintegration of former combatants.

Finally, it is important to strengthen the United
Nations HIV/AIDS response within its peacekeeping
operations. China welcomes the initiatives taken by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, as called for
by the Council in its resolutions, to enhance awareness
about HIV/AIDS among peacekeepers and to amend
the code of conduct for peacekeepers. We wish also to
see continued cooperation and coordination between
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
UNAIDS.

