Mr. Mansour (Palestine): At the outset, I extend
Palestine's congratulations to the Russian Federation on
its ascension to the presidency of the Security Council
and our appreciation for convening of this important
debate today. I thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his briefing and ongoing efforts including to draw
the Council's attention to the critical issues before
us. I would also like to thank Mr. Stephen O'Brien,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, for his briefing.

I reiterate our deep appreciation to the five
Security Council members that co-chaired last week's
Arria Formula meeting on Israeli settlement activities,
allowing the Council to hear expert presentations on
the stark reality and dangers of the ongoing illegal
colonization of Palestine on the ground and their effect
on the prospects for peace. We thank Malaysia, Egypt,
Angola, Senegal and Venezuela for that timely and
important initiative.

Reflecting on that meeting and the firm positions
reaffirmed by all Council members, along with many
recent Government statements made in response to
Israeli settlement announcements, it is clear that the
settlement issue is not, as cynically claimed by some,
a "one-sided" Palestinian issue. As affirmed in every
statement, the illegality of settlement activities and
the threats posed to the two-State solution and peace
prospects are matters of international law and involve
all States concerned with a peaceful solution to the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict and peace and security in
the Middle East.

It is about the law, established by the Member
States, and respect for that law. Otherwise, its
denigration renders it meaningless and ineffective.
That law - namely, the Fourth Geneva Convention,
applicable to all States as customary law - was created
in the aftermath of the horrors of the Second World War
specifically to avert the colonization, oppression and
persecution of peoples by foreign Powers occupying
their lands. The same law clearly stipulates that
occupation is to be a temporary situation, not indefinite
or perpetual. That is not a matter of Palestinian opinion,
narrative or perspective. It is simply the law.

Yet, as we approach the 50-year mark of Israel's
occupation of the Palestinian people and land, the
laws governing it have been turned upside down,
twisted and exploited by Israel, which has used every
pretext - even the most implausible and disrespectful
ones - to justify its occupation and all of the human
rights violations and war crimes flowing from it and
sustaining it for five decades. We must therefore, for
the record, reaffirm article 49 of the Fourth Geneva
Convention, which strictly prohibits the colonization,
construction of settlements, transfer of settlers,
forced displacement and transfer of the Palestinian
civilian population and all other measures carried
out by Israel intended to facilitate and support such
actions, including its construction of the wall directly
contravening this prohibition.

Under Protocol Additional to the Geneva
Conventions of12 August 1949, relating to the Protection
of Victims of International Armed Conflicts, known
as Protocol 1, these actions constitute grave breaches,
which all high-contracting parties are obligated to
suppress. Moreover, article 8 of the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court deems as war crimes,

"[t]he transfer, directly or indirectly, by the
Occupying Power of parts of its own civilian
population into the territory it occupies, or the
deportation or transfer of all or parts of the
population of the occupied territory within or
outside this territory".

The 2004 advisory opinion ofthe International Court
of Justice was equally clear about these prohibitions,
affirming the illegality of Israel's settlements, wall and
all related measures aimed at altering the demographic
composition, character and status of the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. Such
measures also constitute violations of the Charter of
the United Nations.

The international consensus is also clear, as evident
in the determination made individually and collectively
by States, including in Security Council resolutions, that
settlement activities are illegal and constitute a major
obstacle to peace. It is also evident in the global calls
on Israel to cease all settlement activities and end its
nearly half-century occupation. Both are imperative for
realizing ajust, lasting and comprehensive Palestinian-
Israeli peace and an Arab-Israeli peace, in general, and
we recall here the Arab Peace Initiative, the importance
and centrality of which we underscore.

There can be no question about the clear legal
dimensions of the issue, its standing as a peace and
security issue, and the international community's duty
to act, including, at the forefront, the Security Council
according to its Charter mandate. It is therefore quite
astounding to hear Israeli claims that any attempts to
redress this illegal situation are one-sided Palestinian or
Arab attempts and Israeli arguments that the settlements
are not an issue. And it is equally disturbing to hear
claims that the Security Council has no duty or role
on this issue and witness Israel bully States, including
permanent members of the Council, warning them not
to adopt any resolutions on the matter - in essence
demanding of them to ignore and, worse yet, breach
their own legal obligations.

Even more appalling is that Israel, which bullies
and boasts that peace will not come by resolutions, is the
very same Israel that was actually created by a United
Nations resolution - General Assembly resolution 181
(II) of 1947, to be precise. That begs the question: How
can a State be created on the basis ofa resolution while
peace cannot? We believe that peace - the central
purpose of the Organization - is more than worthy
of international legislation and action, and Israel's
constant attempts to diminish and divert the United
Nations work, in that regard, should be denounced and
halted, not rewarded.

Considering the realities of the situation and the
dangers of inaction, so starkly highlighted at the recent
Arria Formula meeting, we must ask what could possibly
justify the continued paralysis ofthe Security Council in
the face of such systematic, aggressive Israeli violations
and blatant defiance of the will of the international
community. And what could excuse Israel's further
appeasement, when its actions are threatening peace
and security - the exact purview ofthe Council - and
destroying the two-State solution based on the 1967
borders that have been internationally conceived and
endorsed for decades? In addition to defying the law,
the premise and arguments presented by Israel defy
logic, reason and decency and must be rejected. The
Security Council has clear responsibilities, and, once
again, we therefore call for urgent action to address the
ongoing crisis and injustice.

The 1 July Quartet report (S/2016/595, annex)
concluded that Israel's continuing policy of settlement
construction and expansion, designation of Palestinian
land for exclusive Israeli use and denial of Palestinian
development, including the high rate of demolitions, are
steadily eroding the two-State solution and entrenching
a one-State reality - a reality that any objective observer
could only describe as apartheid. In the report and in
recent statements, the Quartet deemed the situation
unsustainable and called for a reversal of the negative
trends on the ground to salvage the two-State solution
and create the conditions for meaningful negotiations
on all final status issues - refugees, Jerusalem,
settlements, borders, water and security - and for
tangibly advancing that solution.

The Israeli response to the report, despite the
lip-service paid, came in the form of more settlement
activities and provocations. Since the report's issuance,
plans have been approved for the construction of
over 2,000 units in Israeli settlements in Occupied
East Jerusalem, the Bethlehem and Nablus areas and
elsewhere in occupied Palestine. Plans were also
revealed for a new settlement, east of the settlement
of Shiloh, on lands of the Palestinian village of Jalud,
along with other illegal schemes concerning so-called
settlement outposts, further damaging the contiguity
and integrity of our land. The recent period has
also seen measures aimed at the forcible transfer of
Palestinian Bedouin communities from in and around
occupied East Jerusalem, including in the sensitive E-l
area, such as the community in Khan Al-Ahmar, along
with ongoing threats to demolish Palestinian homes,
schools and other civilian structures in Susiya village
and to forcibly displace the population.

Those are just a few examples from a year during
which we witnessed the unprecedented demolition of
Palestinian homes, as mentioned by Mr. O'Brien, the
non-stop confiscation of Palestinian land, expansion of
Israeli settlements, threats by Israeli officials to annex
our land, and constant settler violence and terror, all
committed with impunity. At the same time, we witness
ongoing provocations and extremist incitement against
holy sites in occupied East Jerusalem and Al-Khalil,
especially at Al-Haram Al-Sharif, daily military raids in
our cities and towns, villages and refugee camps, where
Palestinian civilians are assaulted and traumatized by
the occupying forces, often resulting in the death or
injury; arrest and detention of our civilians, particularly
young men and even children, and the beginning of the
tenth year of Israel's blockade of the Gaza Strip, where
2 million Palestinians are being collectively punished
and besieged, threatened repeatedly by Israeli forces and
enduring extreme deprivation and isolation, which has
imposed a dire humanitarian crisis and socioeconomic
conditions that are at their lowest point since 1967.

In that regard, I must take a moment to appeal for
urgent support to the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which
is leading the efforts of humanitarian organizations to
alleviate the plight of the Palestine refugees in Gaza and
throughout the region, providing them with sustenance,
stability and a measure of hope in the midst of intense
turmoil and conflict. The Agency needs immediate
support to help it to overcome the debilitating funding
crisis it faces, which if unresolved will have far-
reaching negative consequences.

As our people suffer the endless horrors of such
an unlawful, inhumane occupation every day, how
can we believe Israel's claimed commitment to peace?
How can we not question Israel's intentions when every
policy and measure fragments our land and undermines
our State's viability, taking us farther away from the
two-State solution, and when its policies and measures
violate every human right of our people and deny
them any semblance of human dignity, intensifying
hopelessness and despair and shaking their convictions
in the law and in the possibility of peace?

Faced with continued defiance by the occupying
Power, words are no longer enough. Let me
repeat - words are no longer enough. The global calls
for the cessation of Israeli settlement activities and
crimes against the Palestinian people must be backed
with serious, practical measures to compel Israeli
compliance with the law. There must be consequences if
Israel continues to violate international law. Moreover,
the international community must determine what
actions can stop the downward spiral, stabilize the
situation and revive peace prospects. While we echo the
Quartet's calls to reverse negative trends and promote
confidence-building measures, we must also emphasize
the need to restore the political horizon that has been
perilously absent for too long.

Efforts to foster conditions conducive to meaningful
negotiations will fall short, yet again, without a credible
political horizon to move us forward. We must learn
the lessons of the past. The political horizon must be
firmly based on the long-standing terms of reference
based on the relevant United Nations resolutions,
including resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 194
(III), among others, the Madrid land-for-peace principle
and the Arab Peace Initiative, and must be undertaken
within clear parameters and a defined time frame for
the conclusion of an agreement. Again, we say in the
Chamber, the conflict is not intractable. The solution
has long been known; what is missing is the political
will that we need.

In truth, the Council's paralysis, coupled with the
maliciousness ofIsraeli actions, its contempt for the law
and obstruction of any initiative to resolve the conflict
are not only regrettable and frustrating, but would test
anyone's resolve and conviction in the rule of law. But
we will not be deterred. After all this time, we remain
convinced of the primacy of international law and its
role in resolving the conflict and ending the injustice.
We remain committed to peace and the achievement of
a just solution that will ensure the rights of our people,
including the right to freedom and self-determination
in their State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, and secure lasting peace and coexistence

between Palestine and Israel and mutual security for
our peoples.

We therefore continue to seek Security Council
action that is consistent with its pledge to use all
applicable diplomatic, political and legal tools to
advance those goals. Our current efforts are focused
on the Israeli settlement regime, which is something
that everyone recognizes as the central pillar of their
illegal occupation. Settlement activities make up the
main means by which Israel willfully, wantonly and
systematically - it involves almost every branch of the
Israeli Government - continues to forcibly expandd
its presence and entrench its illegal occupation of
Palestine. Those are among the means by which it is
able to control and oppress the Palestinian population.
They are directly endangering the two-State solution
based on the pre-1967 borders. How can anyone speak
of preserving the two-State solution and progressing
towards peace without addressing that matter?

It is for that reason that, with our Arab partners,
based on a decision by the Arab Ministerial
Committee, we have launched consultations with all
Security Council members. The consultations aim at
determining a clear course of action to confront the
main obstacle to peace and open a political horizon
in which a genuine political process can be sustained
and expedited for the achievement of a just, peaceful
and durable solution. We are doing that responsibly,
being guided by international law and the necessities of
peace, and are acting in full cooperation with regional
and international partners.

Recognizing the dangers of a continuing stalemate
and the explosive situation on the ground, we reaffirm
our support for the French initiative to mobilize
international action for Palestinian-Israeli peace. We
concur fully with the urgency of the political horizon
and the calls for an international peace conference.
We also reaffirm our support and cooperation with
efforts by the Arab States to advance the Arab Peace
Initiative, including in cooperation with the Quartet
members, whose efforts over the recent period are
fully recognized, along with the Russian and Egyptian
efforts to promote dialogue and help parties overcome
the deadlock.

However, none of the efforts can absolve the
Security Council from its responsibility. On the
contrary, it is imperative that the Council play its role
in order to reaffirm international law, thread together
these collective efforts and chart a way forward. In
the years of the Council's silence - it has been 22
years - Israeli settlement activities have quadrupled.
That is coupled with an intensification of all other
violations, which gravely undermines the situation on
the ground and deepens the suffering of our people,
who continue to be denied their rights and freedom by
the illegal occupation, and ushering in of the impending
destruction of the two-State solution. The Council must
act and should adopt a draft resolution forthwith. That
is a minimal expectation. And we appeal to the Council
to shoulder its political, legal and moral responsibilities
in order to revive the prospects for peace.

Let us not be deterred by the cynics or by the
bullying, including those who have the audacity to
call our legitimate, diplomatic efforts "terror" - it is
a ludicrous argument that we reject, and the Council
should do so as well. Such arguments must be rebuked
and flatly rejected. The Security Council has a duty to
act in line with the law and the urgency of peace and
security. It must do so now.

