Mr. Gatan (Philippines): Allow me to thank you,
Mr. President, and the delegation of the United
Kingdom for convening this important open debate on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. I also wish
to thank the Emergency Relief Coordinator and the
representative of the International Committee of the
Red Cross for their important briefings to the Council.

One of the grave tragedies of the changing nature
of conflict is that its impact on civilians has become
increasingly horrific. The characteristics and features
of many of today's conflicts show that we have to
adjust our protection strategies if we are to save and
protect lives more effectively.

First, civilians are now not only caught in the
crossfire as innocent victims, but are also deliberately
targeted by many parties to conflict as part of warfare
strategy. Secondly, exacting accountability from the
perpetrators of violence against civilians is now even
more difficult, with many Violators being non-State
actors, who are not bound by relevant international
legal instruments. While international law does cover
the situation of civilians in inter-State conflicts, it is
still difficult to make those parties to a conflict comply
with the provisions of international law. Thirdly,
globalization has made borders porous, so that many
internal conflicts are becoming increasingly regional in
character.

We could go on describing the changing
landscape of conflict situations, yet those three
examples should be enough to show that the changing
nature of conflict demands new and enhanced
protection strategies for civilians.

Today's efforts to combat terrorist activities have,
inadvertently or otherwise, affected the safety of many
civilians. We are concerned that counter-terrorism
efforts, while intended to preserve security, have also
sacrificed the lives of many innocent people. However,
we are heartened that, through the General Assembly,
States have once again reaffirmed the need to ensure
that counter-terrorism measures comply with
international humanitarian, human rights and refugee
laws. In that regard, we welcome the ongoing dialogue
with the Security Council and its Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the relevant bodies dealing with the
protection and promotion of human rights.

It is of the utmost importance that protection be
delivered in a comprehensive manner. Because a
comprehensive protection regime is multidisciplinary
in nature - ranging from conflict-prevention measures
to the protection of civilians in the midst of conflict,
and including post-conflict protection and
rehabilitation - the United Nations system must adopt
a coordinated approach. For its part, the Security
Council, through the ongoing negotiations on a draft
resolution on the subject, will ensure that adequate
protection components are embodied in existing
peacekeeping mandates and that future mandates will
be so designed as to give due priority to the protection
of civilians. We look forward to receiving the empirical
information that the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) will submit so that the
Council can assess with greater precision the impact
and extent of its work on civilian protection, which
should also point to areas where protection efforts need
to be improved.

Access to affected civilians for humanitarian
purposes has been stressed as key to providing
protection. OCHA has emphasized in its past briefings
to the Council that humanitarian access, because of
many factors, remains a challenge. One of those factors
is the increasing perception of the seemingly tarnished
image of humanitarian assistance, including the
perception that humanitarian assistance could possibly
be diverted for political ends. That points to the value
of ensuring that humanitarian assistance remain
neutral, impartial and free from political objectives.
The challenge of remaining faithful to those principles
is also amplified by the involvement of non-State
actors in many conflicts. There should be a proactive
and renewed effort to emphasize the core motivation of
humanitarian assistance: the safety and security of
civilians.

Another factor that impedes humanitarian access
is the lack of adequate protection space for
humanitarian actors to do their work because actual
combat has not ceased, or worse, because of attacks on
the safety and security of United Nations and
humanitarian personnel. We therefore stress the need to
ensure that those providing humanitarian relief -
primarily United Nations peacekeepers - be assured
of the necessary protection and safety.

We have seen the important role of the African
Union in addressing the consequences of conflict in the
region. Indeed, regional organizations can effectively
respond to the protection needs of civilians with
immediacy. We welcome the efforts of the Secretary-
General, such as his dialogue with heads of regional
and other intergovernmental organizations in July, to
strengthen partnerships in the area of protection of
civilians. Nevertheless, it is a fact that most regional
organizations do not have the necessary capacity to
adequately respond to protection concerns. To address
that gap, it would be important, as the Secretary-
General recommends in his report, for Member States
and intergovernmental organizations to make every
effort to assist regional organizations in building their
capacities to provide adequate protection support.

In conclusion, the Secretary-General, in his
report, also recommends the possible intervention by
the Security Council in situations of systematic and
widespread breaches of international humanitarian and
human rights law. My delegation, right up to this last
stage of its term in the Council and as a member of the
General Assembly, will continue to engage actively on
the issue to ensure that the United Nations efforts
aimed at protecting civilians are implemented in ways
that balance effectiveness in achieving the desired
results against possible adverse consequences. We
therefore look forward to the adoption of the Council's
next resolution on the issue and will remain committed
to its objectives.

