Archbishop Chullikatt (Holy See): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate Pakistan on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month, and on organizing today's debate,
focusing on the centrality of peace in the Middle East,
not only for the peoples of the region but also for the
international community. I would also like to thank
you, Mr. President, for inviting the Holy See to take the
floor in this important debate.

The Holy See has actively and attentively followed
the steps leading to Palestine's new status at the United
Nations as a non-member observer State, and welcomes
General Assembly resolution 67/19, while noting that
such an outcome does not in itself constitute a solution
adequate to the problems in the region. It remains
a matter of deep concern to my delegation that the
international community has failed to engage the Israelis
and Palestinians in significant, substantive dialogue
and dispute resolution so as to bring stability and
peace to both. Solving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
remains the key to a series of questions affecting the
region more broadly, not to mention the consequences
for the wider world. The Holy See therefore aligns itself
with other delegations in calling for a resumption of
the peace process and a commitment by all parties to a
peaceful resolution of their disputes.

On 15 May 2009, at the conclusion ofhis pilgrimage
to the Holy Land, Pope Benedict XVI passionately
expressed the following sentiments, which have a
substantive bearing on our work:

"No more bloodshed! No more fighting! No
more terrorism! No more war! Instead, let us
break the vicious circle of violence. Let there be
lasting peace based on justice; let there be genuine
reconciliation and healing. Let it be universally
recognized that the State of Israel has the right
to exist, and to enjoy peace and security within
internationally agreed borders. Let it be likewise
acknowledged that the Palestinian people have a
right to a sovereign, independent homeland, to live
with dignity and to travel freely. Let the two-State
solution become a reality, not remain a dream."

The Holy See's Secretary for Relations with
States, Archbishop Dominique Mamberti, speaking
before the General Assembly in 2011, expressed the
hope that the competent bodies of the United Nations
would strive to give concrete implementation to that
goal (see A/66/PV.28). Today the Holy See vigorously
renews that essential plea and the wisdom underlying
the need for a commitment to dialogue as an antidote
to the violence that continues to destabilize this region.

At various times, the Holy See has invited the
leaders of the two peoples, Israeli and Palestinian, who
have suffered so much, and of those nations that have
a particular responsibility in the region, to do all they
can to restart and reinvigorate the negotiations in good
faith, and to avoid actions, such as making conditions,
that contradict declarations of goodwill and the sincere
search for meaningful solutions that can ensure a secure
foundation for peace for these great peoples. Real peace

in the Middle East will come only as a result of mutual
understanding and respect among all the peoples of the
region, Jews, Christians and Muslims. Peace requires
courageous decisions and unwavering commitments.

The international community, together with the
Quartet, which has been involved in the Middle East
peace process, must demonstrate leadership in bringing
the provisions of General Assembly resolution 181 (II)
to a successful conclusion, because that document is
the juridical basis for the existence of two States. Like
other members of the international community, and in
full support of the role and efforts of the larger family
of nations in helping to resolve the crisis in the Middle
East, the Holy See is convinced that the ongoing crisis
will be resolved only when respect for justice and the
legitimate aspirations of the two peoples, Israeli and
Palestinian, are preserved and guaranteed by them and
by the international community at large.

In the hope that the problems caused by the
many conflicts of the region will finally be resolved
through good-faith negotiations, respectful dialogue
and equitable compromise, the Holy See further
underlines that a lasting solution must include a
decision on the status of the holy city of Jerusalem and
its internationally guaranteed protection, essential to
the patrimony of Judaism, Christianity and Islam. As
Pope Benedict XVI recently stated in his address to the
diplomatic corps accredited to the Holy See, Jerusalem
must be an element of peace and unity for the peoples of
the world and therefore never a source of division. The
Holy See hereby renews its support for internationally
guaranteed provisions to ensure freedom of religion and
of conscience for its inhabitants, as well as permanent,
free and unhindered access to the holy places for the
faithful of all religions and nationalities.

Moreover, let us not forget that resolution 181
(II) foresaw a special international status for the city
of Jerusalem and its environs, to be administered by
the Trusteeship Council. We know that similar ideas
have recently been put forward by some of the parties,
in the context of peace discussions, and we sincerely
hope that they will be pursued. Indeed, the only way to
resolve the delicate issue of Jerusalem in a definitive,
just and lasting way, as well as to secure the guaranteed
provisions for freedom of religion and access to the holy
places called for at the tenth emergency special session
of the General Assembly and in other resolutions, might
be to involve the United Nations in the holy city's
safekeeping and administration in some relevant and
effective capacity.

Turning to the sad events in Syria, the Holy See
is deeply concerned about the worsening situation and
the humanitarian aspects of the crisis. The Holy See
has reiterated several times that a military solution to
the Syrian crisis is untenable. My delegation joins with
those who urge the parties concerned, for the same love
of that people they wish to protect, to end the violence
and bloodshed and to come to the negotiating table,
under the auspices of the international community,
in order to begin a transition towards a peaceful civil
society, with no discrimination based on ethnicity or
belief, and respectful of its long history of peaceful
coexistence among its diverse religions, ethnicities and
cultures.

In fact, the Holy Land and the entire Middle East
are characterized by the presence of this mosaic of
different cultures, languages, religions and confessions,
which bestows such an enviable pride of beauty on
their history and their contributions to the enduring
civilizations of the world. The bimillenary presence of
Christians in those lands is a factor ofrichness that must
be respected, promoted and preserved. It is a matter of
fundamental rights rooted in the very essence of that
ancient civilization, which must be duly protected by
the respective Governments - and we welcome here
their attention so far accorded to that issue - and
supported by the international community.

The theme of Pope Benedict XVI's message for this
year's International Day of Peace refers to Jesus' words,
"Blessed are the peacemakers". Allow me therefore to
conclude by recalling the Pope's address here before the
Council, so that all who are responsible for the well-
being of the peoples of the Middle East may listen and
reflect on that message, because every action intended
to hasten the realization of peace will constitute a
legacy that ennobles the name of all peacemakers, for
they are the human guarantors of that which dignifies
the human person and the family of nations.

