The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Iraq to
participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jan Kubis,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq, to participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document 8/2016/885, which contains the twelfth
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph
4 of Security Council resolution 2107 (2013), as well
as to document 8/2016/897, which contains the report
of the Secretary-General pursuant to resolution 2299
(2016).

I now give the floor to Mr. Kubis.

Mr. Kubi§z Let me start by congratulating the Iraqi
security forces, the Peshmerga, the Popular Mobilization
Forces and allied tribal and local volunteers, supported
by the international community, on the steady progress
in their historic battle to liberate Mosul. We honour the
martyrs who have paid the highest sacrifice for a free
Iraq. This liberation operation marks the beginning
of the end of the so-called Da'esh caliphate in Iraq.
Increased support of the civilian population for this and
previous liberation operations speaks best about the
fact that the liberation of Iraq is a fight of all Iraqis
in their unity for the future of their country as the
common house of all Iraqi people living together in
justice, equality, peace and tolerance.

We are witnessing the birth of a new Iraq. Let
us not forget that the people of Iraq also fight on our
behalf in defence of human values shared by the whole
world against the terrorism and intolerance represented
by Da'esh and its underpinning ideology. Today, we
also stand here in solidarity with the abducted, abused
and violated women and girls, their families and
communities. Women and children are the first victims
of Da'esh crimes, and we insist on full accountability
for the human rights abuses and atrocities perpetrated
by Da'esh against civilians. We call for justice for all
the victims of these heinous crimes, which may amount
to crimes against humanity, war crimes or genocide.

Based on lessons learned from the past, the
Government of Iraq and the leadership of the Iraqi
security forces and the Popular Mobilization Forces
have prioritized the protection of civilians in an
unprecedented way in the planning and conduct of the
military operations. Also, the Shia religious leadership,
the Marja'iya, has issued strong statements in that
regard.

The campaign for Mosul's liberation is in its
twenty-fifth day and is progressing well. The progress
is planned and controlled in order to avoid excessive
risks, notably to the civilian population. The battle
has already moved to the city of Mosul. Nevertheless,
it is expected that the urban warfare may take some
time, well into the harsh winter period. As expected,
a desperate Da'esh has increased its terrorist activities
throughout the country, mostly against civilians. It has
also carried out several complex attacks in Kirkuk and
Rutba, and is planning more.

There has been unprecedented cooperation over
the planning and conduct of the Mosul liberation
operation between the Governments of Baghdad and
Erbil. As confirmed during the visit of President
Barzani to Baghdad, his first since 2013, and the visit
of Prime Minister Al Abadi to Erbil in recent days,
this cooperation and dialogue have expanded to also
cover a range of political, economic and administrative
issues and arrangements on which future Baghdad-
Erbil relations will be built. As the Prime Minister of
the Kurdistan region of Iraq, Nechirvan Barzani, has
said, "We need to find a new formula for coexistence
in Iraq".

Leaders of all components, communities and
groups, including civil society and women, will have to
address numerous grievances of the past and find a way
to live together, after Da'esh, in justice and equality
for all. Reconciliation at both the community and the
national levels is the way to make military victories
against Da'esh sustainable and to make Iraq truly
peaceful and united.

Encouragingly, the head of the Iraqi National
Alliance, Ammar Al-Hakim, recently confirmed that
the National Alliance, as the largest parliamentary
bloc, is planning to submit

"an important document for national compromise
that considers an important political project to be
implemented in conjunction with the liberation of
Mosul to unify all Iraqis".

Al-Hakim has called for the building of a country of
coexistence where all Iraqis feel compelled to defend
the unity oftheir lands, peoples and democracy. He also
stressed that the division of Iraq should be rejected in
all circumstances, and emphasized the importance of
constitutional obligations.

Credible reports suggest that Da'esh has been
forcing tens of thousands of women, children and
men from their homes in sub-districts around Mosul
and forcibly relocating civilians inside the city itself,
effectively using them as human shields. Forced
out at gunpoint or killed if they resist or try to flee,
these people are reportedly being moved to strategic
Da'esh locations, including Tall Afar. Thus far, there
have been only a few sporadic reports of violations
committed by pro-Government forces, mostly of
individuals committing ad hoc acts of revenge against
captured Da'esh fighters or persons accused of
supporting Da'esh. I am nevertheless concerned about
possible vengeful violence, particularly by tribes and
minorities who suffered atrocities committed by Da'esh
supporters, and also against their own tribal members
who joined Da'esh.

Since last December, the presence of Turkish
troops in Camp Bashiqa, which is considered by Iraq to
be a violation of its sovereignty and territorial integrity,
remains unresolved. Although both countries have
endeavoured to contain the situation through diplomatic
channels and bilateral mechanisms, there has been no
visible progress so far. Public exchanges from Baghdad
and Ankara continue to escalate. This is even more
disturbing now as the Mosul liberation operation is in
full swing, with all its risks and complexities. I urge
the Governments of Turkey and Iraq to tone down
their rhetoric and accelerate their bilateral efforts to
find a mutually acceptable resolution of this problem
and related issues in a way that will fully respect the
principles of sovereignty, territorial integrity and
non-interference in the internal affairs of Iraq, and
to ensure that all activities that take place in Iraq are
conducted in coordination and with the full agreement
of the Government of Iraq, while taking into account
the security concerns of both countries.

As of 9 November, up to 42,000 people have been
internally displaced as a result of the Mosul operation.
At present, more than 20,000 people are being supported
at existing camps. The remaining 30 per cent have
found shelter in host communities and public facilities.
A total of seven emergency sites are ready to receive
40,000 more people. At least 450,000 more spaces are
under construction. In July, the humanitarian country
team issued a flash appeal requesting $280 million to
prepare for Mosul. Close to 80 per cent of the required
amount has been received, although most funding came
on line only recently, delaying preparations until nearly
the start of the operation.

Stabilizing the city of Mosul following its liberation
will be a daunting task. Experiences from other
liberated cities, notably Ramadi, point to the possibility
of widespread destruction. Extensive contamination
from improvised explosive devices (IEDs) is already
reported. The United Nations Development Programme
Funding Facility for Immediate Stabilization is
coordinating with the United Nations Mine Action
Service (UNMAS) to conduct rapid threat-impact
assessments in key neighbourhoods and expedite
clearance of IEDs in the liberated areas. Also, UNMAS
is entirely reliant on bilateral contributions to the
United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for Assistance in
Mine Action. The mine action community will require
$112 million in 2017, depending on the rate of at which
areas are retaken. This is almost entirely unfunded at
the moment.

Allow me to turn now to the twelfth report of the
Secretary-General on the issue of missing Kuwaiti
and third-country nationals and missing Kuwaiti
property, including the national archives (8/2016/885).
I would like to commend the Government of Iraq, and
particularly its Ministry of Defence, for bolstering
activities geared towards finding missing persons,
injecting much-needed energy and momentum into the
file.
A call for witnesses that was broadcast on local and
satellite television channels by the Iraqi Ministries of
Defence and Foreign Affairs on 18 September, inviting
all those with information pertaining to missing Kuwaiti
persons and property to come forward, has resulted in
hundreds ofphone calls from citizens claiming to know
the whereabouts of both. That information is currently
being verified.

I would like to highly acknowledge the Government
of Kuwait, which has consistently shown support and
understanding with regard to the challenges faced by
the Government of Iraq over the years.

The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Kubis
for his briefing.

The representative of Uruguay has asked for the
floor to make a statement.


