Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, and the Secretary-
General and all the briefers. In a short time I will be
leaving the Security Council and my post as United
States Ambassador to the United Nations. My service
here has been a great honour and I will miss it. I am
grateful to have the opportunity to discuss the purposes
of multilateralism and what we can do to make the
United Nations a more effective instrument for the
common good.

The American people believe deeply in the
principles of peace, security and human rights enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations. For that reason,
the United States is by far the largest contributor to the
United Nations budget. Our support for multilateralism
at the United Nations has not been limited to rhetoric.
It has been concrete, in both our words and our deeds.
Year in and year out, the United States contributes
20 per cent ofthe funding of the United Nations system.
United States taxpayers in places like Oklahoma, Idaho
and Minnesota provide 25 per cent of the $7-billion
budget for the United Nations peacekeeping operations
thousands of miles away in Kinshasa, Juba, Pristina
and elsewhere. Those same taxpayers contribute
more than 35 per cent of the funding for the World
Food Programme, the world's largest multilateral
humanitarian organization. We contribute 13 per cent
of the funding that allows UNICEF to help children
worldwide. United States taxpayers shoulder 42 per cent
of the burden of paying for the work of the Office ofthe
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
The vast size of financial support that the
United States gives the United Nations illustrates the
seriousness with which we take that work and our
commitment. But I will be honest. There are times when
the American people question their generous support
to the United Nations. There are times when we are
tempted to believe that multilateralism has been a bad
deal for the United States and that we could be more
effective by advancing our principles and interests on
our own. And there are times when that conclusion is
correct. It is not that the American people are cheap.
It is not that we are selfish - quite the contrary, we
are a blessed nation. A representative from an African
country recently lectured me and quoted a passage from
the Bible. He said that to whom much is given, much
is expected. That is certainly true, and the American
people have given much. But multilateralism requires
that we all contribute and that we all work together
for the common good. Everyone has skin in the game
and everyone should ultimately benefit. The American
people have no expectation of always getting our own
way, but we do have a legitimate expectation to get a
return on our investment in multilateralism.

We do not regard that work as charity. It is our
contribution to the advancement of peace, security and
human rights in every region of the world. When we
all contribute and work towards those goals, this body
can accomplish great things. North Korea is a good
example. The Security Council achieved remarkable
unity while taking real action. We sanctioned the
Pyongyang regime more completely than any country
in a generation. That is a credit to the Council and
its members. No other multilateral forum could have
achieved that kind of unity. Peacekeeping is another
good example. We are more effective when we work to
ensure peace as a global community. Together, we can
build the trust and impartiality necessary to mediate
conflict and protect innocent civilians.

But multilateralism is not good in and of itself. It
is a means to an end. It is neither good nor bad; only
its goals are good or bad. And multilateralism fails
when it fails to support the goals of peace, security and
human rights. When the General Assembly gives the
barbaric Cuban regime a pass for violating the rights of
the Cuban people just to poke the United States in the
eye, that is a failure of multilateralism. Action like that
does not seek to protect human rights; it seeks to shelter
authoritarian regimes from criticism on human rights.
It is not worthy of the time or the attention of the United
Nations, and it is certainly not worthy of the support of
the American people.
When the Human Rights Council hosts some of
the world's most flagrant human rights offenders and
gives them cover for their abuses, that is a failure of
multilateralism. When countries invoke sovereignty
when it suits them but ignore it when it does not, that
is a failure of multilateralism. That is a failure to work
together toward the common good. One of my goals
as United States Ambassador has been to show the
American people value for their investment in the United
Nations. That has meant working to prove improve the
efficiency of our peacekeeping missions, mitigate the
North Korean nuclear threat and put human rights at the
centre of the work of the Council, among many other
things. It has also meant more practical things, such as
taking a hard look at where our foreign aid is serving
United States interests and values and where it is not.
Our aid dollars should not be on autopilot. They should
go to where they can do the most good and where we
can expect cooperation and friendship in return.

Showing value to the American people for their
support of multilateralism also means rebalancing how
we finance the United Nations and our peacekeeping
operations. Next month, we will have an important
decision to take on how we distribute the costs of
peacekeeping. The United States is currently assessed
a disproportionate share of those costs - even for us.
Our contribution of 25 per cent of the peacekeeping
budget is more than fair. Insisting on more, especially
when other nations' assessments are so low, only erodes
support for the United Nations. I urge everyone to
support more equitable burden-sharing when it comes
to the financing of peacekeeping. That is not just a
question of fairness; it is a question of the ongoing
success of multilateralism itself. Support for collective
action falters when its burdens fail to match its benefits,
and no multilateral work, no matter how worthy its
goals are, can continue in the long term when it takes
its most generous donors for granted.

I knowI have spoken some hard truths this morning,
but I have done so out of my obligation to reflect the
American people's sincere belief in this institution's
founding purpose. When we work in the true spirit of
multilateralism - the spirit of principled objectives,
shared burdens and respect - this institution is capable
of great things. The United States looks forward to
many more successful years of collaboration with the
United Nations in support ofpeace, security and human
rights for all people in the world.

