The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Cote d'Ivoire in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Bailly-
Niagri (Cdte d'Ivoire) took a seat at the Council
table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2006/2, which contains the seventh
progress report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council strongly condemns
the recent violent attacks against the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) and
international NGO facilities in Cote d'Ivoire by
street militias and other groups associated with
the 'Young Patriots', as well as their instigators.
The Security Council expresses its deep concern
also at the Violent and orchestrated street protests
led by the 'Young Patriots', in particular in
Abidjan and in several cities in the west.

"The Security Council regards these
particularly serious and unacceptable incidents as
endangering the process of national reconciliation
enshrined in resolution 1633 (2005) and as
contrary to this resolution. It calls upon all
Ivorians to refrain from any hostile action, and
demands the immediate end of this Violence and
of all hatred messages in the media, in particular
the attacks against the United Nations. The
Security Council welcomes the urgent mission
led by President Obasanjo in Abidjan. It pays
tribute to his efforts and hopes that they will lead
to a rapid decrease of the current tensions on the
ground.

"The Security Council underlines also that
the occupation of the RTI facilities constitutes an
attack against freedom and neutrality of
information as well as a breach of the principles
of the process of national reconciliation, of the
previous resolutions of the Security Council and
of the peace agreements. It demands that effective
control by the board and the General Director
over the RTI shall be re-established immediately.

"The Security Council reiterates its full
support for the Prime Minister, Mr. Charles
Konan Banny, and invites UNOCI, in accordance
with its mandate, to provide him all the necessary
support. It reiterates also its full support for the
International Working Group (IWG), the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the
High Representative for the elections. It endorses
the final communique of the IWG of 15 January
2006.

"The Security Council firmly calls upon all
the Ivorian parties to cooperate with the Prime
Minister, the International Working Group, the
Mediation Group, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and the High
Representative for the elections in implementing
the road map.

"It underlines that targeted measures will be
imposed against persons to be designated by the
Committee established by paragraph 14 of
resolution 1572 (2004) who, among other things,
block the implementation of the peace process,
including by attacking or obstructing the action
of UNOCI, of the French forces, of the High
Representative for the elections or of the

International Working Group, or who incite The Security Council has thus concluded the
publicly hatred and violence, as provided in present stage of its consideration of the item on its
resolutions 1572 (2004) and 1643 (2005)." agenda.

This statement will be issued as a document of The meeting rose a11.30p.m.

the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2006/2.

