Ms. Bustamante (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the holding of this meeting and thank
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix and Mr. Parfait Onanga-
Anyanga for their important briefings today.

We highlight the overtures made by the new
authorities of Khartoum and their counterparts in Yuba.
The reciprocal visits by senior officials ofboth countries
in August and September give us reason to be hopeful
of their determination to improve bilateral relations.

We welcome the meeting of the Joint Political
and Security Mechanism held on 2 October and hope
that its subsequent meetings will report on important
progress, such as the withdrawal of forces from the
Safe Demilitarized Border Zone and the establishment
of border crossing corridors. We underscore the critical
role of the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism in regulating relations between the two
countries. We also acknowledge the stabilizing role of
the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA) in Abyei and along the border between the
Sudan and South Sudan. At the same time, we stress that
the primary responsibility for resolving outstanding
issues on the shared border lies with the Governments
of the Sudan and South Sudan.
We note with concern that women continue to
be underrepresented at all levels of decision-making
in Abyei. In that regard, we appreciate UNISFA's
mediation efforts with traditional and administrative
leaders, with a view to protecting women's rights
and fostering their participation in decision-making.
We welcome the initiative of the United Nations joint
programme initiative for Abyei by the country teams
in the Sudan and South Sudan, which is aimed at
strengthening local institutional capacity and the rule
of law, fostering peacebuilding and development,
promoting gender equality and combating sexual
violence, among other things.

We reiterate the urgent need for the establishment
of the Abyei police service. We call on the Government
of South Sudan to continue joint planning for its
establishment and on the Government of the Sudan
to expedite the issuance of visas to UNISFA police
personnel so that the rule oflaw can be fully established
in Abyei.

We appreciate the efforts of humanitarian personnel
in addressing the humanitarian situation in Abyei by
providing food assistance, health services and through
community livelihood activities and capacity-building.
We encourage the international community to continue
to provide the necessary resources for development
projects and the establishment of basic services.

We are confident that, despite the limited
progress on issues related to border demarcation,
the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan will
capitalize on recent developments in the region to
move forward with concrete measures leading to the
resolution of the issue of the status of Abyei and the
establishment of the shared border.

Lastly, we believe that it is ofthe utmost importance
that the Security Council continue to support the parties.
In that regard, we stress the need to maintain UNISFA's
presence in the Abyei Area, adapt its mandates to the

situation on the ground and create the necessary space
for reaching a viable political solution to the conflict.

