Mr. Inzko: I should just like to make some
general brief remarks. I should like to thank everybody
for their contributions, support, encouragement,
suggestions and, of course, the concern they have
shown for Bosnia and Herzegovina. I would also like
to sincerely thank Mr. Nikola Spiric', Chairman of the
Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, for
his frank and open assessment of the situation. Believe
me, he has a very difficult job. I understand that very
well.
Beyond that, I would like to speak briefly about
the confusion that exists about my perceptions on two
issues, especially on the Bonn powers. The Bonn
powers have been used in the past around 900 times.
Lord Ashton once invoked them 60 times in one day.
This use of the Bonn powers is something that is now
in the past; they are being invoked less and less.
Altogether, 180 politicians have been removed, among
them three State Presidents. But, as I said, this is a
concept of the past. I have used the Bonn powers only
in eight areas, and have tried to do so in a way that is
transition-driven, exit-driven, "5 plus 2" driven. The
use was usually technical and aimed at finding a
solution or in cases where the Dayton Agreement had
been violated. I did not use the Bonn powers lightly,
and, believe me, I was never happy about it, but, as I
am the ultimate authority in the theatre, when it comes
down to it and there is no other choice, I have to use
them.

Concerning the report (S/2009/588*), any report
is a reflection of reality, and is, I think, more valuable
if reality is reflected. Every report, whether it be a
European Union or a United Nations report, is, in a
way, seismic, registering any tremor occurring
09-61649
anywhere in the world, whether in Asia, Latin America
or Europe, even Bosnia and Herzegovina. I think it is
right that it reflect such tremors correctly and precisely.
We cannot turn a blind eye to such problems or brush
them under the carpet. They will not diminish or
disappear if we do so. Of course, I would be delighted,
next time, to present a more upbeat report, a report of a
sovereign, prosperous, and democratic Bosnia and
Herzegovina, standing on its own and on its way to
being fully integrated into the Euro-Atlantic
integration. That is the wish of all of us, of course.

