I wish to echo other delegations in welcoming you, Mr. President, to the Security Council and thanking you for convening this important debate. I would also like to thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African Union Commission, for their briefings. We welcome the presidential statement just adopted on cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations, in particular the African Union (S/PRST/2020/11). This is indeed a timely meeting. As captured in the saying "neighbours know best", regional and subregional organizations have unique capacities and knowledge on the ground, which greatly contribute to the prevention and resolution of conflict, as well as to sustaining peace. In that context, we welcome the significant progress made in deepening the strategic partnership between the United Nations and the African Union (AU), which is crucial to addressing the complex and evolving peace and security challenges in Africa. We are also heartened to note that it has contributed to positive developments in many African countries, including the Central African Republic, South Sudan and the Sudan. The gains achieved must be sustained. Enhanced cooperation is key in such efforts, particularly as the continent is facing multiple challenges, including terrorism, organized crime and the multidimensional impacts of the coronavirus disease pandemic. Against that backdrop, allow me to highlight three areas where partnership between the United Nations and the AU can be further enhanced. First, we must enhance collaboration between the Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security Council. We note that the two Councils met in September and discussed several important issues, including the situations in Mali and Somalia and the Silencing the Guns initiative. We also appreciate the valuable role of the three African members of the Security Council in articulating the African perspective during Council deliberations. We concur with the Secretary-General's view on the importance of strengthening collaboration in conflict prevention. In that connection, we commend the mediating role undertaken by the AU in several situations this year. It is imperative to ensure that the Security Council provides the necessary political backing in situations where the AU leads. Secondly, we must enhance partnership in peacekeeping and peace support operations. The Council must continue to support regional and subregional peacekeeping efforts and peace support operations. That can be achieved through the exchange of knowledge, expertise and training, among other things. For its part, Indonesia remains fully committed to supporting sustainable peace in Africa. As part of Indonesia's contribution, we currently have more than 1,500 personnel, including 98 women peacekeepers, on the continent, serving in seven United Nations missions. In that context, the indispensable role of women in peacekeeping operations must not be overlooked. We therefore wish to advocate for further cooperation between the United Nations and the AU in advancing the greater participation and role of women in peacekeeping operations, as envisioned in resolution 2538 (2020). We also commend the commitment of the AU and its member States to addressing terrorism, including through initiatives such as the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel, the Multinational Joint Task Force and the decision to deploy the African Standby Force to the Sahel region. Thirdly, more needs to be done to address the root causes of instability. From various briefings on situations in African countries, we understand that many factors concerning peace and security in Africa are interrelated. The partnership between the United Nations and the AU should therefore be guided by that interconnectedness. It must be able to provide effective responses to the evolving realities and challenges on the ground. We welcome the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, which acknowledges the importance of building national capacity to address the root causes of conflict. Such a partnership needs to be nurtured on a basis of good faith, honesty and sincerity. It must also take national priorities into account in order to ensure strong ownership and successful implementation. Finally, ever since we hosted the inaugural Asian-African Conference in 1955, Indonesia has remained faithful in its unwavering support for and solidarity with the African nations. In that spirit, we wish to reaffirm our strong support for the noble pursuit of silencing the guns in Africa and promoting the African Union's Agenda 2063 in order to realize a conflict-free and prosperous Africa. The Council should rest assured that Indonesia's commitment to being a true partner to Africa will endure far beyond its tenure on the Security Council.
