Ms. Durrant (Jamaica): I wish to thank you, Mr.
President, for convening this open briefing on Guinea-
Bissau, and we wish to thank Sir Kieran Prendergast for
updating us on the current situation in that country. We
also welcome the report of the Secretary-General
contained in document S/2000/250.

The events that have been unfolding in Guinea-
Bissau over the past month are, indeed, testimony to the
fact that the United Nations, with the full cooperation of
national actors and with sustained support from the
international community, can make a meaningful
contribution to a country's effort to move from a state of
civil strife to one of peace. In this regard, my delegation
applauds the sterling achievements of the United Nations
Peace-building Support Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNOGBIS). We also extend congratulations to President
Kumba Yala, and wish him and his Government every
success.

The United Nations can be proud of the fact that its
proactive steps, taken to restore constitutional rule in
Guinea-Bissau, including the recent extension of the
mandate of UNOGBIS for one year, means that this
Organization is poised to embark on a new phase in its
political role in Guinea-Bissau. With the revised mandate
of the Support Office, emphasis has been aptly placed on
peace-building facilitation. Equally, we wish to recognize
the sterling contribution of the States members of the
Economic Community of West African States and the
Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries for the key

 

role they played in the restoration of peace and security
throughout Guinea-Bissau, particularly in the successful
implementation of the Abuja Accord.

We join other delegations in paying tribute to the
people of Guinea-Bissau, who have demonstrated the
political maturity necessary for the success of free, fair and
transparent elections, and who have clearly demonstrated a
desire for peace. We were pleased to hear from Sir Kieran
about the recent accord between the Government and the
former military junta, and we express our delegation's
appreciation to the Foreign Minister of the Gambia for his
mediation.

We agree that Guinea-Bissau clearly stands at a
critical crossroads. While the progress made is laudable,
efforts must now be channelled into confronting the
enormous challenges which lie ahead. The report of the
Secretary-General identifies several of these challenges,
including the consolidation of Guinea-Bissau's nascent
democracy, the revitalization of State institutions, the
demobilization and reintegration of retired military
personnel, the return of refugees and the re-launching of the
economy. These will require constructive partnerships,
combining the efforts of national actors and neighbouring
States. Jamaica shares the View that the Security Council
must continue to play a role in the post-conflict peace-
building phase in Guinea-Bissau by lending its political
support. The draft presidential statement, which we will
adopt later and which has the full support of my delegation,
sends a strong message to the new Government of Guinea-
Bissau as it consolidates its new constitutional role, while
at the same time bringing to closure the transitional
institutions deriving from the Abuja Accord and its
additional protocol, and other related agreements which
have now been completed.

The international community also has a role to play in
mobilizing the necessary financial support for the
development of the state structures of Guinea-Bissau. The
Secretary-General's report highlights the need to address
urgently the economic and social needs of the population,
chief among which is the eradication of poverty. It is our
firm belief that commitment to the goals of peace and
security must be matched by plans to foster sustained
economic growth and sustainable development. We
therefore encourage the cooperation of the United Nations
system and the Bretton Woods institutions in the targeting
of the priority sectors, such as health, education and
agriculture, and look forward to the results of the
forthcoming round table.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to pay tribute to
the Secretary-General's representative, Mr. Nana-Sinkam,
and the staff of the United Nations Peace-building
Support Office in Guinea-Bissau for their hard work and
dedicated commitment to ensuring peace and stability in
Guinea-Bissau.

