The Secretary-General: I am grateful for this
opportunity to address the Council on what is
undoubtedly one of the most important items on its
agenda and on mine: the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question.

Three weeks ago, I briefed you on the tragic
developments then under way in Gaza and southern
Israel. While I am glad that the Violence has abated
somewhat since then, tensions remain high. I am
deeply concerned about the prospect of renewed
Violence and what that would mean for both the
civilian populations in the conflict zone and for the
peace process we are all trying to advance.

Despite many difficulties on the ground,
difficulties that must be addressed, I commend the
commitment of President Abbas and Prime Minister
Olmert to the political process. I am personally and
profoundly committed to supporting this process in
every way I can and I admire both leaders for their
tenacity in the face of much scepticism.

Let us remember that negotiations are the only
means to achieve the legitimate Palestinian aspirations
to an end to occupation and independent sovereign
statehood and legitimate Israeli aspirations for
sustainable security and an end to conflict.

At Annapolis, the international community bore
witness and expressed its support as Israeli and
Palestinian leaders set themselves the target of
reaching an agreement by the end of the year. It is my
hope that we can achieve this ambitious goal. I believe
that all of us must ask ourselves and the parties two
simple questions. If not this, what? If not now, when?

This process is too important to be allowed to
lose momentum through inaction or indifference, or to
be overwhelmed by violence. It is essential that it
receive the support of the international community,
including this Council.

I remain personally determined and committed to
working towards peace within the framework agreed
upon: an end to the occupation that began in 1967,
based on the foundations of the Madrid Conference,
the principle of land for peace, Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and
08-28218
1515 (2003) and the Arab Peace Initiative. This
framework will lead to an end of conflict, the creation
of a Palestinian State, living side by side in peace and
security with Israel, and a comprehensive regional
peace. I assure the Council that my senior advisers and
myself are making unceasing efforts to press forward
this agenda in all contacts and forums available to us,
including dialogue with the parties and the regional
parties, the Quartet and, of course, this Council itself.

Mr. Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, will now report on the developments that have
taken place over the past month.

