Ms. Lohdi (Pakistan): We thank you, Sir, for
organizing today's open debate. The scourge ofterrorism
is among the most serious threats to international peace
and security of our times. We appreciate your effort
to focus on this phenomenon in order to strengthen
international cooperation to counter it.

I would also like to commend your delegation for
preparing a useful concept note (S/2016/306, annex) to
inform this debate. We agree with you that terrorism
can be defeated only when all Member States unite
and effectively coordinate their efforts. Your initiative
is also timely, Sir, as we approach the review of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy on
its tenth anniversary this June.

My country condemns all terrorist acts perpetrated
anywhere in the world for whatever reason. We fully
endorse the need for the international community to join
hands to combat this menace, urgently and effectively.
In the past 15 years, the United Nations and its Member
States have made huge investments in countering
terrorism. But despite all these efforts, our goal
remains elusive. We have had successes, substantial
successes, but with each success, we also encountered
a new challenge, at times more imposing than the one
we surmounted. It is time to assess why that is so.

Ten years ago, when Member States deliberated
upon the draft of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, Pakistan was a leading voice
urging the international community to focus on the
root causes ofterrorism. In our view, security measures
alone were not enough to address the underlying drivers
of terrorism. In fact, the more we resorted to kinetic
means alone to defeat terrorist groups, the more we saw
their splintering and proliferation. Today, the terrorist
threat has become more pervasive and has evolved in
complex and unpredictable directions, posing an even
greater danger to international peace and security.
Now, in addition to existing challenges, a multitude of
small terrorist cells and violent extremists perpetrating
guerilla-style or lone-wolf attacks have emerged.

Now that the international community has finally
acknowledged the need to craft preventive approaches
to violent extremism, it is important that we address
all its drivers, both local and international, in a
comprehensive manner. In today's globalized world,
little operates in isolation. We must deal with both the
external and internal dimensions of this phenomenon
and recognize the complex interplay between local and
international factors to prevent violent extremism that
leads to terrorism.

At the same time, our focus on a preventive
approach should not be at the cost of counter-measures
against terrorism. Member States must continue to act
individually and with the United Nations to implement
relevant Security Council resolutions as well as to take
steps beyond their international obligations. Pakistan's
commitment to the campaign against terrorism is clear,
present and tangible. We have adopted a comprehensive
approach to what after all is a multifaceted phenomenon
and we have a diverse policy toolkit to address it. Half
of our national action plan to counter terrorism focuses
on a preventive approach; the other half focuses on
security measures. Most of the action points in this plan
go well beyond our international obligations.

Pakistan is perhaps one ofthe few countries that has a
ministerial-level committee to oversee implementation
of relevant Security Council resolutions. Over the past
five years, we have taken significant strides in upgrading
our measures to counter the financing of terrorism.
The Financial Action Task Force acknowledged these
steps last year, as we continue to cooperate with it and
strengthen our implementation measures.

On the security front, we have made significant
gains. We have sought to eliminate all terrorist groups
through forceful law-enforcement actions and targeted
military operations. Operation Zarb-e-Azb, as we call
it, launched in June 2014, is the largest anti-terrorism
campaign anywhere in the world and has produced
remarkable results. Thousands have been killed or
captured. The rest are on the run. At the same time,
through a well-coordinated intelligence-based law
enforcement operation across Pakistan, as I speak, a
focused campaign is under way against terrorist sleeper
cells, their supporters, sympathizers and financiers.
With the Operation now in its conclusive phase in North
Waziristan, the few remaining hideouts of the terrorists
will be cleared out.

Pakistan has been at the forefront of the global
fight against terrorism. We have lost tens of thousands
of lives in this fight, but that has not shaken our resolve
to continue the fight until the last terrorist is eliminated
from our soil. It is therefore reprehensible that some cast
aspersions about our contribution. Baseless accusations
only set us back and undermine our joint efforts to
counter terrorism.

In conclusion, I would like to say that the need for all
States to work together in a coordinated and cooperative
manner to address this menace comprehensively in
all its forms and manifestations has never been as
compelling as it is today.

