Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. De
Mistura, for his update. We have always believed that
there is no military solution to the Syrian conflict
and that dialogue is, therefore, the only path to peace.
Kazakhstan therefore commends the Special Envoy
for his efforts to reach a peaceful resolution to the
conflict in Syria, and for his steadfast commitment
and indomitable determination, which have enabled
the international community to come this far. His input
into the Astana talks, which are intended to support the
Geneva process, have, therefore, facilitated the search
for common political ground as well as the respect of
the ceasefire for humanitarian purposes.

Nonetheless, we find that the Geneva talks have
experienced difficulties. Although no one has been
expecting miracles, we share the view of the Special
Envoy that the parties to the conflict now have a clear
agenda to pursue a political solution. We applaud the
parties to the Geneva negotiations for demonstrating
political maturity and for undertaking efforts to
implement the provisions of resolution 2254 (2015).

Kazakhstan has high regard for all of the efforts
undertaken by the Russian Federation, the Republic of
Turkey and the Islamic Republic of Iran to consolidate
the ceasefire in the Syrian Arab Republic through
the launching of the Astana process between the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and the armed
opposition groups. Those countries, with their in-depth
knowledge of and enviable expertise in the political and
humanitarian situation on the ground, have succeeded
in bringing the parties to the negotiating table under the
most complex and sensitive conditions.

We also value highly the participation of the
observers from the United States of America and the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan at the recent Astana
meeting. We believe that rapid, safe and unhindered
humanitarian access should be provided. Meanwhile,
the conditions necessary for the delivery of medical aid
to the local population should be created so as to meet
the basic needs of civilians. Furthermore, Kazakhstan
remains committed to the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab
Republic, as well as to ensuring the continuity of
State institutions.

Kazakhstan welcomes the adoption of the
memorandum on the creation of de-escalation areas in
the Syrian Arab Republic, signed in Astana on 4 May. It
will surely decrease the hostilities between the parties
to the conflict. We attach the utmost importance to
compliance with ceasefire agreements by the parties to
the conflict and their enforcement by guarantor States.
All agreements reached in Astana must not simply
remain on paper; instead, they must produce tangible
results if the credibility of the world community and
the Syrian people involved in the negotiation process is
to be maintained.

The Astana talks form an integral part of Geneva
process. Geneva is the main venue for negotiations
on the Syrian settlement under the auspices of the
United Nations, where the political part of the agenda
is discussed. However, it is important to understand
that the success of the Geneva process is intertwined
with the results of negotiations in the Kazakh capital.
Kazakhstan welcomes the efforts of the Special Envoy
and the results of the sixth round of the intra-Syrian
negotiations, which were held from 16 to 19 May
in Geneva.

Finally, Kazakhstan is ready to support Mr. Staffan
de Mistura in his efforts to continue negotiations
in Geneva and in Astana. We call on the Council to
do everything possible to assist him in achieving the
speedy cessation ofbloodshed and a peaceful settlement
of the situation in Syria.

