Mr. Jobe (Gambia): My delegation would like to
take this opportunity to commend the Government of the
Kingdom of the Netherlands for organizing this meeting.
The level at which your delegation is represented, Sir, is
a clear manifestation of the interest and commitment your
Government has for Africa, for which we are also
grateful.

May I also thank our able Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan, for his detailed report on the
implementation of the recommendations contained in his
report on the causes of conflict and the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa.

Contrary to widely held beliefs, the African
continent is changing rapidly, this time for the better. No
longer is it the norm to have a military dictatorship or a
dictator as head of State. Democratic election as a means
of gaining political power is taking root. The declaration
by African heads of State and Government at the Algiers
summit is clear testimony to this trend.

On the economic front as well, the African States
are not doing badly. Liberalization of trade and exchange
controls, privatization of industries and reform of
regulatory and legal frameworks, which are prevalent in
many States, clearly indicate the determination of African
States to forge ahead in economic advancement for the
betterment of the African people.

Unfortunately, however, this is not the whole story.
While some good news is coming from many countries in
Africa, the overall situation is overshadowed by conflict,
civil strife, economic stagnation, refugee problems,
poverty and deadly diseases. Today quite a number of
African States are gripped in armed conflict, while the
great majority of the Africans languish in abject poverty.
Over 8 million of its people are refugees, returnees or
internally displaced persons.

This dismal picture notwithstanding, African States
have begun to take greater responsibility to mitigate the
plight of their peoples. And, as such, African States are
making greater efforts at conflict prevention, management
and resolution. The report of the Secretary-General under
consideration clearly shows the successes recently
achieved in several theatres of conflict, including Sierra
Leone and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

 

My delegation acknowledges the fact that the conflicts
facing Africa are complex. In dealing with them, we agree
with the Secretary-General that the root causes of the
conflicts should be addressed, and not merely their
symptoms. Any interventions to this end would require the
involvement of the entire United Nations system. In this
connection, we appreciate the efforts of various United
Nations agencies and funds which are mentioned in the
report.

We must, however, mention the special responsibility
of the Security Council as the body which has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and
security. I will return to that matter.

The reluctance of the Security Council to deploy
peacekeeping operations to Africa is unacceptable. We
know that the failure in Somalia was bitter, but inaction in
Rwanda and elsewhere is even worse. The failure of the
Council to act in the face of serious threats to peace,
security and human lives in Africa threatens the credibility
and legitimacy of the Security Council.

It is no longer credible to use financial costs as a
guiding principle for intervention. The United Nations
should consider ways of providing more funding for
peacekeeping operations. In this context, we support the
appeal of the Secretary-General for more contributions to
the United Nations and OAU trust funds, not as a
substitute, but to complement funding of peacekeeping
operations in Africa from the regular budget.

The situations in Sierra Leone, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia and Eritrea will soon come
up for consideration by the Council for the possible
deployment of peacekeeping operations. The people of
Africa will be watching carefully to see what the United
Nations does. Undoubtedly, the credibility of the Security
Council will again be put to the test. We hope that the
Council will, on these occasions as well as others, rise to
the challenge and come not with half-hearted measures, but
with adequate measures to resolve those conflicts.

African States are now prepared to take their own
initiatives to address conflict situations in the continent.
Through subregional organizations and the Organization of
African Unity, significant breakthroughs have been
achieved. Through such mechanisms, African States will
continue to contribute to conflict resolution.

However, the responsibility has to be shared. We value
the cooperation among the United Nations, the OAU and
subregional organizations in this regard. We have taken
note of the initiatives of the Secretariat to enhance such
cooperation and coordination, and we encourage the heads
of the organizations concerned to continue their efforts.
The partnership among the United Nations, the OAU and
subregional organizations in Africa for peacekeeping is
vital for obvious reasons. Strengthening Africa's
peacekeeping capacity is therefore crucial. The activities
of the Secretariat for this purpose, as outlined in the
report, are most welcome. We must, however, emphasize
that shifting responsibility for peacekeeping from the
Council to the regional or subregional levels for reasons
of political expediency should be avoided. As many
speakers today have stressed, the Security Council cannot
sub-contract its responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

It cannot be gainsaid that in addressing the issue of
the causes of conflict in Africa, the problem of illicit
flows of arms, including small arms, must be addressed
as well. My delegation welcomes the importance the
Secretary-General and the United Nations attach to this
question. The recent open debate of the Council on this
issue will further contribute to efforts to bring about
greater public awareness of this problem as a precursor of
global action. We welcome and encourage the efforts of
the Secretariat to heighten awareness of this problem in
the African continent by engaging subregional
organizations in Africa, as well as African States, in the
search for solutions to this problem. Identifying
international arms merchants and restricting the
manufacture of and trade in small arms could contribute
to reducing the troubling phenomenon of the excessive
proliferation and illicit flow of arms. We encourage the
Secretariat to continue its feasibility study on this, and we
look forward to the recommendations that the Secretariat
may submit.

Strengthening arms embargoes could also help in
reducing the flow of arms. The work of the sanctions
Committee under the chairmanship of Ambassador Fowler
is very encouraging. However, the Secretariat should
continue in its efforts to encourage African States to
adopt measures to criminalize violations of Security
Council arms embargoes.

In recent times, we have seen that civilians, in
particular women, children and members of other
vulnerable groups, suffer the most from conflicts. The
recent report of the Secretary-General on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, which was considered by the
Council recently, clearly spells out the magnitude of the

 

problem. Ensuring adherence to international humanitarian
and human rights law by all parties to a conflict is
absolutely imperative for the security of civilians. In this
context, my delegation values the important roles being
played by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, by the United
Nations Children's Fund, by the World Health Organization,
by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and by the High Commissioner for Human
Rights. My delegation also supports the various efforts
undertaken by the Secretariat in conflict situations to
improve the situation of civilians, in particular that of
children.

A series of interventions might be necessary to help
societies emerge from conflicts. However, helping to bring
a conflict to a close should not be the end of our
interventions. Societies emerging from conflict often require
post-conflict support structures in order to help avoid a
relapse into fighting. The establishment of post-conflict
peace-building support offices in Liberia and more recently
in Guinea-Bissau is a good example of how post-conflict
support structures can contribute to the consolidation of
peace. My delegation would encourage the establishment of
such structures, as appropriate, for countries emerging from
conflict.

The report of the Secretary-General is very detailed,
and it cannot be considered in all its aspects within the
limited time we have at our disposal. We can only
encourage him to continue in his crusade. But we must all
work together to implement the many recommendations that
are contained in his report on Africa. We hope that the
Secretary-General and others will continue to keep the issue
of the African continent alive both inside and outside the
Council. We hope that in this way greater international
attention will be focused on the problems of Africa, not
only on the issue of conflicts but also on the wider issues,
including economic and social issues, that must be
addressed as some of the many root causes of conflict. We
say this because we believe that there should be a
coordinated and comprehensive approach to Africa, for its
problems are diverse and complex.
In this context, we welcome the interest generated by
the report of the Secretary-General both within the United
Nations and in other forums. It is our fervent hope that
others will join in the debate to find a way forward on both
the political and the socio-economic fronts.

As we enter the new millennium, we should forge a
new partnership on Africa: a partnership for the renaissance
of a continent long abandoned, a continent that has too
frequently been marginalized. The time has now come for
Africa to be respected at least for what it is. It needs
friends and it needs solidarity. It is the fervent hope of
my delegation that the international community will
muster the political will and come forward to work with
us. Together, there is no conflict we cannot settle;
together, there are no economic difficulties we cannot
address. All that Africa asks for is support and
understanding.

I turn now to the Security Council. We know that
the imposition of sanctions is a powerful coercive
measure by which to put people on the right path. Of late,
one African State, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, has been
subjected to sanctions. We have followed the gradual
negotiations in these chambers, and note that those
sanctions are now suspended.

We have also observed that that same country
recently organized a meeting of African heads of State or
Government that is generating a lot of hope for the
African continent. It is in that spirit that we would like
the United States to join the United Kingdom in reaching
out to that country to bring it back into the international
community - of which it is already a member. That
would not only contribute to reducing tension in the
continent, but would give us new hope for consolidation
of the results of the Sirte meeting, at which we decided
that, given the various arguments heard in this very
Council without any solid results for the continent, it was
time for action. When we saw the rapid decisions taken
on Kosovo and on Timor, we thought that, at Sirte and
following Sirte, we would look for means of addressing
our own problems.

We do not want this to be in the absence of the
Security Council, and I therefore appeal to all members,
in a fraternal spirit, to understand that only dialogue, not
exclusion, can help us forge and strengthen the links that
led to the creation of this Organization.

