Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset,
let me join others in commending you, Sir, and your
delegation for organizing this meeting on an issue that
is becoming a major threat to maritime navigation,
trade and economic activities in the Gulf of Guinea. I
would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn
Pascoe for his briefing and for introducing the
Secretary-General's report on the United Nations
assessment mission on the subject (see S/2012/45). I
would also like to place on record our appreciation to
the representatives of the Gulf of Guinea Commission
and of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) for their valuable statements.

The problem of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea was
first discussed by the Security Council during the
Indian presidency of the Council in August last year.
Since then, there have been several new acts of piracy
in the Gulf of Guinea and the problem has assumed
more serious proportions. Its impact is felt increasingly
by all littoral States, and its seriousness is
demonstrated by the participation of a number of
delegations in today's debate. I thank all participants
for sharing their assessments with us.

The piracy off both coasts of Africa illustrates the
degree of instability prevalent in the region and the
reach of organized terrorist and criminal groups. They
are targeting oil and chemical vessels, as well as oil
drilling platforms, in the Gulf of Guinea and
perpetrating severe violence against their captives. The
region produces more than 5 million barrels of oil per
day and three-quarters of the world's supply of cocoa.
Pirate attacks are thus adversely affecting the emerging
oil industry of the region, as well as commercial
shipping and mariners.

The Secretary-General's report states that piracy
in the Gulf of Guinea is already causing an annual
economic loss of $2 billion, which is a significant
amount when compared to the annual gross domestic
products of the countries of the region. As regional
stakeholders have said in their statements today, a large
number of unemployed young people are becoming
attracted to the business of piracy and maritime
robbery.

The evolving business model of piracy involves
low cost and risk, but yields high returns. While such
socio-economic issues as poverty and unemployment
may be abetting piracy, the main causes have to do
with the limited institutional capacity of the countries
in the region. Addressing problems such as the
proliferation of weapons, poor naval infrastructure, and
weak law enforcement and prosecution systems must
become an integral part of counter-piracy efforts.
Otherwise, like piracy off the coast of Somalia, piracy
in the Gulf of Guinea can quickly assume the intensity
and proportion of an organized cartel in the countries
of western Africa.

India has been at the forefront of highlighting the
menace of piracy off the coast of Somalia and stressing

the urgent need for the international community to
work towards a comprehensive counter-piracy strategy.
India is also concerned about the surge in piracy in the
Gulf of Guinea, including its economic and social
costs. While the two situations are quite different in
proportion at this stage, it is quite possible that the
failure of the international community to act decisively
against piracy off the coast of Somalia could have
spawned a new surge in piracy in the Gulf of Guinea.

The time has now come for the Council's
attention to addressing the problem of piracy to be
translated into a concrete plan of action. It being a
regional problem, the action taken to address it must
involve the full cooperation of the international
community, led by the United Nations, with the
countries of West Africa and regional and subregional
organizations. In that connection, we welcome some of
the steps that have been taken, such as the
establishment of a subregional coastguard network in
West and Central Africa, the formulation of the
maritime security strategy of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS), the
establishment of the Regional Centre for Maritime
Security in Central Africa, and the creation of the Gulf
of Guinea Commission and the Maritime Organization
of West and Central Africa.

These initiatives have helped create a platform
for Governments to formulate a collective approach to
the problem. Also, the ECCAS maritime security
strategy has yielded positive results in the zone
comprising Cameroon, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon and
Sao Tome and Principe. These efforts should be
intensified and should include joint counter-piracy
efforts ranging from patrolling and surveilling coastal
waters to sharing information and intelligence and
building the capacities of naval forces. In addition, it is
also critical to strengthen the legal system to ensure
effective and expeditious prosecution.

Greater coherence among the regional States and
organizations will help to support the full and sustained
implementation of these efforts. In that connection, we
welcome the Secretary-General's proposal to facilitate
a regional summit of Heads of State. The United
Nations should also assist in the mobilization of
resources. United Nations agencies in the region,
particularly the United Nations Office for West Africa,
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa,
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
International Maritime Organization, have an important
role to play in regional counter-piracy efforts and in
addressing the related problems of terrorism, the illicit
trafficking of drugs and the proliferation of weapons,
which all conspire together to destabilize the region.

In conclusion, India stands ready to contribute to
international efforts aimed at increasing the effective
cooperation among States in the region in tackling the
threat of piracy and armed robbery at sea.

