Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I welcome High
Representative Valentin Inzko back to the Council
and thank him for his twelfth report to the Secretary-
General (S/2014/777, annex). Once more, his report
highlights honestly and objectively the challenges that
Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to face and the
crucial importance of the international community's
engagement in the country.

The United Kingdom is grateful to the High
Representative for his commitment to the implementation
of the Dayton Peace Agreement. The United Kingdom
shares the concern of the High Representative at the
current situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The picture
is a depressing one, notjust in respect of this reporting
period but over the past four years. It is hard to see this
period as anything other than a wasted electoral term,
characterized largely by stagnation - an electoral
term in which the narrow interests of the political class
and short-sighted squabbling over sectional interests

have prevailed over a commitment to reform, to good
governance and to delivering change that will benefit
all citizens.

The statistics paint a bleak picture: a four-year
parliamentary term in which a total of only 14 new pieces
of legislation were adopted, an unemployment rate that
stands at about 44 per cent, with youth unemployment at
60 per cent, and too many university graduates failing
to find employment in the country or leaving Bosnia
and Herzegovina behind for opportunities elsewhere.
The situation is unsustainable. It does a huge disservice
to the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Urgent
change is needed.

The elections that took place in October offer an
opportunity for progress. The first step must be the
swift formation of a reform-minded Government.
That is crucial if Bosnia and Herzegovina is to break
out of its current malaise. The challenges facing the
country are too great for there to be a lengthy hiatus
while its politicians argue over who gets what job.
Once a Government is formed, it should focus on the
policy and priorities that will deliver real change for
the population.

The protests that took place in February and the
plenums that sprung up at the same time demonstrate
the depths of public frustration with the status quo.
Politicians must heed those clear calls for change.
Urgent reforms are needed to improve growth, tackle
corruption and create jobs. The population of Bosnia
and Herzegovina deserve a political leadership that
strives to deliver on those goals. The terrible flooding
that devastated large parts of the region this year adds
to the importance of quick Government formation and
speedy focus on the immediate challenges facing the
country, including work to implement necessary relief
for those affected by the flooding.

The United Kingdom welcomes the work of the
European Union (EU) in responding to the population's
socioeconomic concerns. In particular, we welcome the
excellent work of the EU delegation in Sarajevo, led
until recently by Peter Sorensen. Under his leadership,
the Compact for Growth and Jobs in Bosnia and
Herzegovina provided a platform for Bosnian society
to engage with its political leaders and express their
desires and frustrations. It will now be up to the new
Bosnian Government to take the necessary steps to
improve the business climate, increase social protection
and promote enterprise.

The United Kingdom is utterly committed to Bosnia
and Herzegovina's future membership in the European
Union and NATO. Last week in Berlin, the Foreign
Secretary and the German Minister for Foreign Affairs
announced a United Kingdom-German initiative to
reinvigorate Bosnia and Herzegovina's Euro-Atlantic
perspective. It is clear that stabilizing and stimulating
Bosnia and Herzegovina's economy should be a priority.
Reforms aimed at doing that should not wait while other
issues remain intractable.

There were aspects of the recent elections in Bosnia
and Herzegovina that gave us cause for concern. The
narrow and divisive nationalism that characterized
some leaders' rhetoric was unacceptable. We are clear
that the focus of some on difference and division must
end. Leaders must stop thinking along ethnic lines
and start thinking about what will deliver economic
progress to the country as a whole.

There is no prospect of Bosnia and Herzegovina
joining the European Union as anything other than
a single, sovereign State. Public statements about
separation or referendums take the country nowhere.
They are not going to happen. The United Kingdom
has a binding legal responsibility to protect Bosnia
and Herzegovina's territorial integrity. We remain as
committed to that responsibility now as we were 19
years ago, when the Dayton Peace Agreement was
signed. The redrawing of the map in the Balkans
is finished. The road forward involves reform and
Euro-Atlantic integration on the basis of the Peace
Agreement, as stated in resolution 2183 (2014), which
we have just adopted.

We remain concerned by the security situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is clear to us that stability
is not yet entrenched. February's protests demonstrated
how quickly the population's discontent can spiral into
widespread unrest. Until stability is entrenched, the
deterrence provided by the European Union military
mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina's (EUFOR)
Operation Althea will remain crucial.

We welcome the Security Council's renewal
of EUFOR's mandate for a further 12 months. We
note with disappointment that the resolution was not
adopted by consensus this year, for the first time in
14 years. The Russian Federation's position this year of
opposing previously agreed references in the resolution
to Bosnia and Herzegovina's Euro-Atlantic perspective
is cynical and deeply regrettable. Nothing has changed
in respect of the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina to
justify such an approach. To adopt such an obstructive
position, to argue that the Euro-Atlantic perspective
is being imposed from outside, shows contempt for
the established and widespread support in Bosnia and
Herzegovina for the country's Euro-Atlantic direction.
It speaks volumes about the zero-sum, with-us-or-
against-us mindset that Russia is applying to this and
other foreign-policy issues.

