Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): On earlier
occasions, we have expressed the opinion that it is the
obligation of the Council to exhaust all peaceful means
available before resorting to the authorization of the
use of force and that only the Council can bestow
legitimacy on an armed intervention. We thus deeply
regret that military action has been initiated without
explicit authorization by the Council. At the same time,
we are not of the view that this constitutes a failure of
the Council, much less of the Organization as a whole.

As a small State, we are particularly concerned
that the Council and international law have been
bypassed on a question of such magnitude, and believe
that this has wider ramifications, which will and must
be discussed. However, given the very concrete and
urgent needs in Iraq, the Council is challenged to
engage in very concrete actions at this particular
moment. The challenge before the Council today
consists in particular of the large-scale humanitarian
crisis that is unfolding at frightening speed in Iraq.
While international humanitarian law is clear on the
responsibility for the civilian population in the current
situation, it is also our view that the United Nations
must play an essential role in this respect and that
humanitarian assistance should be coordinated under
its authority, as soon as the circumstances on the
ground allow for such coordination.

Against that background, we thus welcome the
initiative of the Secretary-General for an early
resumption of the oil for food programme for the
benefit of the Iraqi people. We realize that the
resumption of the oil for food programme has sensitive
political and legal implications. But we do believe that
it is the obligation of the Council to place the plight of
the Iraqi people at the centre of its considerations and
regain quickly its unity, which will also be essential for
securing a central role for the Organization in shaping
a peaceful future for Iraq, based on the principles of
territorial integrity and sovereignty. We would be in a
very difficult position to explain a lack of unity in the
Council with regard to humanitarian assistance to the
Iraqi people and are therefore encouraged by the
progress that was made in consultations on the issue.

The humanitarian situation of the Iraqi population
is at the heart of our concerns. The Government of
Liechtenstein decided earlier this week to give a total
of more than $100,000 to the International Committee
of the Red Cross and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, and an additional
contribution may be forthcoming shortly. We are thus
ready to contribute to the joint effort of the
international community to alleviate the suffering of
the Iraqi people.

While we can contribute to that end, it is only the
warring parties that are in a position to prevent the
suffering of the civilian population. The strict
observance of international humanitarian law, and the
Geneva Conventions in particular, will go a long way
towards securing this goal. It is the obligation of the
parties to the conflict to strictly adhere to all these
established standards, in particular those regarding the
prohibition to target or otherwise abuse civilians and
the obligation to grant full access to humanitarian
organizations.

