Mr. Gokool (Mauritius): The tragic
developments and grave situation in the Middle East,
Africa and Eastern Europe, among others, remind us
once again of the need for the Security Council to take
comprehensive measures to address the protection of
those innocent civilians who have always been the first
and easiest victims, both in inter-State and intra-State
conflicts.

Mr. President, I salute your decision to include
this item in the agenda of the Security Council. I
express my delegation's appreciation of the tremendous
efforts that your delegation has put into the preparation
and negotiation of the aide-memoire before us. I
equally commend the efforts and good work
undertaken by the experts of the members of the
Security Council and the Secretariat through their
interactive consultation. I would also like to pay tribute
to Mr. Oshima for his fruitful briefing that highlights
the positive measures taken to protect innocent
civilians in armed conflict.

There is no doubt that the aide-memoire provides
an important framework for allocating responsibilities
and obligations to each actor involved in the conflict,
either directly or indirectly. Indeed, as Mr. Oshima has
pointed out, the document is an unprecedented example
of coordination and extensive consultation among the
parties involved. The checklist now needs to be
translated into action in order to bring positive results,
and I highly commend the proposal outlined by
Mr. Oshima for doing this.

I would like to concentrate on four aspects
regarding the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
First, there cannot be real peace and security in a world
where minimum protection to civilians is not
guaranteed, whether in times of peace or of war. We
must, therefore, condemn in unequivocal terms the
continued violation of the basic norms of law and
moral behaviour.

Secondly, the culture of impunity should, once
and for all, be eliminated. We fully support the
recommendations in bullet six of the aide-memoire in
this regard. We applaud the efforts of the international
community in the establishment of the International
Criminal Court which, I understand, now needs only
five ratifications to come into effect and which, we
hope, will address all war crimes and crimes against
humanity. The establishment of the two International
Criminal Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and for
Rwanda respectively has clearly demonstrated the
importance of such mechanisms at the international
level. There is a growing consensus that international
peace and reconciliation can come only after justice
has been secured. International criminal proceedings
will, in a way, play the role of healer and encourage the
process of reconciliation. National interests should not
outweigh the willingness to comply with international
human rights norms.

Thirdly, it is imperative that all parties to any
conflict ensure that humanitarian assistance is not
interrupted in any of the areas affected by conflicts.
The responsibility should be not only upon the
Government, but also upon the opposing parties.
Several reports on the humanitarian situations in States
plagued by armed conflict have expressed grave
concern over the dearth of humanitarian aid to innocent
civilians. Those who violate humanitarian or regional
norms should be made accountable either through
domestic jurisdiction or through regional or
international mechanisms.

Another point worth noting here is that when we
talk of protecting civilians and extending humanitarian
aid, we should not wait for a situation to deteriorate
into armed conflict. This exacerbates the situation, and
people start losing faith in the principles of human
rights and humanitarian law.

Fourthly, and lastly, the Security Council should
urge the parties concerned to establish a protective
neutralized zone, as provided for in the Fourth Geneva
Convention. All opposing parties should recognize this
zone through concluding an explicit agreement under
the guidance of the International Committee for the
Red Cross or any other humanitarian agency. We would
like to highlight here our appreciation at learning that,
among the initiatives that have been taken or are being
undertaken, the separation of combatants from refugee
camps is being put into effect.

Finally, I would like to say that the crisis of
credibility regarding efforts of the United Nations in
protecting civilians in armed conflict not only makes
security elusive, but also negatively impacts all actions
taken or proposed to be taken by the United Nations.
We hope this aide-memoire and the road map will wipe
away doubt and apprehension and will give way to a
culture of confidence.

