Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I
would like to welcome Deputy Prime Minister Gilmore
to the Security Council and congratulate both him and
Ireland on having assumed the chairmanship of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe. I
also thank him for his comprehensive briefing today.

The Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) has unique capabilities to assist the 56
OSCE participating States and 12 OSCE partner States
in addressing a range of security concerns. As the
world's largest Chapter VIII regional organization
under the United Nations Charter, the OSCE is a key
partner in implementing the international legal
obligations, as called for in Security Council
resolutions. It is an effective regional multiplier for the
United Nations and contributes meaningfully to
advancing peace and stability. In this regard, I have
several points I wish to make.

First, the United States appreciates the crucial
role the OSCE plays in democratic institution-building,
including by observing elections and providing
technical assistance to Governments and civil society.
The United States also welcomes the OSCE's
commitment to supporting transition in North Africa
and to working with Governments that seek to build
pluralistic and democratic societies. We welcome
continued close cooperation between the United
Nations, the OSCE and other regional organizations in
assisting this transition. In the Western Balkans,
Eastern Europe, Central Asia and the Caucasus, the
OSCE's 16 field missions and offices support a wide
range of United Nations priorities and specialized
agencies, particularly the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.

For example, the OSCE supported the creation of
regional security centres in Central Asia and the
Caucasus through its field missions. The OSCE office
in Baku is working with the United Nations Economic
Commission in Europe to promote an agreement
between Azerbaijan and Georgia on shared water
resources. The OSCE mission in Kosovo plays a
critical role in assisting the development of Kosovo's
democracy and new institutions. For example, the
mission helped to establish municipal offices in
Kosovo to protect the rights of displaced persons,
returnees and community members - a crucial
element in supporting the United Nations efforts.

Secondly, we strongly support the OSCE's efforts
to protect human rights and promote tolerance and
non-discrimination through its Office of Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights. The United States
remains focused on gender issues, particularly
discrimination and violence against women, and we
greatly appreciate the OSCE's support, through its
Forum for Security Cooperation, for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on women
and peace and security.

The OSCE is also an important forum for helping
States adapt to the changes of the twenty-first century,
including expanding our support for and protection of
fundamental freedoms in this digital age. We look
forward to the results of the June Dublin conference for
OSCE States on this important issue.

Thirdly, the OSCE has demonstrated capacity in
the fields of early warning, conflict prevention, conflict
resolution and response to atrocities. We encourage
progress in the Geneva Group process, co-chaired by
the United Nations, the OSCE and the European
Union, to resolve outstanding issues between Georgia
and Russia. In Moldova, we welcome the resumption
of the official 5+2 talks aimed at reaching a
comprehensive settlement with regard to the
Transdniestria issue. As a co-Chair of the Minsk
Group, the United States remains committed at the
highest levels to achieving a lasting and peaceful
settlement of the Nagorno Karabakh conflict.

The United States applauds the work of the OSCE
field offices in the Balkans in monitoring local war
crimes trials and providing assistance to support legal
reform processes. We welcome OSCE collaboration
with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia on the War Crimes Justice Project, which
transfers skills and knowledge to local courts. The
OSCE Community Security Initiative is also helping
rebuild trust between citizens and law enforcement
following the unrest in Kyrgyzstan in 2010, which
contributes to the United Nations work in post-conflict
situations.

Finally, the OSCE continues its strong advocacy
with participating States on combating national threats.
The United States consistently advocates for the full
implementation of Security Council resolutions, and
we have found the OSCE to be a useful partner in this
regard. To this end, we have provided extrabudgetary
resources to the OSCE in support of ongoing United
Nations non-proliferation efforts. We urge other
Security Council members to consider providing a
modest contribution, financial or in kind, to help
sustain this successful regional initiative, which is a
value-added contribution to the efforts of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) and to the efforts of the United Nations Office
of Disarmament Affairs.

The United States also supports the OSCE's
ongoing projects with Central Asian States and
Afghanistan towards strengthening those countries'
capacities to combat cross-border security challenges,
including drug trafficking, cyberthreats, terrorism and
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. We
further welcome the decision by OSCE ministers at the
December 2011 Vilnius Ministerial Council meeting to
broaden the organization's support to Afghanistan
across all dimensions. We encourage as well the
OSCE's efforts to promote cooperation between
Afghanistan and the Central Asian States, which will
facilitate those countries' long-term security,
development and prosperity.

The United States is a proud member of the
OSCE. We value the fundamental commitments of the
organization, which have provided clarity, stability and
continuity to participating States for more than 35
years in our common effort to promote comprehensive
security throughout the Euro-Atlantic and Eurasian
regions. These commitments remain as relevant today
as they were in 1975.

