Mrs. Juul (Norway): Allow me first to thank the
Secretary-General for his substantial and informative
report on small arms. The report's many concrete
recommendations to the Council deserve our close
attention and support.

Norway aligns itself with the statement made by
the Permanent Representative of Luxembourg on
behalf of the European Union, but I will make some
supplementary comments.

We are constantly reminded that illicit small arms
and light weapons undermine conflict prevention and
peace-building efforts. Illicit arms transfers to conflict
regions continue at a disturbing rate. As pointed out in
the report, such transfers are very often linked to the
illicit exploitation of natural resources as well as to the
trade in illegal drugs, creating a vicious circle of
instability and crime-based economies. That
undermines political stability as well as economic and
social development and the attainment of the
Millennium Development Goals.

Norway believes that the Security Council has a
key role to play in this respect. Preventing, combating
and eliminating the uncontrolled spread of small arms
and light weapons must be a core element of the
Council's peace efforts. More attention should be
focused on the need for effective arms embargoes. The
Council can certainly do its part through the
establishment of special monitoring mechanisms and
other measures. However, we must not forget that arms
embargoes cannot be implemented effectively without
the cooperation of Member States.

The Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat
and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects remains the key global
instrument in dealing with the issue of small arms. It is
encouraging to see that national implementation of the
Programme of Action is well under way and that many
regional organizations are giving high priority to it. We
believe that regional efforts are of particular
importance in the light of shared challenges and similar
experiences in dealing with the issue. Norway has
assisted such efforts in a number of regions and will
continue to do so. Civil society representatives have
shown themselves to be constructive partners in that
regard.

Norway strongly supports the efforts of the Open-
ended Working Group to Negotiate an International
Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a
Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and
Light Weapons. We are pleased with the progress made
at the second session of the Working Group in New
York recently, but we regret the continuing
disagreement on the status and scope of the instrument.
To our mind, it is imperative that the instrument be
legally binding. We also believe it should cover
ammunition, given that that issue is so closely linked to
the use and misuse of small arms and light weapons.

The issue of brokering remains essential in our
efforts to deal effectively with the destabilizing effects
of illicit small arms and light weapons. We welcome
the focus on brokering in the Secretary-General's
report in relation to its relevance both in the fight
against terrorism and in ensuring effective arms
embargoes in conflict areas. We need as much
transparency as possible in that area.

Norway is pleased that the recent report by the
High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change
noted the threat to stability posed by small arms and
light weapons and recommended that Member States
expedite and conclude negotiations on legally binding
agreements on the marking and tracing, and the
brokering and transfer, of small arms and light
weapons. In our view, the issue of small arms and light
weapons deserves to be further highlighted in the
follow-up to the High-level Panel's report.

The Security Council and the Secretariat should
continue their discussions of questions related to small
arms. We believe it would be useful to consider
whether any of the particular issues raised in the
report's recommendations could lend themselves to a
more focused debate in the Council at a later stage.

The interaction between the Security Council and
the General Assembly on the issue of small arms and
light weapons should also be looked at. We welcome
the Secretary-General's recommendation that the two
organs establish a committee to look into how they
could work together in that area.

We all agree on the seriousness of the issue of
illicit small arms and light weapons, but we still have a
way to go when it comes to developing effective
international cooperation to meet the challenges
involved. This debate should serve to remind us of the
challenges and should encourage us all to work more
effectively to deal with them.

