Mr. Kouchner (France) (spoke in French):
France believes that this meeting is important.
Settlement activities have been stepped up since
Annapolis. With its European partners, France has had
the opportunity to state clearly and repeatedly its
concerns at that accelerated building of settlements and
the tenders, namely in East Jerusalem. The European
Union (EU) believes that the building of settlements
anywhere in the Palestinian occupied territories is
illegal with respect to international law. It harms the
credibility of the process started in Annapolis and
affects the viability of the future necessary,
indispensable Palestinian State; it makes the
development of the Palestinian economy more
difficult; and finally, it causes tension, as illustrated by
the recent exactions of the settlers with regard to the
Palestinians.

On 23 June in the Knesset, the President of
France recalled that for France there can be "no peace
without an immediate and complete halt to settlement".
I recall that very decisive position in view of the threat
posed by the violent speeches, and particularly the
speech of the Iranian President, who again delivered an
unacceptable message a few days ago before the
General Assembly.

In parallel with our messages on the necessary
freeze on the settlements, naturally we call on the
Palestinian Authority, as we have always done, also to
meet its commitment, particularly to continue its
efforts to combat terrorism and attacks in all their
forms, as well as arms trafficking, as the representative
of Israel has just emphasized.

We want peace with all our heart. We support
peace efforts, wherever they may be made, with all our
strength. Thus, we support the Palestinian authorities in
their reform of the security service and welcome the
success of the steps taken in Jenin, for example.
Finally, we welcome the continuation of the truce
concluded on 19 June in Gaza, hoping that it will help
to improve the humanitarian conditions of the people,
the suffering of the people in Gaza and the chances for
a prompt release of Gilad Shalit.

France is convinced that the Israelis and the
Palestinians can achieve peace, and in that respect, of
course, I recall the important Arab peace initiative.
There will be no security in Israel without a democratic
and viable Palestinian State at its side and no security
for the world without peace in all the countries of the
Middle East.

Accordingly, France stands ready, particularly
with its EU partners, to contribute to the
implementation of an agreement that must be able to be
sealed as soon as possible. One year after the Paris
conference, which raised a lot of money and aid to
build that Palestinian State, we are ready to make an
additional and decisive effort to consolidate the hope
for peace. Now that a solution is within reach, we
expect our Israeli and Palestinian partners to seize that
opportunity and take historic decisions in the interests
of their peoples and stability throughout the entire
region.

