I would like to thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for his comprehensive briefing on the political situation in Syria. South Africa is encouraged that the ceasefire agreement of 5 March between Turkey and Russia continues to hold, despite sporadic instances of shelling. In that regard, we call on all parties to work, especially during these challenging times, towards a permanent nationwide ceasefire that will pave the way to a conducive environment in which an inclusive Syrian-led dialogue can be held. For Syria to attain peace, it would be necessary for all external interference in Syria to come to an end and for all unauthorized foreign forces to have left. In addition, we wish to reiterate that all States have the sovereign right to address the threat of terrorism in their countries. However, any action to counter terrorism must be in line with international law, including obligations under international human rights law and international humanitarian law. The ultimate goal should be a lasting political solution that is reflective of the will of the Syrian people and brings sustainable peace and stability to the country, as well as the opportunity to rebuild its economy and to repair the damage caused by 10 years of war. With regard to developments pertaining to the Constitutional Committee, South Africa welcomes the co-Chairs' agreement on the agenda for its next meeting, as reported by the Special Envoy in his previous briefing to the Council (see S/PV.8727). We urge all parties to continue to engage substantively and constructively in the Constitutional Committee process as part of the wider political process supported by the Special Envoy. As we have learned through our own constitutional drafting process, engagement and confidence-building are essential components in finding a sustainable and peaceful solution to the crises in Syria. Resolution 2254 (2015) remains the framework for the political process in Syria, and it would be important that it be fully implemented. The Security Council should continue to support the work of the Constitutional Committee and the role of the United Nations and the Special Envoy in the mediation process. South Africa has noted the release of the Secretary-General's summary of the report by the Board of Inquiry on Syria into incidents in north-west Syria. We welcome his intention to appoint a senior independent adviser to consider how best to respond to the recommendations contained in the report. In the light of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and of reports of three COVID-19-related deaths, South Africa fully supports the joint appeal by the Secretary-General's Envoys to the Middle East. We reiterate our full support to the Special Envoy's call for a complete and immediate nationwide ceasefire throughout Syria in order to ensure that the necessary supplies, equipment and personnel are available to efficiently and effectively respond to the pandemic. The conditions in parts of Syria raise the risk of COVID-19 spreading quickly. In those parts of the country, the fragile health system, overcrowded detention centres and camps for internally displaced persons, the lack of adequate access to water and sanitation infrastructure, access challenges for the delivery of humanitarian aid and continuing conflict are all factors impeding efforts to stop the spread of the virus. As we address the humanitarian consequences of the pandemic, it is vital that economic measures placed on Syria should be eased. This is necessary to ensure that the required supplies and equipment are provided to combat the pandemic. We also support the Special Envoy's consistent call for the substantive release of prisoners and detainees, particularly women, children, the elderly and those with disabilities. Given the challenging conditions in detention centres, this appeal is even more relevant and necessary today. The situation in Syria requires the international community to support both the political and humanitarian tracks. These processes are interlinked, and progress must be supported on both tracks to create the necessary conditions for a sustainable and peaceful settlement to the conflict.
