Nana Effah-Apenteng (Ghana): Let me also
thank Under-Secretary-General Jan Egeland for his
briefing. As he takes leave of the United Nations, we
wish to thank him for his strong and sustained
advocacy during his incumbency. We wish him well.

May I also commend you, Mr. President, for
organizing this open debate on the issue of the
protection of civilians in situations of conflict, which
the Secretary-General once rightly described as a
humanitarian imperative. This issue is of cardinal
importance to the United Nations as a whole, if it is to
discharge successfully its Charter obligations of
maintaining world peace while promoting sustainable
development and strengthening human rights.

Although General Assembly resolution 46/182 of
1991 entrusted Governments and States with the
primary responsibility for the protection of civilians,
parties embroiled in armed conflict are invariably
unable to discharge their obligations owing to various
inhibiting factors. It is for that reason that the
international community, and especially the United
Nations, has over the years been at the forefront of this
critical humanitarian duty. Indeed, the pivotal role of
the United Nations was recognized by world leaders in
paragraphs 138 and 139 of the World Summit Outcome
document, and subsequently reaffirmed by resolution
1674 (2006).

We must acknowledge that our Organization, and
indeed the Security Council, have, since being seized
of the matter, made laudable strides to rein in acts of
impunity against unarmed civilians, as demonstrated
by the establishment of domestic and international
bodies and judicial entities to specifically address the
menace. While applauding those measures, we cannot
but also stress that recent events in some conflict areas,
such as Darfur and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, are indicative of pertinent gaps that need to be
examined, with a view to adopting necessary remedial
measures. That requires the total commitment of States
to the Secretary-General's call for a culture of
protection, through scrupulous adherence to the
provisions of all multilateral agreements dealing with
the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
9

The changing nature of warfare, be it intra- or
inter-State conflict, has of course widened the scope of
protection, although its basic elements of physical
protection and humanitarian assistance, which are
mutually reinforcing, remain unchanged. It has been
recognized, that in the new warfare that has emerged,
the impact of armed conflict on civilians goes beyond
the notion of collateral damage. The physical
protection of unarmed civilians in conflict is
paramount if an already traumatized populace,
especially the vulnerable, like women and children, are
to be spared from further agonies of rape and other
forms of sexual violence, forced conscription,
abduction, forced labour, maiming and forced
displacement.

In that connection, the rapid deployment of
United Nations peacekeepers in conflict areas is
imperative. We recognize that any deployment should
be in conformity with the Charter. That
notwithstanding, the Security Council has a moral duty
to act in dire situations to save civilians not only from
genocide, ethnic cleansing, crimes against humanity
and other grave violations of human rights abuses in
line with the commitment made by our leaders last
year. It is also our view that the same sentiments
underpin article 4 of the Constitutive Act of the African
Union. We should stop paying lip service to the
concept of the responsibility to protect, and have the
political will to stand by the courage of our
convictions.

Apart from bringing succour and hope to a
traumatized population, the presence of peacekeepers
also facilitates the provision of humanitarian assistance
to hitherto inaccessible areas, especially remote
villages and towns. However, without the requisite
mandate, the presence of Blue Helmets may not attain
the envisaged objective. That is why we welcome the
Security Council's resolve to provide peacekeepers
with a robust mandate to enable them effectively to
discharge their responsibilities. Furthermore, we
support extending the role of peacekeepers, where
appropriate, to include the protection of civilians and
other humanitarian assistance, as well as the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
former combatants.

The United Nations system, in collaboration with
non-governmental organizations, has acquitted itself
creditably over the years in providing deprived persons
with the basic necessities of life, including food, water,

shelter and medical care. Their commendable efforts,
often under severe circumstances, have saved hundreds
of thousands of lives and led to the improvement in the
living conditions of civilians afflicted by the ravages of
conflict. Undoubtedly, those noble efforts are often
obstructed deliberately by parties to conflicts, whose
callous acts often disregard the plight inflicted on
innocent civilians by their wanton disruption of their
peaceful lives. Parties to conflicts, including armed
groups, are obliged to guarantee unfettered access to
civilian victims of conflict to cater to their basic needs.

It therefore behoves the community of nations,
and especially the Security Council, to ensure that
those obligations are fully respected by applying
realistic and punitive sanctions against identified
persons violating the tenets of these instruments,
especially the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their
protocols, whose universalization is of the utmost
importance. We therefore urge States that are not yet
parties to take urgent measures towards that end.

The role of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Assistance and other United Nations
agencies involved in humanitarian activities can only
be sustained through the availability of appropriate
resources. We therefore urge donor countries and
agencies to concretize their commitment through the
provision of adequate funding.

The valuable contribution of regional
organizations and other inter-governmental institutions
in the protection of civilians cannot be
overemphasized, given their profound experience and
knowledge of the dynamics of a given region. We
therefore encourage the further strengthening of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations to enhance the provision of humanitarian
assistance as appropriate.

Our goal of providing protection to civilian
victims in conflict would be bolstered by the arrest and
trial of perpetrators of acts of impunity and gross
human rights abuses. We are therefore encouraged by
some actions recently taken by the International
Criminal Court in that direction. We hope that the force
of example will serve as a deterrent to unscrupulous
adventurists from indulging in such heinous crimes.

While saluting all the men and women engaged in
humanitarian activities, we hold the view that the most
effective means of protecting civilians is by preventing
the eruption of conflicts, as peace and stability are sine
qua non conditions for the pursuit of development and
the promotion of human rights.

