I thank the briefers for their overviews of the political situation and of the many humanitarian challenges Syrians are facing before the upcoming winter. Looking at the political process, Estonia welcomes the announcement of the holding of the next round of Constitutional Committee talks at the end of this month in Geneva. Estonia calls on the parties to engage actively in these discussions, as this fourth meeting is already long overdue. We are cautiously optimistic about the overall political process, as there is also a preliminary agreement for the fifth round in January. The Committee's meetings must become regular in order to build trust between the Syrian regime and its legitimate opposition. I reiterate Estonia's position that resolving the issue of detainees and missing persons is a cornerstone for national reconciliation and for ending the conflict. More than 100,000 people remain detained or missing in Syria, largely at the hands of the Syrian regime. Releasing arbitrarily detained people and identifying those who have lost their lives is at the core of resolutions 2254 (2015) and 2474 (2019). The Russia-Turkey ceasefire agreement from March seems to be holding. This truce gives local populations a break from violence. This break is much needed in the light of the growing numbers of coronavirus disease infections around the country. Nevertheless, instability prevails in many parts of Syria. Estonia condemns in the strongest terms yesterday's bomb attacks near Al-Bab and Afrin, which wounded more than 40 people. We are also concerned that attacks by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) are steadily increasing. ISIL's propaganda continues, targeting vulnerable populations, including those living in overcrowded refugee camps. In this regard, efforts by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs aimed at providing aid to millions of Syrians every month are crucial. Ahead of winter, preserving humanitarian access must be an imperative for the parties on the ground.
