Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian delegation voted in favour of
the draft resolution, because of the need to continue the
United Nations humanitarian programme in Iraq. We
consider it important that the resolution establishes the
level of appropriations for the rehabilitation of the oil
sector in Iraq at $600 million, and includes a new
notification regime for water and sanitation contracts
and medicines.

We regret, however, that the text does not reflect
a number of other important proposals to ease the
humanitarian crisis in Iraq. I refer in particular to
restoring civil air communications with Iraq and to
repaying Iraq's debt to the United Nations and to other
international organizations. We agree with many other
delegations about the need for an in-depth analysis of
the impact of economic sanctions on the humanitarian
situation in Iraq. But we consider that the wording of
the resolution in that connection is rather vague and
detracts from that specific goal. We would prefer that
this provision of the draft resolution, as was initially
intended, focus on the negative impact of sanctions in
bringing that to light. But this paragraph, I repeat, was
formulated in a rather general way and we think that
the group of independent experts should deal precisely
with the consequences of sanctions. If, in their
purview, there are other things that do not directly
relate to the sanctions issue, these issues must be
considered as a whole, without any exceptions. In that
case, these questions must include the negative impact
of the bombings by the United States and the United
Kingdom against civilian targets and the economic
infrastructure of Iraq. As we found out today from the
statement made by the Minister of Defence of the
United Kingdom, the intensity of these bombings has
grown by a factor of 30 since December 1998.

We also had problems with operative paragraph 2,
which we believe unjustifiably stresses the supply of
food and medicine. Of course, these are important
goods, but we think that areas such as oil and energy
and the development of the transport infrastructure are
just as important. Unless the crisis in these sectors of
the Iraqi economy is overcome, we cannot hope for any
improvement in the supply of food and medicines to
the Iraqi people. We note that this specific paragraph
achieved balance in the end. In view of that, the
Russian delegation decided to go along with the
consensus on the resolution.

In conclusion, we wish to note that with the
adoption of this resolution, the humanitarian crisis in
Iraq will not be overcome. Although the measures
undertaken in the humanitarian programme are
meaningful and necessary, the only way to radically
improve the situation is through the speedy lifting of
economic sanctions. For this we need the Security
Council to comprehensively consider all aspects of the
Iraq situation and all reasons which impede a
comprehensive implementation of resolution 1284
(1999), particularly regarding the disarmament and
monitoring parts. We hope that the Security Council
will do this in the foreseeable future.

