Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
welcome you here today, Madam President, to preside
over this meeting. I would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe; African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security Ramtane
Lamamra; His Excellency Mr. Moses Wetangula,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kenya; and His
Excellency Mr. Crispus Kiyonga, Minister of Defence
of Uganda for their statements. I also welcome the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Azerbaijan at our
meeting today.

There has been some progress in the current
situation in Somalia. All parties in Somalia are
continuing their efforts to implement the road map for
the end of the transition. They have also taken
important steps in drafting a constitution and reforming
the Parliament. Somalia's security forces and the
military operations of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) continue to produce significant
results. The areas under Al-Shabaab control continue to
diminish in size. The international community has paid
greater attention and made greater inputs into the
situation in Somalia. We now face a rare historic
window of opportunity to address the question of
Somalia. At the same time, we should also be aware of
the serious challenges facing Somalia in the political,
security and humanitarian spheres.

Effectively implementing the road map is key to
lasting peace and stability in Somalia. All parties
concerned in Somalia should take advantage of the
current favourable opportunity by fully implementing
the road map and concluding the transition on
schedule. The international community should also
provide greater support to Somalia's Transitional
Federal Government (TFG). The TFG should maintain
its internal unity, which is important in order to ensure
peace and stability in the country.

China has noted that the Transitional Federal
Parliament is facing a number of serious internal
differences. We hope that all parties concerned can
strengthen their communication and mutual trust,
addressing their differences through dialogue so as to
avert any unnecessary disruption in the peace process
in Somalia.

China welcomes the achievements registered by
the Somali security forces and AMISOM. in their
military operations. China appreciates the contributions
made by the United Nations, the African Union, other
international and regional organizations and the
Governments of Uganda, Burundi, Kenya, Ethiopia and
Djibouti.

We hope that Somalia's TFG can take effective
measures to bring about peace and stability in the area
under its control. The African Union is playing a
crucial role in addressing Somalia's problems. The
United Nations should attach great importance to its
requests and recommendations.

The AU recently adopted a strategic concept for
the future operations of AMISOM. that calls for an
increase in its troop strength, an expansion of its areas
of responsibility and an increase in United Nations
logistical support, which will help to promote peace
and stability in Somalia. China welcomes those
recommendations and hopes that the Security Council
will respond positively to them.

China remains concerned at the serious
humanitarian situation in Somalia. We appreciate the
relief efforts undertaken by the international
humanitarian organizations operating there and urge all
parties concerned fully to cooperate with the
international community in that respect. We call upon
the international community to continue to provide
Somalia with more effective support.

