Mr. Hannesson (Iceland): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Belgian presidency of the Security
Council for convening this open debate and giving us
the opportunity to participate in the discussion on the
complex relationship between natural resources and
conflict.

As other speakers have pointed out before me, the
theme of today's debate is a cross-cutting issue that
includes the prevention of conflict and crises
management, Security Council sanctions, peacekeeping
operations and peacebuilding, among other topics. We
believe that a thematic debate by the Security Council
on this issue is indeed timely.

The concept paper prepared by the Belgian
presidency (S/2007/334, annex) provides an excellent
basis for the discussion, underlining the complex link
between natural resources and conflict and indicating
how effective and responsible management of
resources can contribute to post-conflict recovery. In
too many cases, we have seen how exploitation of
natural resources, even fish stocks, and high-value
commodities has become a direct or indirect cause of
conflict, as well as the financial means for maintaining
it.

Good and transparent governance of natural
resources is an essential ingredient in maintaining
stability. In this context, we recognize the impact and
value of the Kimberley Process vis-a-vis the
exploitation of so-called blood diamonds. In some
parts of the world, access to water is also increasingly
becoming a source of conflict that we need to address.
As fossil fuels will become less accessible in the
future, we need to ensure access to alternate energy
sources.

In a broader context, I would also like to mention
clear threats to security and democracy such as
poverty, debt and environmental pollution. Among the
biggest threats to stability and democracy in the future
will be the unsustainable use of the world's natural
resources and irreversible pollution. Security risks
associated with global, regional and local conflicts
over natural resources are increasingly becoming more
central on the political agenda. Iceland participated in
and welcomed the timely open debate held in the
Security Council on 17 April on climate change and
security (see S/PV.5663), organized by the British
presidency of the Council.

Peacekeeping operations are one of the most
important areas of United Nations activities, with a
growing number of operations. We need to ensure that
the current peacekeeping and peacebuilding work of
the United Nations pays sufficient attention to
responsible and effective resource management. The
Peacebuilding Commission should also be an effective
and flexible instrument in that context.

We would favour a stronger role for the
Peacebuilding Commission regarding the post-conflict
utilization of natural resources and environmental
preservation. We need to address how the Security
Council and other United Nations institutions can be
better equipped to tackle this issue, but the Security
Council has a key role to play, as outlined in resolution
1625 (2005).

There is a need to further enhance and promote
systematic international cooperation on resource-
related security, including regional cooperation. This
debate will help to provide greater focus on this
increasingly important issue.

