Mr. Dangue Rewaka (Gabon) (spoke in French):
My delegation is grateful to you, Sir, for having been so
kind as to organize this debate on the situation in
Burundi.

It is regrettable that some of the parties in Burundi,
taking advantage of the vacuum created by the tragic
death of Mwalimu Julius Nyerere, the Facilitator of the
inter-Burundi talks, deemed it necessary to break the
ceasefire and relaunch the civil war. The delegation of
Gabon condemns this attitude and urges all those who,
overcome by despair, have resorted to the use of force to
return immediately to the way of negotiation and
dialogue. In our View only these means can lead to a
lasting settlement of the crises now shaking not only
Burundi but all of the Great Lakes region. This is why
my delegation remains convinced that the full
implementation of the Lusaka Agreement would also
promote the resolution of the situation in Burundi.

We ask all of those who are involved in the peace
process in Burundi to reach agreement as quickly as
possible on the choice of a new Facilitator, and that all
the Burundian parties be closely involved in the search
for peace.

Experience, indeed, has shown that those who are
considered small factions and have no authority to
influence the course of events have most frequently been
at the root of problems of insecurity and instability that
are delaying the normal conduct of the peace process.

In this regard the delegation of Gabon reiterates its
condemnation of the murder of staff members of the
United Nations and humanitarian organizations, which
took place on 12 October 1999 in the province of Rutana.
We welcome the Government of Burundi's investigation
aimed at finding the perpetrators of this act and bringing
them to justice.

The cycle of Violence resuming in Burundi is a
source of serious concern because it is increasing the
number of victims, in particular children and women, and
unleashing a large flow of refugees into the neighbouring
countries. We urge our brothers in Burundi to make a
reality of the solemn commitment they undertook in
Arusha on 21 June 1998 by signing the declaration
following the first round of negotiations, in which they
said:

 

"Aware of our historic responsibility, we share
the same conviction that we owe it to the Burundian
people, both present and future generations, to create
a climate of lasting peace in our country and to put an
end to the constant cycle of violence and fratricide
that has long afflicted Burundi,

"Aware of the suffering of our people, we are
determined to exercise, individually and collectively,
responsible leadership with the aim of putting an end
to this suffering and creating the conditions for
peaceful coexistence on the basis of democratic values
and security for all". (S/1998/562, annex I, p. 3)

To act in any other way would provide excuses to
those who remain reluctant to join the efforts at
reconstruction and economic and social development
undertaken by the Government and the people of Burundi.

The Secretary-General's report of April 1998 on the
causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa stressed the need to
provide aid and significant assistance to countries in
conflict. The state of poverty and the lack of development
which they must often endure can damage the efforts
undertaken to restore peace and stability in the countries
involved.

