President Nikolic' (spoke in Serbian; English text provided by the delegation): At the beginning of my
statement, let me welcome Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and thank him
for his overall commitment to the implementation of the
mandate of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) under resolution 1244
(1999). I also thank the members of this organ for the
attention they give to this issue on a regular basis. I
also take this opportunity to wish His Excellency
Mr. Antonio Guterres, the new Secretary-General of
the United Nations, every success in his future work.

It is with sadness and sorrow that I note that
Ambassador Vitaly Churkin is not with us today
sitting behind the nameplate of the Russian Federation.
He was a diplomat who contributed through his
indefatigable work not only to protecting the interests
of his country but also to international diplomacy and
the global political policies of our age. Serbia will
forever be grateful to him for the understanding and
support he extended over many years, as well as for the
dedication and energy that epitomized his work in the
Security Council.

I would like to point out once again the importance
of convening regular quarterly meetings of the Security
Council, at unchanged intervals, to discuss the present
agenda item. This is an important contribution to
transparency and openness and, equally relevant, it is
the only way to create conditions for the unhindered
implementation of UNMIK's mandate in Kosovo and
Metohija. Also, these meetings lend support to the
dialogue conducted between Belgrade and Pristina
with the facilitation of the European Union (EU).

We fully agree with the observation in the report
(S/2017/95/Rev.l) before us regarding the importance
of ensuring that UNMIK is appropriately resourced
to address current and emerging challenges, including
fragile reconciliation and the evolving threat of violent
extremism. It is evident that the United Nations
Mission needs optimal, larger staffing and financial
capabilities in order to address all the requirements of
the implementation of its mandate.

There is no doubt that the Republic of Serbia is
committed to resolving all outstanding issues through
dialogue, within a status-neutral framework. Only
through such an approach will it be possible to bring
about stabilization in the southern Serbian province
and uphold Serbia's right, as a sovereign State, to
territorial integrity. Our primary goal was, is and will
be to safeguard peace, stability and human lives. By
responding determinedly to all the challenges, the
Government institutions of the Republic of Serbia have
been instrumental in easing the tensions in Kosovo
and Metohija when they threatened to escalate. The
message that I send to all extremists from this organ
is that peaceful solutions have no alternative. Problems
and outstanding issues must be solved through dialogue,
and not by threats and the use of force.
The Republic of Serbia expects the international
community to stand united in defence of this
civilizational achievement. In that context, I would like
to emphasize in particular the detrimental statements
made in respect of a possible formation of an army of
Kosovo. It would be a gross violation of resolution 1244
(1999) and, at the same time, present a new, serious
threat to the efforts invested in stabilizing not only
Kosovo and Metohija, but also the Western Balkans.

The Republic of Serbia will continue to pursue a
responsible and peaceful policy and will provide no
excuse to anybody to engage in escalation and violence.
In the dialogue betweenBelgrade and Pristina, Serbia has
sought to pave the way towards gradual normalization.
For a genuine and implementable agreement, though, it
is necessary that the other interlocutor be sincere too.

Serbia's proposals submitted within the dialogue
have been constructive and realistic. Also, my country
has been ready for compromises. All along, we have
striven to find mutually acceptable solutions to for
many complex issues. That approach by Serbia has not
been reciprocated by the other side, which often stalls
the implementation of commitments it has assumed
by agreement and signature. Certain results have been
achieved, but they are far from what is expected.

For its part - only one part, though - Serbia is
firmly committed to the preservation of peace and the
creation of conditions in which all residents of Kosovo
and Metohija will be ensured security and respect for
basic human rights. This is the place and opportunity
for us to face the fact that the situation in Kosovo and
Metohija is, as borne out by the reports of the Secretary-
General on the work of UNMIK, different altogether.

Let me recall that more than 200,000 internally
displaced persons (IDPs) continue to live in central
Serbia, without any hope of ever returning home.
Regrettably, such hope is not provided by the
international presence either. Serbia is interested in
protecting the lives and property of all the residents
of the province and creating conditions for sustainable
IDP returns. Yet all our commitments to the dialogue,
agreed to by Belgrade and Pristina and facilitated by the
European Union, are continually undercut by violations
of agreements and aggressive acts of the authorities in
Pristina. The aim is to provoke conflicts - from the
ban on Serbian-language textbooks to the continuous
attacks on Serbs and their property and the unlawful
attempt at confiscating the Mining, Metallurgy and
Chemical Combine at Trepca, to the latest instance
of preventing a Belgrade train from entering Kosovo
and Metohija, the gravest violation of the basic human
rights and the freedom of movement.

Traffic connections among people in the twenty-
first century cannot be considered a provocation
against anyone; rather, they are an obligation of all
civilized societies to ensure economic development and
decent living conditions to its citizens. Let me point out
in that regard that the initiative for the operation of a
train on that route was not made by politicians, but by
students of the only university in Kosovo and Metohija
in which instruction is in Serbian. The request of over
10,000 young men and women for a better and more
economical traffic connection with Belgrade and the
rest of central Serbia was met by threats, the mining of
the line and recourse to long guns and combat vehicles.
Such an approach is in direct contravention of the spirit
ofthe dialogue aimed at normalizing relations and poses
a serious threat to peace and stability in the region.

They say that the train was carrying the message
that Kosovo is an integral part of Serbia and that it was a
provocation that they were ready to stop by the force of
arms. There is not a single decision ofthe United Nations
under which Kosovo and Metohija is not a constituent
part of Serbia. For me, the real provocation is that all
representatives of the provisional administration in
Pristina continue to aver that Kosovo is an independent
State. Would members justify the actions of Serbia, a
State Member of the United Nations, if it responded to
that provocation with the threat of arms?

I am sure that members share my concern at the
dispatch, short of the mandatory agreement of the local
Serbian community, of the ethnically pure special
police units, armed with offensive weapons, to the
north of Kosovo and Metohija, populated by and large
by Serbs still harbouring a vivid memory of the wave of
organized ethnic cleansing in March 2004. In that wave,
let me recall, Serbs were expelled from almost all cities

and towns in Kosovo and Metohija. The deployment
of special police units is absolutely unacceptable and
represents a call to armed conflict. Ask them what
orders they had in case the train full of students were
to appear at the administrative crossing. They did not
know how to answer me at a meeting in Brussels in
the presence of Ms. Mogherini, High Representative of
the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy. Perhaps they will tell the Council. Perhaps
they will tell the Council, as there are many here who
support their behaviour, which was a direct threat to
civilian lives.

The manifestation of the institutional intention to
use violence against peace-loving students - members
of non-Albanian communities - was also a serious
threat to peace in a volatile security situation in
Kosovo and Metohija. Just as it has on many previous
occasions, the Republic of Serbia also reacted
reasonably and responsibly on that occasion, taking
decisions and conveying messages whose only goal
was to preserve peace and whatever level of stability
existed in the region and to eliminate the danger posed
to the lives of the remaining non-Albanian population
in the province. In no way has Serbia ever provided
any pretext to Albanian extremists, yet they continue
to employ every asset to provoke conflict on a larger
scale. That bona fide compromise-based approach of
ours is also reflected in the 4 February agreement on
the landscaping of part of the area near the bridge in
Kosciuszko and Mitrovica.

Almost four years have elapsed since the signing
of the First Agreement of Principles Governing
the Normalization of Relations. A key segment of
the agreement, agreed and signed, relates to the
establishment of the association/community of Serb
municipalities in Kosovo. Unfortunately, it has not
been started yet. Pristina representatives are sending
ever more open messages that they are not interested
in the community and that they will not honour the
agreement guaranteed by the EU. The obstinacy of the
Pristina negotiators will not be checked by a few public
criticisms of Pristina made in the West en passant.

Serbia demands that Pristina honour the agreement
reached four years ago, nothing more, nothing less.
Serbia also expects to hear the united and powerful
voice of the international community, including that
of our partners from the European Union, against
the callous position held by Pristina on this issue
of vital importance to the Serbs. What is the use of
agreements reached and obligations assumed if they are
not implemented?

The establishment of the association/community
of Serb municipalities in Kosovo is a precondition for
the normal life and sustainable survival of the Serbian
people in the province; it provides for systemic,
institutional protection of guaranteed human rights.
As such, it also deserves to be accorded much greater
attention in the reports of the Secretary-General, whose
task it is to protect basic human rights, primarily the
right to life, freedom of movement, housing, the right
to work and education, the right to the preservation of
the cultural uniqueness of a people and the freedom
of religion.
Serbia confers by agreement all those rights on the
Provisional Institutions in Pristina. Under the Brussels
Agreement, Pristina has to confer all such rights on
the association/community of Serb municipalities in
Kosovo, the institution that is to implement them within
the non-Albanian and, especially, Serbian populations
in Kosovo and Metohij a, in municipalities in which they
constitute the majority. The association/community of
Serb municipalities in Kosovo was entrusted the task of
establishing the rule of law and human freedoms for the
Serbs through the institutions of the system.

It is also in that context that Serbia views the
importance of convening regular meetings of the
Security Council from which messages are sent to
either side, especially to Pristina, that agreements are
not, and cannot be, just a dead letter and that, instead,
they must be achieved in practice and enforced. Four
years is more than sufficient time. Procrastination
and excuses must no longer be taken lightly. The
establishment and the commencement of the work of
the association/community of Serb municipalities in
Kosovo is of primary importance. The dynamics must
be defined and the date on which the management
team will commence work must be determined, while
the community is to be based exclusively on what has
been agreed and not on some subsequent attempts to
unilaterally change the agreements that have already
been reached with facilitation by the EU.

The establishment of the association/community
of Serb municipalities in Kosovo, with substantive
powers provided for by the Brussels Agreement and
by accompanying agreements, rather than with the
competencies of a non-governmental organization, is
also necessary in order to prevent a further escalation
of mistrust. Anything else would amount to the flouting
of commitments that have already been made and
would render the very dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina meaningless.

The situation in Kosovo and Metohija continues to
be characterized by a continued lack of physical and
legal safety for the Serbs and all other non-Albanians,
especially for IDPs, either who have returned or are
willing to return to their previous homes. The padlocks
on the Church of Christ the Saviour in Pristina
symbolize the intolerance of, and the attitude towards,
non-Albanian communities, especially the Serbs
in Kosovo and Metohija. Behind that unambiguous
anti-civilizational act is the resolve to erase all traces of
the existence ofthe Serbian people and their culture from
a city in which more than 50,000 Serbs lived until 1999.
The international community must not allow the brutal
ethnic cleansing of the Serbs and other non-Albanians
from Pristina to be carried out symbolically by the
violent acts of usurpation of this holy site. Every effort
to create at least an illusion ofa multi-ethnic society in
Kosovo and Metohija is rendered meaningless in that
way. The Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija are therefore
sent an abundantly clear message that their centuries-
long history, culture and religion are unwelcome.

In their fictitious endeavours to protect the Serbian
cultural and religious heritage, Pristina resorts to
double talk - as historical, cultural and religious
heritage is not protected from the desecration, arson
and destruction of the centuries-long Christian heritage
that belongs not only to the Serbs, but also to the
medieval memory of humankind. A truly democratic
society cannot be developed in an atmosphere in which
the crimes committed against the Serbs and other
non-Albanians, their property and historical, cultural
and religious heritage and identity go unpunished. That
is also becoming increasingly clear to those countries
that once supported the attempt by the authorities in
Pristina to join UNESCO.

I emphasize that there can be no true reconciliation
unless all crimes are tried. It is an obligation towards the
families, who have the right to find out the truth about
the fate of their loved ones. The Republic of Serbia has
never called into question the need for all those who
committed war crimes, irrespective of their ethnic
identity, to be brought to justice, on the contrary. At the
same time, in that regard, it is of the utmost importance
not to resort to manipulation and abuse for political
purposes, employed ever so often by the authorities in
Pristina. This provides clear evidence of Pristina's lack
of readiness to assume responsibility within its own
ranks for war crimes. I point that out well aware of the
upcoming commencement of the work of the Specialist
Chambers, established to try the crimes committed in
Kosovo and Metohija in connection with the assertions
in the Dick Marty report on the trafficking in human
organs of abducted Serbs, as well as other war crimes
and crimes against humanity. Serbia also attaches great
importance to the solution of the problem of missing
persons, as a priority humanitarian question.

The French judiciary is to decide on the request to
extradite Ramush Haradinaj to Serbia. He is accused
of committing the gravest war crimes. In an attempt
to flee justice, this brute, one of the commanders of
the so-called Kosovo Liberation Army, does not refrain
even today from openly threatening Europe and the
world with a new war and states that "Serbia will fare
just as it did in 1999".

Allow me to take the Council back in just a couple
of sentences to 1999, not through the stories of the
people killed, innocent civilian victims and ruins, ofthe
destruction and demolition during the aggression, which
is not difficult for me to recall was carried out against
a sovereign European State, without the approval of
the Security Council and the United Nations. Instead, I
shall advise of the consequences with which we live 18
years later and include facts also available to the World
Health Organization. Science has established that, once
the micro- and nano-particles of depleted uranium
enter the body, they have heavy metal radioactive and
toxic effects and, if they are sufficiently small, they
pass through all corporal barriers, including the blood-
brain barrier and the placenta, and can be found in all
tissues and organs ofa contaminated person, as well as
in the intrauterine fetus.

Research conducted in 2004 by Gatti and Montanari
reveals that if someone comes from a territory hit by
missiles containing depleted uranium, one cannot
exclude the presence of depleted uranium as a potential
pathogen, even ifthere is no proof ofits presence in that
person's tissue. That is telling proof that nuclear arms,
including those containing depleted uranium, are in
fact by-products of civilization. They are an invisible,
ideal killer and a means of mass transgenerational
destruction, leading to lasting irriversible changes in
all natural organisms, despite being the end result of
state-of-the-art technology. The bombs containing
depleted uranium that were dropped on Serbia 18
years ago are today damaging the ecosystem of the
entire planet.

However, I leave that topic to be considered by us
all to be an inseparable part of the Security Council's
mission in the field of armament, the use of arms and
the consequences to humankind's future survival on
planet Earth. I do not know, therefore, why there was no
strong condemnation of what I would refer to as clear
threats made by Ramush Haradinaj. Impunity for the
crimes committed must not be allowed or tolerated. It
is a civilizational matter and a litmus test for the entire
membership of the United Nations. It is an opportunity
for us to demonstrate that law and justice are above
politics and that all victims are equal in suffering.

Many incidents confirm that security in Kosovo
and Metohija continues to be unstable and that there is a
latent danger of escalating violence. I would reiterate that
it is the returnees in the nationally mixed environments
who are the most vulnerable. Accordingly, this question
should be accorded greater attention in the reports of
the Secretary-General.

Let me give a concrete example: between 1 October
2016 and 31 January 2017, that is, in the past four months
alone, over 30 ethnically motivated attacks against
Serbs and other non-Albanians have been recorded.
Physical attacks were committed, attempts were
made to prevent displaced persons from celebrating
Christmas Eve in the Church of the Assumption of Holy
Virgin Mary in Djakovica, the property of returnees
was broken into and set on fire and the memorial plaque
of the abducted Serbian journalists in the municipality
of Orahovac was damaged once again. A bomb was
planted near the Orthodox church in the Serbian part
of Orahovac, an explosive device was found at the
water-supply line in Kosovska Mitrovica, a school bus
with children aboard was stoned on the road between
Silovo and Koretiste - all of these instances evince the
discrepancy between Pristina's formal pronouncements
and the reality on the ground.

Is it not a clear cause for concern and reaction by
the entire international community that Serbs continue
to be prevented from visiting their churches and
graveyards even during the major Christian holidays,
such as Christmas? If the international community is
not concerned and does not stop these prohibitions, it
is sending a clear message that it approves Pristina's
position that the Serbs are unwanted, that they will never
be able to be the masters of their own destiny, that there
are no conditions for their safe return, and that their
lives - let alone their property and security - will
never be safe.

The restitution of private property, which is one
of the most frequent violations of human rights that
internally displaced persons from Kosovo and Metohija
are facing, remains an unresolved problem, Over
40,000 requests for the restitution ofillegally seized and
usurped property have been submitted to the Kosovo
Property Agency, which is under the control of Pristina.
Out of the requests, some 97 per cent were submitted
by Serbs and other non-Albanians, while approximately
18,000 lawsuits relative to compensation for property
damage were filed in courts in the province.

It is therefore evident that the basic conditions for
the sustainable return of the displaced are not present,
with the lack of guarantees for the safety of persons and
the protection of property, the absence of the rule of
law and the widespread discrimination against and lack
of respect for the non-Albanian population and their
fundamental human and civil rights and freedoms.
The number of returnees to Pristina continues to be
discouragingly small, despite the fact that the creation
of conditions conducive to an unhindered and long-
term sustainable return is one of the main tasks of
UNMIK's mandate.

It is clear that UNMIK carries out this part of
its mission with difficulty, the key reason being the
absence political will of the majority community and
its unwavering intolerance of all other communities.
For example, a declaration aadopted by the local
Municipal Assembly in Suva Reka makes the return of
internally displaced persons to Musutiste contingent
upon the resolution of the question of missing persons
and upon an apology by the Republic of Serbia and
the Kosovar Serbs for crimes allegedly committed
during the conflicts of 1999. Of no value at all are the
Serbs' title deeds proving ownership of property or the
right to live in houses they have inherited from their
forefathers. Empty, too, are the Brussels Agreement
and the UNMIK mandate.

No one reacts to such wilful acts or the denial of
all rights to Serbian returnees. Failure to react to such
incidents is a form of tacit acceptance of, or even the
support for, the continuation of such practices, which is
neither in the spirit of Security Council resolutions nor
any other United Nations instruments and declarations,
in clear violation of the spirit of law and justice. We
therefore request that the question of minority rights
be accorded greater attention in the reports of the

Secretary-General on the work of UNMIK.

It is evident that systemic, legal, administrative,
institutional and political threats to the human rights
of the non-Albanian communities are widespread in
Kosovo and Metohija. Systemic double standards in
which members of non-Albanian communities have to
face numerous obstacles when trying to exercise their
rights - the most basic right to live without fear of
physical violence, the right to see perpetrators punished,
the right to return and stay in the place of return, the right
to employment and the right for children to receive an
education, the right to health protection, property rights
and religious rights - are the rule. As long as crimes
go unpunished and as long as the authorities in Pristina
carry out their designs without consequences and fail to
implement the provisions of the Brussels Agreement, a
dignified life in a multi-ethnic community will not be
possible. In that regard, I note the responsibility of the
United Nations.

In a word, it must not be allowed that the questions
of essential importance for a normal and dignified
life of Serbs and the members of other non-Albanian
communities be submerged in general statistics without
regard to the ethnic component that underlies all the
problems in Kosovo and Metohija. That path cannot be
acceptable when it is construed as proof of readiness to
accept the existing conditions without the intention of
making any substantial changes, proceeding from the
fact that enclaves have their own distinctive problems
and are worthy first and foremost of recognition by the
State and of greater efforts towards resolving numerous
everyday problems.

On this occasion, I would also like to reiterate that
we consider it necessary to introduce a new section in the
report with respect to northern Metohija, which would
focus on the situation of the minority communities
south of the Ibar River. Radicalization of the political
climate and the strengthening of the political, ethnic
and religious intolerance amplify the instability of the
security situation in Kosovo and Metohija.

A drastic increase in religious extremism, with
elements of terrorism, is evident in the province, as
are activities by radicalized extremists returning from
the battlefields of the Middle East. At the same time as
the political situation of Kosovar Albanians becomes
more polarized, a trend towards further escalation is
observable, with the constant threat of the Albanian
electorate redirecting its discontent to the members
of the non-Albanian communities, primarily the
Serbs, which requires heightened attention from the
international presence.

Guided by the interest of regional stability and
a vision for a different life in the region, and truly
dedicated to reconciliation, the rule of law and
democratic values, the Republic of Serbia is firmly
committed to maintaining the dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina, whose primary aim in the
solution of everyday problems of the people living
Kosovo and Metohija, with full respect for resolution
1244 (1999), which represents the basis and framework
for the resolution of these issues. However, in order for
the dialogue to be truly purposeful, it must be grounded
in the genuine desire to resolve the problems on the
basis of compromise, and it must not be abused as a
platform for the imposition of the interests of one side
alone, especially not for the purposes of promoting the
unilaterally declared independence of Kosovo, which
the Republic of Serbia will never recognize.

The solution to the question of Kosovo and Metohija
cannot be based on diktat and on the presentation ofa fait
accompli to the Republic of Serbia. The solution is only
possible through dialogue and by solutions acceptable
to all sides. The last thing we want is for the situation
in Kosovo and Metohija to pose a constant threat to the
stability and progress of both Serbia and the region,
for which reason we shall continue our dedicated work
on the process of normalization and responsibility and
regardless of the increasingly frequent manifestations
of the lack of constructiveness and the presence of
harmful unilateral actions by the other side.

There are numerous examples of unilateral steps
that Pristina has taken outside the agreements reached
within the dialogue, such as the attempts to join
international organizations. As a matter of fact, the
dialogue provides for the resolution of all issues - all
issues - through the dialogue between the two parties
with the facilitation of the European Union. Detrimental
is the habit of Pristina authorities to resort to unilateral
actions, with the support of some major Powers, the
sponsors of their attempts at independence, contrary
to the Brussels dialogue as the agreed framework for
resolving the outstanding issues. The continuity of this
regrettable practice is evinced by Kosovo's efforts tojoin
UNESCO, INTERPOL and other organizations, which
unnecessarily disturbs the atmosphere in which the
dialogue takes place and which is keeping us back from
what is supposed to be the primary goal for both sides,
namely, the stabilization of the situation in the region
and the quest for sustainable and mutually acceptable

solutions. Serbia, for its part, honours agreements.

Five years ago, I decided to join the dialogue with
the provisional authorities in Pristina in order to calm
the tensions and, above all, ensure a normal and safe life
for Serbs and the non-Albanian minorities in Kosovo
and Metohija. Serbia's experiences in the dialogue have
made me wonder if I did the right thing. Many forget
that, historically, Kosovo and Metohija is the territory
of Serbia, and not of the Albanians, who, according to
the Ottoman census, did not even live in the territories
in the fourteenth century.

It is forgotten that Kosovo Day, in which Kosovo as
a Serbian land was celebrated in the United States some
99 years ago. On that occasion, President Woodrow
Wilson sent a message of American goodwill towards
Serbia and the Serbian people to the Serbian community
of the United States. It is forgotten that the Serbs had
founded their State on the territory of Kosovo in the
Middle Ages, and that ever since the Serbian emperors
and kings built their churches and monasteries there,
most of which are inscribed on the UNESCO List of
World Heritage Sites as Serbian heritage. Unfortunately,
most of them are also now on the List of World Heritage
in Danger. The question arises: In danger from whom?
Certainly not from us, who seek to preserve our
Christian heritage.

It is also forgotten that Kosovo was populated
by Albanians most intensively only in the past two
centuries, especially during the dictatorship of the
Communist leader Enver Hoxha, from whom they fled
Albania to Kosovo and Metohija and were received by
Serbs in good faith as brothers. It is forgotten that a
unilateral declaration of statehood means nothing if
it is not the result of an agreement with the mother
country and people. That this is right is confirmed by
the constant pressure on Serbia to renounce its territory,
the land where it established its statehood almost 10
centuries ago.

We shall not do that; no one else would. In the
Council we have a guarantee in that certain permanent
members respect international law and support the
integrity and sovereignty of Serbia. We know that some
countries recognized so-called Kosovo out of their own
interests, but we also know that more than 70 per cent
of humankind does not share this View.

Perhaps I am speaking to some of those present
here in vain. We in Serbia say that it is futile to whisper
to the deaf or to wink at the blind. Those who do not
have such pain turn their backs on the pain of others. I
would never wish your children to live in the conditions
in which Serbian children in Kosovo and Metohija do.
I would not, because I believe in the right of a child to
grow up in peace, the parents' right to raise that child
in peace, and people's right to live out their life, come
the time, in the home of their ancestors. I would not,
because I believe in God.

I would like to be clear once again: Serbia will not
recognize Kosovo, whatever we might be offered in
return and whatever pressures we may be subjected to.
This has everything to do with the defence ofprinciples
and a permanent adherence to justice. Those who adhere
to principles and fight for justice are always right.

On behalf of the citizens of Serbia, I would like
to thank all of the countries that respect international
law and support our position. The political leaders of
Pristina should be aware of all of this so as finally to be
able to embark on reasonable negotiations and to keep
the promises they have made, just as their ancestors did.

On this occasion, I call on those States that have
not recognized the unilaterally declared independence
of Kosovo to resist the shameless pressure brought
to bear by the powerful and to remain true to their
principled respect for international law, the Charter of
the United Nations and the supreme authority of the
Security Council in the maintenance of international
peace and security. I call on those States that have
recognized Kosovo to reconsider their decision
and thereby contribute to efforts to find mutually
acceptable solutions.

Serbia is ready for agreements, but not for
blackmail. It is ready for talks, but not for ultimatums
or unilateral solutions. It is ready for the substantial
autonomy of Kosovo and Metohija, but never for an
independent State of Kosovo. And it is ready, in a
context of substantial autonomy, to guarantee all rights
to national communities, rights that, in the context
of Serbian laws and everyday life, exceed by far the
standards of most countries.

