Mr. Pleuger (Germany): First of all, I should like
to thank Mr. Kalomoh for the introduction of the
Secretary-General's report.

The Security Council mission to the West African
subregion concluded that a regional approach was
necessary in order effectively to address the continued
existence of regional factors of instability. Without
attempting to repeat the points that the representative of
the European Union - Ambassador Ryan of Ireland - is
going to make shortly, and which we fully support, I
should like briefly to touch upon five points with regard
to the regional approach which was dealt with in the
Secretary-General's report, in chapter III, more or less.

First, a regional approach requires a
multidimensional strategy. Poor governance; disrespect
for human rights; a culture of impunity; the illegal
exploitation of natural resources; poverty and
unemployment, especially of young people; the spread
of small arms; the use of child soldiers; and the use of
mercenaries all are cross-border issues. They all are
interrelated and cannot be treated in isolation from one
another. Without a comprehensive strategy that takes
into account the complex and diverse root causes of
conflict as well as their equally complex symptoms,
lasting peace in West Africa is difficult to envisage.

Secondly, a multidimensional strategy requires
integrated and coordinated efforts. The Governments in
the region, international organizations and mechanisms,
the international donor community and other
stakeholders must identify shared objectives and areas
of cooperation and undertake a division of
responsibilities. Only a coordinated approach can
reduce duplication of efforts and help to use the limited
resources available more efficiently.

Thirdly, cooperation between the United Nations
and the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) needs to be strengthened. We have said so
before, and it is worth repeating: the positive role
ECOWAS continues to play for peace and security in
West Africa cannot be overestimated. The mediation of
ECOWAS, at the highest political level, prevented a
major crisis after the military coup in Guinea-Bissau.
ECOWAS peacekeepers have played a key role in the
stabilization of cote d'Ivoire and in Liberia.

ECOWAS, in our view, needs the international
community's support to increase its capabilities with a
view to fully enabling it to take the lead in conflict-
prevention and mediation efforts in West Africa. The
United Nations is certain to benefit from ECOWAS'S
intricate knowledge of the specific problems of the
subregion.

In this respect, we look forward to the
recommendations of the joint mission to ECOWAS
headquarters of the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the European Commission.

Fourthly, cooperation among the United Nations
missions in West Africa must be further developed.
The United Nations peacekeeping missions in Liberia
and Sierra Leone, the United Nations Office in Guinea-
Bissau and the Mission in Cote d'Ivoire should develop
a coherent approach to regional and cross-border
issues. The potential of logistical and other assistance
should also be explored in order to benefit from the
effects of synergy and to make the best use of limited
peacekeeping resources. We welcome the steps taken
so far, and we hope that further efforts will be made.

Fifthly, political dialogue in the Mano River
Union peace process should be revitalized. We
encourage the Mano River Union States to revitalize
their cooperation. We welcome the first steps that have
been taken, such as the visits undertaken by President
Bryant to Guinea and to Sierra Leone. At the
administrative level, the Mano River Union secretariat
should be strengthened expeditiously in order to
provide a framework for enhanced cooperation. The
United Nations, as well as the donor community and
other interested parties, that is, the European Union,
should look into the possibility of accompanying and
supporting this process.

The stabilization of the West African subregion
requires the joint efforts of the United Nations system,
the donor community and the States in the region. Let
me stress at this juncture, however, that no efforts from
third parties and no amount of resources poured into
the region can substitute for the full and unequivocal
commitment of the national Governments of the region
to peace, development, respect for human rights, the
rule of law and democracy.

