Mr. Santos Maraver (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to begin by extending the condolences of the people and the Government of Spain to the families and countries affected by the plane crash of Ukraine International Airlines Flight 752. The Charter of the United Nations was the founding document of new international relations based on the shared purpose of preserving succeeding generations from the scourge of war and promoting fundamental human rights. In 2020, as we celebrate the seventy- fifth anniversary of our Organization, it is time for us to recall the obligations to which Member States voluntarily agree, without exception, under the Charter and before the rest of the international community. The exercise of those responsibilities requires a steadfast collective commitment to multilateralism. That is why I am grateful to Viet Nam for this opportunity to share ideas on the future we want and the United Nations we need. This debate is all the more important in the light of the escalation of tensions and dangerous situation in the Middle East and the Gulf in recent days, which we hope will be addressed through diplomatic means to prevent the further loss of life. For Spain, peace and security mean giving priority to political action, improving the effectiveness and consistency of peacekeeping operations, boosting preventive diplomacy and reinforcing a comprehensive approach to the three pillars of the United Nations. In that regard, Spain would like to pay tribute to and endorse the words of Secretary-General Guterres at the beginning of this meeting, as well as to thank Mary Robinson for her wise briefing (see S/PV.8699). To make further progress, we must continue to strengthen three areas: the working methods, mandates and partnerships of the Security Council. First, with regard to the working methods of the Council, I would like to thank Kuwait for the impetus that it gave in that area. I would also like to express our support to Ambassador Inga Rhonda King of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. It is a positive step to further institutionalize the monthly stocktaking meetings of the outgoing presidency, known as the Toledo format, which Spain promoted during its recent term in the Council. We attach great importance to the equitable distribution of the workload in the allocation of penholders between the elected and permanent members of the Council. We should seek synergies by giving priority to the appointment of co-penholders, which would bring together the Chairs of the sanctions committee and those responsible for the dossier on the country concerned. Secondly, the mandates of the Security Council should be a genuine road map - realistic, substantial and flexible. They have a direct impact on people, especially on the victims of conflict. They must include and prioritize key aspects, such as the protection of civilians, the women and peace and security dimension and attention to children in armed conflict. That approach must focus on defining the mandate of the Council, ensuring its adequate financing in the Fifth Committee, integrating the critical work of the Peacebuilding Commission into the stabilization phases and, lastly, implementing a coherent and articulated exit strategy. Thirdly and lastly, on partnerships, Spain recognizes the progress made and the great potential that lies ahead for cooperation among the United Nations, the European Union (EU) and the African Union in the areas of cooperative security and crisis management. Deeper and more effective triangular cooperation requires a continued framework of strategic partnership that, we hope, extends to all regional organizations to address all areas of common interest and fosters close relations between the Council and the African Union Peace and Security Council and the EU Political and Security Committee. I will conclude my statement by recalling that the intergovernmental negotiations on the reform of the Council will resume in January. Spain, a member of Uniting for Consensus, supports a flexible and balanced approach that takes into account proposals from other groups. We support a more democratic, representative and transparent Council. We are confident that the international system will thereby succeed in adapting to the challenges and changes of the future.
