Austria would like to thank Estonia for convening this open debate via video- teleconference on the protection of civilians. My country fully aligns itself with the statements made by the observer of the European Union and on behalf of the Group of Friends on the Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict. In our national capacity, we would like to highlight a few of our national priorities. As we all know, the current coronavirus disease pandemic has been changing the lives of people around the world. Regrettably, it has also compounded the numerous challenges that civilians in armed conflict have been facing for a long time and threatens the livelihoods of already vulnerable people. That is why Austria did not hesitate to join the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire. We call on all States Members of the United Nations and parties to conflicts to follow suit. As in previous years, we thank the Secretary-General for his excellent report (S/2020/366). His assessment therein that the past year brought another 12 months of suffering unfortunately reflects the dire reality on the ground. Independent journalism is one way of exposing this human suffering. It can also serve as a means for promoting accountability and advocating solutions. We are therefore concerned about the decline in the number of journalists and media workers reporting from conflict zones as a result of the high degree of insecurity and the rising number of targeted attacks against them. Austria would especially like to underline the report's call for new approaches to urban warfare. The fact that more than 90 per cent of the victims of the use of explosive weapons with wide area effects in populated areas (EWIPA) are civilians is unacceptable. To this end, in October 2019, Austria organized an international conference to raise awareness of the humanitarian impact of the use of such weapons and to start drafting a political declaration on the subject. The participation of 133 States, international organizations and civil society showed that there is interest in this topic. We look forward to the adoption of the declaration and the elaboration of a toolbox of good practices, to be followed up by workshops, including workshops directed at the armed forces. Another subject of great concern to Austria in this context is the fact that the rapid progress in artificial intelligence enables the development of autonomous weapons systems. Austria has developed the concept of human control as a central guideline, and in 2018 introduced a draft mandate for the start of negotiations on the Chemical Weapons Convention for a legally binding protocol that prohibits autonomous weapons systems, which are not subject to meaningful human control in critical functions. Despite many strong statements issued last year on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the protection-of-civilians agenda (see S/PV.8534), we continue to face myriad difficulties concerning the protection of civilians in armed conflicts. Women and girls still must endure horrendous acts of sexual and gender-based violence, and they remain particularly vulnerable in various conflict settings. Civilians in armed conflict should not be considered mere victims; more important, their contribution in peacebuilding and humanitarian relief efforts should be acknowledged. In this regard, we condemn the numerous acts of violence and intimidation against women and youth peacebuilders, human rights defenders and humanitarian first responders in armed conflicts. The twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) and the fifth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 2250 (2015), both occurring this year, can serve as a reminder and a chance to link the valuable work on women and peace and security and youth, peace and security more closely with the protection-of- civilians agenda. Furthermore, Austria welcomes the adoption, in 2019, of resolution 2475 (2019), on the situation of persons with disabilities in armed conflict. We encourage the Security Council to take the needs of persons with disabilities into account throughout its entire agenda. Moreover, we cannot lose sight of the specific situation of minorities or their needs for protection and assistance. We have unfortunately witnessed throughout history that discrimination and prejudice against minorities lie at the root of many conflicts around the world. In his call to action on human rights at the opening of the Human Rights Council in March, the Secretary-General emphasized that a new agenda for human rights must also focus on the protection of minorities against any form of discrimination. In Austria's view, it is essential that the protection of the rights of minorities be adequately incorporated in the overall United Nations agenda for the prevention of conflicts. As the protection of civilians has in recent years become an integral part of many United Nations peacekeeping missions, we need to make sure that peacekeepers are well prepared to fulfil their protection-of-civilians mandates, and we highlight the importance of disseminating international humanitarian law, particularly to the armed forces. In the light of this, Austria continues to offer United Nations- certified courses aimed at creating better awareness of the protection of civilians at the operational level. These courses include several topics pertinent to the women and peace and security agenda. We repeat our call for full compliance with international humanitarian law. The strict and consistent implementation of the principles of international humanitarian law remains a necessity in all conflict settings. Austria continues to be a strong supporter of the intergovernmental discussions on strengthening compliance with international humanitarian law. We believe that accountability and the fight against impunity for violations of international human rights law and international humanitarian law are central to ensuring lasting peace. We wish to highlight the important role that the International Criminal Court (ICC) plays in that regard. In December 2019, the Assembly of States Parties of the ICC adopted an amendment to article 8 of the Rome Statute concerning the crime of starvation of civilians in non-international armed conflict. We believe that this amendment strengthens the Rome Statute system and the protection it provides. Finally, Austria welcomes the opportunity to contribute to this open video- teleconference by submitting this written statement. However, we hope to see the Security Council return to its full functions as soon as circumstances permit, and we look forward to resuming the delivery of oral statements at the next open debate on the protection of civilians.
