Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): The Chinese Government has always strongly
opposed and condemned acts of terrorism in all forms, for
they not only endanger innocent lives and social stability
but also pose a threat to international security. We were
deeply shocked by the terrorist assassination attempt on
President Mubarak of Egypt in the capital of Ethiopia on
26 June 1995 and believe that those involved in that act
must be brought to justice.

Following the attempted assassination of the
Egyptian President, Ethiopia, Egypt, other countries in the
region and the Organization of African Unity (OAU) have
made numerous efforts to learn the truth, apprehend
suspects and resolve disputes arising from this matter.
The Government of Sudan has also openly condemned
terrorism and has expressed its readiness to cooperate
with the OAU and the other countries concerned to settle
this question properly. The Central Organ of the OAU
Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management and
Resolution has held two high-level meetings during which
relevant decisions were adopted to condemn this terrorist
act and to urge the countries concerned to apprehend and
extradite suspects. We appreciate and support these efforts
made by the parties concerned and by the OAU.

We sincerely hope that the OAU, with the support of
the Security Council, will continue to play its proper,

 

important role in bringing about an appropriate solution to
this matter. The main purpose of the draft resolution before
us is also to demonstrate the Council's support for and
cooperation with the OAU in this regard.

In addressing this act of terrorism, as in other
international disputes, the Council should observe the
purposes and principles of the Charter, act strictly according
to the norms of international law, and make its own
judgement in a fair and objective manner by respecting the
facts and giving due importance to the evidence. The
Council should be careful, serious and prudent when taking
any action. Therefore, we have reservations about that part
of paragraph 4 (b) that calls upon the Sudan to desist from
engaging in activities of assisting, supporting and
facilitating terrorist activities. As a Chinese saying goes,
"Listen to all sides and you will be enlightened; otherwise
you will be benighted." The Council should also listen fully
to the views of the parties concerned and of the OAU, and
should allow them to play their respective roles to the
fullest possible extent.

Having stated the position of China, the Chinese
delegation will vote in favour of the draft resolution before
us.

