Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico expressed yesterday, and it reiterates today, its
most vigorous condemnation of the Israeli army's
aerial attack on 23 July in Gaza, which resulted
tragically in the loss of many innocent civilian lives
and more than a hundred injured, mostly women and
children. Israel has gained nothing by this action, nor
has it avoided or prevented anything. On other
occasions Mexico has just as strongly repudiated the
terrorist acts committed by Palestinian groups in Israel
in which innocent civilians, including children, also
died. My country deplores the continued acts of terror
and reprisal which inflict unspeakable suffering on the
civilian population and scar present and future
generations through the horrors and the scourge of war.

In reaffirming our most profound dismay at the
vicious circle of violence in which Middle East is
trapped, we endorse the appeal of the Secretary-
General to the effect that the parties should
immediately take all necessary measures to restore
security conditions for the civilian population, in both
Israel and Palestine. Mexico concurs with the joint
statement of the "quartet" that emphasizes the urgent
need to address the humanitarian situation in Palestine.
We appeal again to the parties to refrain from resorting
to practices contrary to international humanitarian law
and urge them to comply fully with the provisions of
the fourth Geneva Convention relative to the Protection
of Civilian Persons in Times of War, of 1949.

The acts of violence, reprisal and mutual
provocation we deplore today are happening at the
same time as endeavours are being made to restore the
bilateral dialogue and promote international initiatives
to find a long-term substantive solution to the problem.

Mexico believes that military actions as well as
terrorist attacks generate greater violence in the Middle
East and undermine the valuable initiatives and tireless
efforts of the international community to get the peace
process started again and end the conflict. We call on
the parties to comply, without delay, with the
provisions of resolution 1397 (2002), whereby the
Security Council called for immediate cessation of all
acts of violence, including all acts of terrorism,
provocation, incitement and destruction.

A lasting peace process in the region must take
into account, simultaneously, the various aspects of the
conflict. Political negotiations, security arrangements,
implementation of an immediate humanitarian
assistance plan and building of Palestinian institutions
should be the most important elements in building the
desired peace.

We reaffirm support for increasing the efforts of
the international community to restart the peace
process in the Middle East based on Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). We reaffirm our
support for the concept of a region in which two States,
Israel and Palestine, would live side by side within
secure and recognized borders, as provided for in
resolution 1397 (2002).

