President Compaore (spoke in French): Today's
Security Council meeting is addressing a major issue
concerning current challenges in the area of
non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament. This is a
timely meeting in the light of the numerous enormous
potential risks for the planet's destruction. I would
therefore like to convey to you, Mr. President, as well
as to the entire delegation of the United States, my
gratitude for having taking the initiative to hold this
debate.

International security requires a cessation of
nuclear tests and the elimination of all nuclear arsenals.
In that regard, Burkina F aso calls for strict adherence
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons. The irreversible and devastating effects of
nuclear weapons should be a source of additional
motivation for all of us.

Collective security entails respect by all for
international norms and the values of justice and
equity. It also requires that we consider the following
issues in depth: How are we to dissuade States from
renouncing the acquisition of weapons of mass
destruction when other countries are developing
nuclear programmes and carrying out tests? How can
we contemplate a civilian nuclear programme without
causing suspicion and mistrust? How can we prevent
nuclear material from falling into careless and
irresponsible hands? The possession of and illicit
trafficking in nuclear, biological and chemical weapons
by non-State actors and terrorist groups pose a real
threat for all humankind.

It is therefore important to combine and intensify
our efforts to ensure the effective implementation of
the measures that have been adopted to combat this
scourge. Our collective responsibility is clearly
involved here. We must fully assume that responsibility
courageously and with perseverance. Mobilization by
all States, regional and subregional organizations, civil
society and opinion-makers is essential. The fair,
transparent and responsible implementation of
resolutions will help to reduce antagonism and tension
and, above all, to restore trust between all countries.
Likewise, more rational use of such instruments and
mechanisms as the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-
Ban Treaty and the Conference on Disarmament will
contribute to making the world a safer place.

Mr. President, your dedication to building a world
free from nuclear dangers and the process begun
between the United States of America and the Russian
Federation augur well for the success of the ongoing
negotiations on reducing the nuclear arsenals of both
countries.

The establishment of the International Atomic
Energy Agency responded to the need to protect the
world from the harmful use of the atom and to benefit
from nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. Now more
than ever, we must commit ourselves to that goal,
support the Agency and make civilian nuclear
energy- to which all States have a right - an
effective tool for development. That is the will that
justified the 1996 adoption of the Treaty of Pelindaba,
establishing a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa. In
the context of the energy crisis, African States should
thus be given an opportunity to gain access to nuclear
energy for civilian purposes.

The question of nuclear non-proliferation and
disarmament is at the heart of the problems related to
the maintenance of international peace and security.
The Security Council has a particular role to play in

that regard. In accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, it must assume that role with
objectivity and effectiveness.

Mr. President, aware of the force of your
convictions, your personal commitment to
multilateralism, your opinions and your courageous
initiatives on the problems of disarmament, I remain
convinced that you will be able to assume the
leadership necessary for the implementation of the
outcome of our work. I can assure you of the full
cooperation of Burkina Faso in that regard.

