Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): I would like to
thank President Theodor Meron and Prosecutor Serge
Brammertz for their useful and informative briefings
on the work of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals.
As this is the first open meeting on this topic since
the closure of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) at the end of last year, we would
also like to once again express our sincere appreciation
to the ICTY and its staff for the invaluable contributions
to international criminal justice and the development
of international law. We also appreciate the efforts
made, both by the ICTY and the Mechanism, to ensure
a smooth and efficient transition of the functions and
services of the Tribunal to the Mechanism.

The Mechanism will continue to fulfil and complete
the important work of the International Criminal
Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda.
Both Tribunals have played a key role in the fight
against impunity for the gravest crimes of concern to
the international community, such as genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes. They were both
forerunners of the International Criminal Court, which
is the only permanent, treaty-based international court
with jurisdiction in the fight against impunity today. In
that regard, we repeat the importance of ensuring the
universality of the Rome Statute.

In order for the Mechanism to complete its functions
and to prevent any delays in the implementation of
its mandate, it is essential that the Mechanism has
the required resources to deliver on its mandate. It is
also imperative that its independence and integrity be
upheld. The Mechanism has made important headway
since our previous briefing in December 2017 (see S/PV.8120). The continued development of the ongoing
cases, including the completion of the case against
Vojislav Seselj, demonstrates the progress of the
Mechanism. There has also been significant progress in
relation to gender-related matters. We welcome the fact
that the Registry is now reviewing how policies on the
support and the protection of victims and witnesses can
better reflect gender-sensitive and gender-appropriate
approaches. We also applaud the achievement by the
Mechanism of gender parity at the level of professional
staffwithin the Organization, as well as the appointment
of focal points, including for gender issues.

We note with satisfaction that the practice of
judges exercising their functions remotely has worked
well, having been described as efficient and innovative
in the evaluation report (S/2018/206) of the Office of
Internal Oversight Services (OIOS). We also welcome
the work to revise the Code of Professional Conduct
for the Judges of the Tribunal (see S/2016/976, annex, enclosure VII), which is an important element of
ensuring judicial accountability. We further note the
efforts made towards the transition to a digital archive.
The report on the evaluation carried out by the OIOS
made a number of important recommendations for
the Mechanism going forward. We are pleased to see
that the Mechanism has already begun to implement
those recommendations.

If the Mechanism is to succeed in delivering on
the mandate that we have given it, all Member States
must cooperate fully and provide full and unequivocal
support for its work. In that regard, Sweden is one of
the countries that has received convicted individuals
for the enforcement of sentences.

We note the concerns expressed by Rwanda and
underscore the importance of continued work to
promote communciation and cooperation with the
Government of Rwanda. We welcome the Mechanism's
work in assisting national jurisdictions that prosecute
international crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia
and in Rwanda. We call on Member States to assist the
Mechanism in the arrest of the eight fugitives indicted
by the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda who
remain at large.

Finally, I want to join other representatives
in expressing our appreciation to Peru for its able
leadership as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals. We look forward to continuing
to work closely with the Group going forward.

