Mr. Al-Ni'mah (Qatar) (interpretation from Arabic):
I am pleased to extend to you, Sir, my delegation's
congratulations on your accession to the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of May. I am deeply
convinced that your well-known experience and competence
will enable the Council to achieve complete success in its
consideration of the item on its agenda for this meeting.

I should also like to pay a tribute to your predecessor,
His Excellency the Permanent Representative of the Czech
Republic, for the strenuous efforts which he made in
guiding the Council's work last month and which deserve
our great esteem and appreciation.

I should emphasize at the outset that we are
participating in this debate because we sincerely wish to see
the peace process in the Middle East reach a successful
conclusion. We want to work for the culmination of this
process in the achievement of its goal, namely, the
establishment of a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in
the Middle East. If such a peace is to be achieved and
maintained, the question of Al-Quds Al-Sharif, the Holy
City of Jerusalem, must be solved.

There is a lasting and indisputable historical reality -
namely, that Al-Quds, an Arab city, is an integral part of
the Palestinian and Arab territory occupied by Israel since
1967.
This is not the first time the Council has met - and
it will perhaps not be the last - to consider the question of
the Holy City of Jerusalem, as well as the measures
adopted by Israel to change the demographic, geographic
and urban nature of the City of Al-Quds Al-Sharif, and
also to consider the continuing Israeli practices that
contravene resolutions of the General Assembly and
Security Council - and in particular Security Council
resolution 476 (1980). Today, 15 years after the adoption
of that resolution, we see that Israel has not respected it,
nor any of the other relevant resolutions. In the face of
such lack of respect, we wonder where the determination
of the Security Council is. What measures must be
adopted in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
United Nations Charter to ensure full respect for that
resolution? We have seen the Security Council apply
those provisions to other States that have not respected its
resolutions. That is why today we are wondering whether
there is not a double standard in the criteria adopted by
the Security Council when dealing with international
issues, or when dealing with States that are violating
resolutions and international norms and rules.

On 13 September 1993, we witnessed a new dawn
in relations between the Arabs and Israel in general, and
between the Palestinians and Israel in particular, when the
Declaration of Principles between the Government of
Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO)
was signed. That Declaration set forth specific measures
allowing for a peaceful settlement of the Palestinian-
Israeli conflict. In the Declaration, the two parties agreed
to defer the negotiations concerning Jerusalem to the
second and later stage of the negotiations. They agreed on
the establishment of a precise timetable for such
negotiations. The Israeli party committed itself to
recognizing the importance of Palestinian institutions in
the eastern part of Jerusalem and to preserving those
institutions during the transitional period. But events have
shown us that that party did not respect its commitments,
though it had entered into a signed agreement guaranteed
by the two States that were sponsors of the peace process
in the Middle East. Indeed, the Israeli party adopted
measures to confiscate Arab land in Jerusalem and to
establish settlements and build housing there for new
settlers who had never been residents of the Holy City.

The Israeli authorities also closed off the city and
refused access to the Palestinians, who are the legitimate
holders to title. Not content with the confiscation of Arab

 

land in Jerusalem, the Israeli side then went so far as to
carry out excavations, which today affect the very
foundations of the Al-Aqsa Mosque in the Haram Al-Sharif,
as well as the dome of the Church of the Sepulchre and
other Islamic Holy Places. In official statements, the State
and the Government of Qatar have condemned all these
Israeli measures as flagrant violations of United Nations
resolutions and of international instruments and rules. They
are contrary to the spirit and the letter of the Palestinian-
Israeli Declaration of Principles and undermine the Arab-
Israeli peace process, thereby further compromising it and
dooming it to failure.

At this important stage of the peace process in the
Middle East, we call on the Security Council to shoulder its
responsibilities as laid down by the United Nations Charter.
We therefore urge the Council to adopt categorical and
decisive measures and to state firmly that it will not allow
Israel to continue violating its resolutions and challenging
the international community, and also to forbid Israel to go
against the conscience of the world and the world's
responsibility to the Holy City of Jerusalem.

We wish to see the Council adopt a binding resolution
compelling Israel to reverse its decision to confiscate Arab
land, to renounce its plans for establishing settler colonies
and to dismantle the settlements already established. Israel
must also stop closing the city to its inhabitants and stop all
its excavations, that pose a threat to the foundations of the
Al-Aqsa mosque. The Council should also insist on the
non-recognition of any change made by Israel, as the
occupying Power, in the legal status, demographic
composition or physical character of the city of Jerusalem.
The annexation of the Holy City of Jerusalem, particularly
East Jerusalem, and Israel's proclamation of Jerusalem as
its capital must be resolutely rejected as flagrant violations
of international resolutions and the norms of international
law.

The content of the draft resolution before the Council
is based on the decision taken by the Ministerial Council of
the Arab League at its special session, on 6 May 1995. It
is intended to guarantee the continuation of the peace
process and the attainment of the goals established on the
basis of international legality, Security Council resolutions
252 (1968), 267 (1969), 465 (1980), 476 (1980) and 478
(1980) and the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization.

The draft resolution before the Council is based on the
need to adopt security measures to protect Palestinian Arab
land, both private and public, by underlining that the
Council must take into account the unique status of the
city of Jerusalem. We call upon the members of the
Council to vote in favour of the draft resolution, and we
are convinced that the Security Council is in a position to
shoulder its responsibilities and adopt the measures we
are counting on to cope with this threat.

This is necessary because the measures taken by
Israel will end up sabotaging the peace process. If we do
not take matters in hand, the flames will continue to blaze
until the peace process fails. The Council would be
neglecting its duties if it did not adopt this draft
resolution. The Council must make the necessary efforts
to support Member States.

Today we call upon members of the Security
Council to stand in opposition to all those measures that
are contrary to international agreements confirmed by
international will. The Council should heed that will and
not shrink from its task. It must not procrastinate or
ignore its commitments to its great mission. Today's
events are far too serious. The Council must head off the
process that is under way and reaffirm the will, the right
and the aspirations of all States.

We believed that, thanks to the good offices of all
sides, we could see a glimmer of hope in the Middle East.
We must see to it that that hope is not extinguished.
Would it not be better for us to inject some confidence
into peaceful intentions so that they can grow? Should not
the proponents of peace continue to work towards
overcoming all obstacles? Should they not tend to the
peace process so that the seeds of peace planted by
international will can flower into a just and lasting peace
in the Middle East?

One may wish not to listen, but one cannot be deaf
to the facts. God himself made the Holy City of
Jerusalem the guardian of the secret of His call - a call
that reveals to the believer the secret of His existence and
to the believer's conscience the secret of the Creator. God
imbued Jerusalem with the essence of its eternity.
Everything had its beginning in Jerusalem. From
Jerusalem sprang faith. There we have seen the human
soul rid itself of all impurities and rise up. We have seen
it cleansed of all impurities. If we allow it to rise even
higher, it can lead us to absolute goodness and serve as
a symbol of our greatest values and purity itself.

The city of Jerusalem has for centuries welcomed
prophets and apostles. Peace be with them, one and all.

 

Jerusalem, a city created by God, is an integral whole. It
has always been a pearl. From the very beginning God
made it a place for goodness. All the prophets passed
through Jerusalem. From Jerusalem cries rose up to God.
Jerusalem reached its objective. It became a reality, not an
illusion. God made it one of the two kiblahs. It is a torch
of piety. From Jerusalem the word of God issued. That
reality will continue to endure, despite all the lies told
about it.

Jerusalem has always been a sacred symbol. This is a
reality that will continue to resound in the conscience of all
Muslims as long as they live. That reality will continue to
live and to resound like the vibrant voice of the Muzzein.

The Holy City of Jerusalem is a city of peace. How
shall we make peace without Jerusalem?

