Ms. Gonzalez Laya (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I address the Security Council for the first time as Minister for Foreign Affairs, European Union and Cooperation of Spain - a country that is today a robust democracy, a State governed by the rule of law and scrupulous respect for human rights. However, Spain is also aware that, barely one generation ago, it suffered a bloody civil war that led to a long dictatorship. Even after it became a democracy, the country suffered the ravages of terrorism. We firmly believe in our model, which is based on democratic transition and is embodied in the 1978 Constitution. It was a true experiment in transitional justice put into practice. However, we recognize that we must continue to respond to the demands of citizens and civil society. Our experience shows us that no country is immune to the enormous risk of hate speech and fearmongering, which can easily degenerate into human rights violations, the rejection of the principles and values of democracy and, ultimately, conflict. That is why Spain's transitional justice efforts are both internal and international. At the national level, we adopted the Historical Memory Law in 2007 in order to leave no one behind by listening to the testimony of victims and preserving their memory so that they are not forgotten. At the international level, Spain is firmly committed to transitional justice processes around the world. In the 1980s, Spain supported the efforts of the Contadora Group that led to the Esquipulas I and II Agreements. Today Spain works with the United Nations to support the transitional justice process in Colombia. We must repeatedly affirm that peace and justice are not contradictory realities. There can be no sustainable peace without justice, while justice cannot be achieved without truth, accountability and recognition for the dignity of victims and reparations for them. In that connection, I would like to highlight three elements. The first is the fight against impunity. The international community has developed a valuable instrument to achieve that objective - the Rome Statute. That is why we believe that the members of the Council must cooperate with the International Criminal Court. We must strengthen the Court, revitalize it to make it more efficient and broaden its base - the number of States parties - if we are to enshrine the universality of justice. The process beginning this year to elect the new prosecutor and six judges gives us a perfect opportunity to do so. Secondly, the dignity of victims must be respected. Caring for the victims of terrorism and of repression against the defenders of democracy is a priority for my Government. Not only do they deserve recognition and reparation, but their testimony is also an extremely effective preventive tool. That is why we believe that the Council should take into account the synergies among the agendas on the protection of civilians, on children and armed conflict and on women and peace and security. The role of women is essential in any transitional process. Their inclusion must be cross- cutting and applied to decision-making centres. In that connection, Spain, together with Finland, has undertaken to achieve that objective by 2025 through Commitment 2025. Thirdly and lastly, the truth and guarantees of non-repetition are key. I urge the members of the Council to bear that in mind in defining the mandates of peace missions or of Special Representatives of the Secretary-General. This year our Organization, which strives to achieve universal peace and which Spain supports unwaveringly, turns 75. Much remains to be done, but we know the way. We must continue to believe in multilateralism because it alone can consolidate peace in those countries where that has yet to be achieved.
