Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): First of all, I would
like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
very responsible duties of the presidency of the
Security Council in the month of January. I would also
like to wish you and your team every success. We
would also like to warmly welcome the newly elected
members of the Council and wish them further creative
inspiration.

We would like to join previous speakers in
expressing our thanks to Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno for his, as usual, very comprehensive update
on the latest developments in Kosovo and activities of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). It was with great regret that we
learned about the decision of Mr. Hans Haekkerup to
leave the post of Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in the province. We wish him every
success in his new endeavours. We hope that
Mr. Haekkerup's successor, Mr. Michael Steiner, will
bring the necessary inspiration in order to carry out the
aims of the international community in Kosovo, and we
pledge our full cooperation with the new Head of the
United Nations Mission in the province.

Ukraine supports the statement made by the
representative of Spain on behalf of the European
Union. We share the general vision of the situation on
the ground and endorse the key messages brought out
by our European colleagues.

The two months that have passed since the
general elections in Kosovo have been marked by
important results in UNMIK activities. As was outlined
in the report of the Secretary-General and the
presentation of Mr. Guehenno, concerted efforts were
made to ensure the stable work of the newly elected
Kosovo Assembly.

My delegation is particularly satisfied with the
prudent approach taken by UNMIK to promote the
political and power-sharing dialogue in the framework
of the Parliament, as well as to ensure the security of
its members and staff. We support UNMIK's internal
adjustments for handing over powers to the provisional
institutions of self-government and the intensive steps
made to restructure the Mission and transform the
former Joint Interim Administration Structure.

Of no less significance is the implementation of
other UNMIK priorities, in particular further steps to
create the conditions necessary for the sustainable
return of internally displaced persons and refugees. In
this context, we welcome the developments in the
Osojane valley, where the first phase of an integrated
programme to ensure the sustainability of returns was
completed in December.

My delegation also notes UNMIK's activities
aimed at reducing ethnically targeted crimes and its
success in developing the Kosovo Police Service.
Progress in the fight against terrorism and organized
crime deserves our appreciation as well.

Two months after the parliamentary elections, a
difficult test for the Kosovo leaders has appeared.
Concerned about the recent failures to finalize the
composition of the presidency and to elect the
President of Kosovo, Ukraine calls upon all political
forces to streamline these efforts, thus proving their
readiness to contribute to the democratic
transformation of the region. We believe that it is not in
the interest of any Kosovo political force to block these
processes, thus discouraging hopes of ensuring
productive work of the Assembly.

Another Vital issue is the security conditions in
the region, which remains a matter of grave concern.
My delegation strongly condemns the brutal murder of
one of the members of the Assembly, who was shot to
death on 17 January. It is our firm belief that any acts
of violence in the province, as well as any threats
directed against members of the democratically elected
Parliament, are absolutely inadmissible and should not
be tolerated. We believe that UNMIK will do its utmost
to apprehend the assailants.

From our standpoint, further progress in the
political recovery process of Kosovo will depend on
three major factors. The first is that there will be no
visible breakthrough unless the democratically elected
leaders take their own share of responsibility for
political and economic transformation in the province,
while exercising their authority, in strict observance of
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) and the
Constitutional Framework for Provisional Self-
Government.

Secondly, we share the view of the Secretary-
General that the next phase of UNMIK's activities will
require the strong commitment of the international
community. However, in our opinion, further
international involvement in the situation in Kosovo
should be based on a single and clear political strategy
that has to be determined by the Security Council.

Thirdly, lasting political recovery in Kosovo can
be achieved only through enhanced and strengthened
dialogue between Yugoslav and provincial authorities.
We believe that such cooperation will give a necessary
impetus to inter-ethnic reconciliation in the whole
region.

