Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): Allow
me to thank the Acting Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Fisher, for his briefing.

The security situation in Haiti has been stable
of late. The development and reconstruction process
has moved forward. China welcomes the Haitian
Government's successful hosting of an intersessional
meeting of the Caribbean Community in February.
At the same time, Haiti faces political, economic and
humanitarian difficulties and still has much to do to
return to the path of development. To that end, Haiti
needs the international community's support.

We hope that the Haitian Government and the
international community, as well as the Haitian
political parties, will pursue the democratic process
through reconciliation so as to guarantee the smooth
conduct of free, fair and credible elections by 2014 and
to consolidate the country's acheivements to date.

Hurricane Sandy ravaged Haiti, but the country
is also encountering difficulties in improving living
conditions, creating employment and promoting
sustainable development. We call on the international
community to pay close attention to the reconstruction
efforts in Haiti, uphold its aid commitments, and improve
the effectiveness of assistance so as to contribute
constructively to the rebuilding and development of the
country.

China supports the Secretary-General's initiative
to eradicate cholera in Haiti. We welcome the efforts
and contributions of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti to peace and stability in the country. We
note the consolidation plan 2013-2016 for MINUSTAH,
submitted by the Secretary-General, and we hope that
MINUSTAH will continue to carry out its Security
Council mandate by helping Haiti to move forward
with the political process, maintaining the security and
stability of the country, and bolstering the rule of law
and institutional stability.

Regarding the Mission's drawdown, we need to
hear the views of the various parties involved so as to
better guide this process.

