Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Ms. Valerie Amos, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator; Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations;
Ms. Navanethem Pillay, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights; and Mr. Yves
Daccord, Director General of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, for their respective
statements.

China is gravely concerned about civilian
casualties in armed conflict. We condemn all acts that
deliberately target civilians. I wish to emphasize the
following three points concerning the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.

First, the protection of civilians in armed conflict
must be strengthened in line with the Fourth Geneva
Convention, international humanitarian law, and the
principle of respect for State sovereignty, political
independence and territorial integrity as enshrined in
the United Nations Charter. National Governments
bear the primary responsibility for protecting their own
citizens. In a situation of armed conflict, the
international community can assist in the protection of
civilians, but such assistance should not substitute for
the responsibilities and obligations of the national
Government concerned.

Secondly, in strengthening the protection of
civilians, attention should be paid to addressing the
root causes and symptoms of conflict. The deployment
of United Nations peacekeeping operations alone
cannot offer a fundamental solution to the protection of
civilians. The Security Council should prioritize
preventive diplomacy in order to prevent and mitigate
conflict. In a volatile conflict situation, the Council
should commit to pushing for a strong and viable
political process to achieve lasting peace and stability
at an early date. The Council must focus on helping the
affected countries to expedite security sector reform in
order to build professional military and police forces
and provide effective protection for their own citizens.

Thirdly, in order to ensure the effective protection
of civilians, the various United Nations bodies and
agencies must ensure a synergetic division of labour,
with a clear focus on the effective implementation of
existing commitments. The protection of civilians in
armed conflict involves the development and evolution
of international humanitarian law, which requires
in-depth discussions with the broader membership with
a view to reaching consensus. United Nations
peacekeeping operations are deployed in varying
circumstances and conditions. Their priorities should
be tailored to local specificities. The one-size-fits-all
approach will not work.

