I would like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his final briefing, and especially his tireless efforts and dedication over more than five years in his capacity as the United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process. I wish him further success in his new capacity at a very crucial juncture for Libya. As the year 2020 comes to an end, we regrettably find ourselves in the same worrisome situation. Month after month, quarter after quarter, we receive reports that little progress has been made in the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016). Despite some recent positive signals in the cooperation between the Palestinian Authority and the Israeli Government, we have seen continued violations of most parts of the resolution. The expansion of settlements has been continuing at an alarming rate throughout the entire year. Notably, some 50 per cent of those settlement units were located in outlying areas deep inside the occupied West Bank, impeding the contiguity of a future Palestinian State. We are particularly concerned about the plan for the construction of about 3,500 units in the strategic location of E-1. If implemented, it would significantly undermine the chances of establishing a viable and contiguous Palestinian State as part of the negotiated two-State solution. We would like to reiterate our position that settlements in the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, have no legal validity and constitute a violation of international law and relevant United Nations resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016). We join many other States Members of the United Nations in calling on the Government of Israel to immediately cease the advancement of all settlement activities. We are also troubled by the continued demolitions and seizures of Palestinian structures and properties in the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem. Last month, the occupying Power carried out the most extensive demolition in the West Bank in years, not even sparing schools and basic infrastructure facilities. Decade-long petitions and appeals against the demolitions continued to be rejected. We call on Israeli authorities to end those activities immediately, in accordance with resolution 2334 (2016). While the situation has not escalated for the last few months, we remain concerned by the violence perpetrated throughout the occupied Palestinian territory, including clashes between Palestinians and Israeli security forces and settler-related violence. The daily acts of violence threaten to widen the gap between the parties and erode the hope for negotiations and dialogue. We call upon the parties to refrain from taking actions and making statements that could complicate the situation and hamper negotiation and dialogue. We also welcome all initiatives for international cooperation that may help achieve a just, sustainable and long-lasting solution to the Middle East peace process on the basis of international law and relevant United Nations resolutions. We remain gravely concerned about the difficult living conditions and the humanitarian situation of millions of Palestinian people, in particular women and children, throughout the occupied Palestinian territory, including in the Gaza Strip. We would also like to reiterate our strong support for the work undertaken by United Nations agencies, particularly the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, and by the United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process. In that regard, we welcome the recent launching of the humanitarian response plan to address the humanitarian needs of Palestinians in 2021, and we urge members of the international community to fulfil its commitments and provide further support for the implementation of the plan. In conclusion, Viet Nam reiterates its unwavering support for the legitimate struggle of the Palestinian people and their inalienable rights. We strongly support the two-State solution, including the establishment of the State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, peacefully coexisting with the State of Israel and with secure and internationally recognized borders on the basis of the pre-1967 lines, in accordance with international law, the Charter of the United Nations and relevant United Nations resolutions, in particular resolution 2334 (2016).
