Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania):
Mr. President, I thank your delegation for arranging
this public meeting on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. I also thank Mr. Jan Egeland, Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, for his
defining statement in today's debate. In addition, we
thank Mr. Jacques Forster, Vice-President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, for his
insightful statement on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.

As we mark the fifth year since the adoption of
the landmark resolution 1296 (2000) on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, we need to take stock of
the achievements accomplished and the challenges we
still face in our endeavour to devise a more
comprehensive and coordinated framework for the
protection of and assistance to civilians in armed
conflict, in order to fill existing gaps. We welcome the
report of the Secretary-General on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict (S/2005/740). The
recommendations provided in the report warrant our
careful study.

Despite the decline in the number of wars, the
number of civilians affected by conflict has continued
to increase, with graphic humanitarian consequences.
We note with concern the change in warfare strategies,
which deliberately target civilians or use civilians to
achieve military objectives. The impact of conflict on
civilians has gone beyond collateral damage to
calculated maximum damage to civilians, including
hostage-taking, as we have witnessed in terrorist acts.
Armed conflicts also paralyse and deny to civilians
their basic means of livelihood by destroying
infrastructure, disrupting economic and social activities
and causing malnutrition, the outbreak and spread of
diseases, human suffering and humiliation, all of which
exacerbate poverty.

We are deeply concerned by the increase in acts
of violence and abuses committed against civilians -
particularly women and children - in situations of
armed conflict, in violation of international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law. The
pattern of those violations constitutes a threat to
international peace and security. We urge all parties to
conflicts to respect the relevant international laws and
conventions.

One of the grave violations of international
humanitarian law committed against civilians in
conflict situations is the use of sex as a weapon of war.
In that regard, it has been mostly women and girls that
have borne the brunt of the abuses. While we are
encouraged that sexual abuses in conflict situations are
now regarded as war crimes, perpetrators need to be
exposed and prosecuted expeditiously without the
constraints of political expediency.

We reiterate the need to end impunity and urge
that all those responsible for genocide, war crimes,
crimes against humanity and violations of humanitarian
law be brought to justice. In that regard, we urge that
priority be placed on assistance in the restoration of
national judicial systems in countries emerging from
conflict.

The protection of civilians is the primary
responsibility of Governments. When Governments fail
or are unable to offer such protection, we should have a
collective responsibility to protect humanity.
Governments must ensure respect for the rule of law,
human rights and democracy.

Human rights and democracy are essential. We
thus call upon States to ratify all instruments relating to
the protection of civilians and to implement the various
Security Council resolutions regarding the protection
of civilians. Technical assistance may, however, be
required to assist developing countries, at their request,
to develop such capacities and competencies.
In that regard, we need to further develop the
concept of the responsibility to protect. Our stance on
that responsibility is inspired by the following
statement by the President of Tanzania, His Excellency
Benjamin Mkapa:

"States must firmly be placed on notice that the
humanity we all share demands that we should
collectively have an interest in its promotion as
well as in its protection. Governments must first
be held responsible for the life and welfare of
their people. But there must also be common
agreed rules and benchmarks that would trigger
collective action, through our regional
organizations and the United Nations, against
Governments that commit unacceptable human
rights abuses or threaten regional peace and
security."

We thus welcome the affirmation by world leaders of
the responsibility to protect civilians from genocide,
crimes against humanity, war crimes and ethnic
cleansing.

We note with concern the denial of access for
humanitarian workers to populations in dire need of
humanitarian assistance. We echo the Secretary-
General's demand that parties to conflicts allow
immediate, full and unimpeded access for humanitarian
personnel and implement resolutions related to
particular conflict situations. We also call upon
humanitarian personnel to uphold the international
principles guiding humanitarian work, in particular
impartiality, neutrality and the non-political character
of humanitarian assistance.

Protecting civilians in conflict situations requires
that we also prevent the prevalence and risk of war.
Currently, as observed in the Secretary-General's
report "In larger freedom", half of the countries
emerging from violent conflict revert to conflict within
five years. Reducing the risk of war also requires that
humanitarian support during conflict and the transition
period to peace address developmental aspects. Here,
we would like to emphasize the importance of quality
of education and training, especially to ensure the
reintegration of young people into their societies and
the building of a culture of peace and tolerance within
those societies. We thus welcome the establishment of
the Peacebuilding Commission to address issues
related to post-conflict institution-building and the
consolidation of peace.

In conclusion, I should observe that there are
several international conventions, protocols, Security
Council resolutions and international initiatives to
protect civilians in armed conflict. Together, they
provide useful elements for updating and developing a
more comprehensive and coordinated regime for the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. It may be
necessary to establish new norms and adopt additional
Security Council resolutions to address this problem.

The consensus reached on the responsibility to
protect by the world summit this year is a useful basis
for the further development and refinement of norms
and practices related to the national and international
protection of civilians in armed conflict. The African
Union has set an example in that direction. For the
Security Council, it is part of its responsibility for the
promotion and maintenance of international peace and
security.

In that regard, Mr. President, we welcome your
initiative to present a new draft resolution which is
under consideration by the Council.

