Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): France
associates itself with the statement that will later be
made by the Ambassador of Spain on behalf of the 15
member States of the European Union. But I would like
to say a few words in my national capacity.

Last 11 September, we experienced one of the
moments that define the development of the world for
many years and perhaps decades to come. The question
that arose was whether the Security Council would
meet the challenge posed to the entire international
community. Our meeting today shows once again, I
believe, that, yes, the Security Council has been able to
cope with its new responsibilities, and it has been able
to do so in an exemplary manner.

This is first and foremost the result of the work of
one person, Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock, to whom
I would like to pay a special and well-deserved tribute.
I would also like to include in that tribute a woman,
Anna Clunes, who is part of the delegation of the
United Kingdom and who has carried out tremendous
work. Beyond that, it is in fact the entire Council, first
of all through the Vice-Chairmen, that should show the
result achieved in a few months time. This result is first
a method, I believe, a determination to have total
transparency with regard not just to the Member States
but also, above and beyond that, all those who have
come as partners, especially regional organizations,
and therefore an ability to act as a team, not just within
the Council and the permanent missions in New York
but also with the networks of international
organizations.

Sir Jeremy has reminded us of the results. One
hundred sixty reports have been received and
considered. This shows not just the success but also the
importance that all States members of the community
of nations attach to the work done by the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC).

Regional and technical organizations are
henceforth not just informed but also mobilized, along
with the CTC, which seems to be a veritable umbrella
that covers all these organizations and thereby ensures
a necessary consistency in the work of the entire
community of nations.

We shall soon be going on to the second, more
targeted phase of the work, which, on the basis of a
dialogue with each country, will enable us first of all to
identify the areas in which each country should
improve its legislation and the administrations
involved. Secondly - and above all, I would say -
this phase will enable us to identify the work of
technical cooperation that not the Security Council but
the organizations identified by the Council and
Member States will make available to States that need
such technical assistance.

This second phase is crucial. It will be more
targeted and concrete. Indeed, it will enable the world,
following an unprecedented auditing of the state of the
world in combating terrorism, to work to improve the
situation, State by State, and the steps to be taken by
all.

France has already indicated the areas in which it
was prepared to provide such technical assistance.
Beyond that, the French-speaking world, which will
hold a summit meeting in October in Beirut, is
mobilizing the means at its disposal for States that are
part of a culture that goes beyond a single language and
a common legal culture.

Once again, I would like to pay tribute to Sir
Jeremy and his entire team. Let us continue to work in
the good spirit that he himself has inspired in us.

