Mr. Dauth (Australia): Australia welcomes this
opportunity to address the Security Council on an issue
we consider to be of singular importance - Iraq's non-
compliance with Security Council resolutions.

There has been considerable speculation about
what has motivated the international community to
pursue this issue so forcefully in recent months. All
manner of conspiracy theories have been aired.

But let us be perfectly clear. This issue is about
one thing and one thing only, and that is Iraq's
continued failure to meet its commitments to the
international community, embodied in at least nine
Security Council resolutions.

Almost 12 years ago the international community,
through the Security Council, acted resolutely to expel
Iraq from Kuwait. In the aftermath of that conflict, the
Security Council further set out, in plain, unambiguous
terms, what the Government of Iraq had to do to ensure
that it no longer posed a threat to its neighbours or to
global security.

For over a decade Iraq has avoided most of those
obligations - obligations that were agreed by the
Security Council under the mandatory provisions of the
United Nations Charter. To this day, the Government of
Iraq has failed to comply with 23 out of the 27
obligations contained in nine Security Council
resolutions.
People ask, why Iraq? The answer is simple.

Iraq today poses a clear danger to international
security because it has sought to acquire weapons of
mass destruction and has a well-established record of
using them against its neighbours, and, indeed, against
its own people.

Iraq's defiance of the international collective will
threatens the very basis of our system of collective
security. It threatens the global non-proliferation
regime that so many, including my country, have
worked so hard to build.

If Iraq is allowed to violate both the will of the
United Nations and the commitments embodied in key
arms- control instruments, it would gravely damage the
international system. It would encourage the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction to other
countries and to other regions. It would encourage
some to believe that treaty obligations - such as those
taken on by Iraq in the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons and in the Biological Weapons
Convention - can be flouted with impunity.

It is worth focusing for the moment on what it is
these Security Council resolutions require the
Government of President Saddam Hussein to do.

The Security Council's requirements of Iraq
embodied in resolution 687 (1991) were agreed to by
Iraq in 1991. For almost 12 years the Government of
Iraq has been asked to disarm itself of weapons of mass
destruction, to provide a full and frank accounting of
its weapons of mass destruction programmes, and to
cooperate with United Nations agencies seeking to
examine and monitor its weapons of mass destruction
facilities. For almost 12 years it has refused to do so.

The international community has very good
grounds for pressing Iraq on this issue. Despite
continuous Iraqi obstruction, subterfuge and - let us
be clear - plain deceit, from 1991 to 1998 the United
Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) was able to
discover, document and destroy elements of a massive
Iraqi programme to acquire a full suite of weapons of
mass destruction: nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons and their means of delivery.

But UNSCOM's job was never finished. As
UNSCOM. reported to the Security Council in early
1999, Iraq's claims that it had destroyed all its
chemical and biological weapons could not be verified.
As of late 1998, UNSCOM. assessed that Iraq had a
residual, illegal long-range missile capability, a
quantity of chemical munitions, the ability to
manufacture more of those - including VX - and a
biological weapons manufacturing capability.

Since 1998 the international community has had
the benefit neither of inspections nor of ongoing
monitoring of Iraq's weapons of mass destruction
programmes. For four years our United Nations has
tried to resolve this impasse without success - four
years in which, as the information provided to the
Security Council by Member States such as the United
Kingdom, the United States and others highlights, Iraq
has used the opportunity presented by the absence of
United Nations inspections and monitoring to
accelerate its weapons of mass destruction
programmes.

Australia is convinced that the Government of
Iraq's ambitions to acquire weapons of mass
destruction remain undiminished. Australia is
convinced that Iraq has made continuing attempts to
procure equipment, material and technologies for its
weapons of mass destruction programme; that it has
been working to increase its chemical and biological
weapon capability over the past four years; that it has
worked to extend the range of its ballistic missiles; and
that it has continued to work on uranium enrichment
and weapons design for a nuclear device.

We acknowledge that some Members of the
United Nations family take a different view. But few -
indeed none, I think - could argue that our concerns
about Iraq's ambitions in the area of weapons of mass
destruction are not real concerns; that our fears that
Iraq has used weapons of mass destruction before and
could easily use them again are not unreasonable; that
in the aftermath of 11 September and, I say with the
greatest sadness, the events of 12 October in Bali, the
international community must be scrupulous in
addressing threats to international security, or face the
disastrous consequences.

There is one way to end the debate, and that is for
Iraq to do what it has refused to do for the past four
years. The Government ofIraq has the power to resolve
this issue peacefully. It must make a full, final and
frank declaration of its weapons of mass destruction
holdings; give United Nations inspectors full,
unconditional and unfettered access; and provide for
ongoing monitoring and verification to prove that it has
given up weapons of mass destruction once and for all.

But if it lies in the Government of Iraq's gift to
end the situation once and for all, the international
community also has a responsibility. In recent months
we have, on the surface at least, seen something of a
change of approach by Iraq on the question of
inspections - a change, to be sure, which is yet to be
tested. Indeed, Australia congratulates the officials of
the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) on the
practical steps they have taken towards the resumption
of inspections. But this change has come about only
because of concerted international pressure and
because the Government of Iraq is finally starting to
understand the looming consequences of continued
defiance.

We must not, as we say in Australia, drop the ball
now. The members of the Security Council have a
profound responsibility to ensure that the international
community's recent pressure on Iraq does not go to
waste. We urge the Council to pass a new and robust
resolution which provides the strongest possible basis
for unconditional and unfettered inspections of Iraq.
For it is only through such inspections that the
international community can be completely satisfied
that Iraq no longer poses a threat to international
security and that this almost-12-year-long saga can be
brought to an end.

Australia considers that the United Nations has
been patient. It has worked hard to satisfy Iraq's
concerns about the previous inspection body - the
United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) - by
designing a new and more streamlined inspection body,
UNMOVIC. The Secretary-General has been unstinting
in his efforts to encourage Iraq to comply with Security
Council resolutions. But we cannot afford to let Iraq's
defiance stymie these efforts endlessly.

Australia stands ready to do its part. We have a
proud history of contributing to international
disarmament and non-proliferation efforts. Some 110
Australians served with UNSCOM. - we were the
fourth-largest national contributor. Australians have
been trained as inspectors by UNMOVIC, and
Australia is ready to participate in the resumption of
IAEA weapons inspections. I hope that Australians will
again make a substantial contribution to the
dismantling of Iraq's weapons of mass destruction
programmes.

People ask why we must act on Iraq now. What
has and what has not changed? In the wake of 11
September, of course, everything has changed. If one
needed any more convincing, one need go only as far
as the terrible events in Bali on 12 October - a
tragedy which has struck deeply at the heart of my
country. If there is one thing that 11 September and 12
October highlight it is that one cannot allow threats to
international security to go unaddressed.

It is also true that nothing has changed. For four
years we have debated what to do about Iraq, and
nothing has been done. Can we afford to allow this
situation to continue indefinitely? Can we afford for
Iraq's defiance to be rewarded by a slowly fading
interest? What message would that send to others in the
international community prepared to challenge
international norms? That if they hang on long enough,
eventually the international community will give up?

The risks presented by inaction are very real. It is
the risk that an Iraqi Government, which has shown no
compunction about using weapons of mass destruction
in the past, will once again be able to threaten its
neighbours and the world, but this time with a full suite
of chemical, biological and nuclear weapons. It is the
risk that a regime that has been indiscriminate in its
support for terrorist groups will one day hand one of
those groups either a chemical, biological or nuclear
weapon, or pass on the knowledge to build one.

Some may debate the likelihood of either ofthose
scenarios coming to pass. But can we afford to be
wrong? Is what we are asking Iraq to do so
unreasonable that we can afford to be wrong?

On 12 October, an as yet unknown number of
innocent Australians and other nationals were the
victims of an attack of indiscriminate and indescribable
savagery. It was a grim demonstration to us that we
cannot hide ourselves from threats to international
security; that in today's globalized world we act
together or face the consequences together.

As a number of world leaders have already noted,
unless we step up to the mark to address the threat to
the world posed by Iraq's pursuit of weapons of mass
destruction today, we will all come to regret our
inaction tomorrow.

