The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. James D.
Wolfensohn, President of the World Bank.

It is so decided.

I invite the President of the World Bank to take a
seat at the Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Heinrich von Pierer, President and Chief Executive
Officer of Siemens.

It is so decided.

I invite the President and Chief Executive Officer
of Siemens to take a seat at the Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Her
Excellency Ms. Marjatta Rasi, President of the
Economic and Social Council.

It is so decided.

I invite the President of the Economic and Social
Council to take a seat at the Council table.

In accordance With the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Dumisani Kumalo, Chairman of the Ad
Hoc Advisory Group on African Countries emerging
from conflict.

It is so decided.

I invite the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Advisory
Group on African Countries emerging from conflict to
take a seat at the Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Please allow me to make a few opening remarks
to explain the framework of this meeting.

Political and economic stability in conflict
prevention - as well as in post-conflict recovery -
are closely interrelated. This must be reflected inside
and outside the broader United Nations system,
including the international financial institutions, of
which the World Bank is one of the most prominent.
Much has been done already to improve coherence and
efficiency between the different actors. One example of
this is the establishment of the Economic and Social
Council Ad Hoc Advisory Group for African Countries
emerging from conflict.

The role of the individual enterprise in the private
sector as a whole deserves particular attention in this
context. This refers to the whole complex of the
entrepreneurial responsibility, to the so-called "global
corporate citizenship" on the one hand, and the huge
potential that the private sector can provide in any
development or reconstruction strategy at national or
regional levels on the other hand.

Today, as a consequence of globalization, the
international private sector is more involved in the
issues of the stability and the prosperity of conflict-
prone countries than in previous decades. Economic
and social stability is a major factor in preventing
armed conflict and failing States. In post-conflict
peace-building, the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process can be accomplished only if job
opportunities provided by the private sector are
available. In its mission to Afghanistan half a year ago,
the Security Council experienced on the ground that
only if there is a true alternative, a true prospect of
making a living, are soldiers and combatants willing to
give up their arms.

I realize that this meeting is a first in this
discussion, in this kind of format. I believe it is
appropriate for the Security Council, as a forum
responsible for the maintenance of international peace
and security, to address the role business can play in
conflict prevention, peacekeeping and post-conflict
peace-building.

On behalf of my colleagues on the Council, let
me say how pleased I am to welcome representatives of
those actors that play a decisive role in dealing with
this important aspect of armed conflict: the Secretary-
General, Ambassador Rasi and Ambassador Kumalo,
as representatives of the United Nations system, as
well as Mr. Wolfensohn and Mr. von Pierer, as
representatives of major players in the global financial
and business world.

Before I give the floor to our guest speakers, let
me just make one short appeal. I ask members of the
Council to limit their statements in the subsequent
discussion to five minutes. Otherwise, we will not be
able to conclude - let us say - by about 1 pm. We
would also like to allow our guest speakers the
possibility, at the end of the interventions of Council
members, to respond to questions and to comment in
response to what has been said in the discussion. I
would therefore very much appreciate it if members
could limit the length of their statements. If members
have longer statements, they can distribute them in
writing.

I now welcome the presence of our Secretary-
General, Mr. Kofi Annan. I give him the floor.

