Mr. Darmanovic' (Montenegro): I would like
to thank the Bolivian presidency for organizing this
timely open debate on the global efforts to prevent the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs)
by non-State actors and for preparing an informative
concept note (see S/2016/1038). I also thank the briefers
for their input at today's debate.

Montenegro aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union, as well as
with the statement to be made on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Resolution 1540 (2004). I would, however,
like to make some additional remarks in my national
capacity.

We have witnessed the security, health,
environmental and social effects of testing nuclear
weapons. The nuclear programme of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea and putative further
technological developments in its pursuit of military
nuclear capability pose a serious threat to international
peace and security. Montenegro condemns in the
strongest terms the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea's repeated violations of the relevant Security
Council resolutions. Allegations of the use of chemical
weapons in Syria, Iraq and Malaysia, and the possible
existence of residual capabilities on Syrian territory,
increase the risk of the proliferation of such weapons
and their falling into the hands of terrorist groups. We
have to face the fact that this imminent threat requires
our immediate action so as to avert consequences of a
global scale.

Montenegro supports the global agenda for the
full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), as set
out in resolution 2325 (2016). At the national level,
we take a proactive and comprehensive approach in
trying to contribute to regional efforts in addressing
this urgent threat. As a State party to all key
international agreements and instruments related
to WMD proliferation and their means of delivery,
Montenegro has established a solid national framework
and built administrative and institutional capacities
to address the threat efficiently. We were the first
country in the Western Balkans to adopt a strategy
for the non-proliferation of WMDs for the period
between 2016 and 2020. In Montenegro, through the
implementation of that strategy and the implementation
of all accompanying action plans - including the
action plan for resolution 1540 (2004) and the chemical,
biological, radiological and nuclear action plan - our
focus is on taking a number of measures at the national
level that ensure full compliance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions, thereby contributing to
regional efforts in addressing that threat.

Aware of the fact that the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction is closely related to other aspects of
arms control in general, our attention is on the effective
enforcement of legislation and the establishment of
domestic control. In that context, we have established
an effective export control system, while taking into
account measures, such as those regarding intangible

technology transfers and other matters requiring
particular vigilance, including the transfer of the
sensitive facilities, equipment, technology and material
usable as weapons or other nuclear explosive devices.

We firmly believe that putting an emphasis on
the universality of the international provisions on
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
derives from the fact that even small States that do
not possess nuclear capacities or industries are an
important part of the security architecture, which aims
at controlling the use of sensitive materials for peaceful
purposes.

The threat of the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction by non-State actors is a global one,
which requires a response at the national, regional and
international levels. We are confident that, only through
the joint and coherent efforts of the international
community, including increased cooperation between
the United Nations and the relevant international and
regional organizations, as well as among the relevant
Security Council Committees and active participation
of all stakeholders - parliamentarians, civil society,
industry and academia - this threat of grave concern
can be effectively addressed. Montenegro stands ready
to make a further contribution in that regard.

