The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Albania, Argentina, Australia,
Bahrain, Belarus, Canada, Colombia, Croatia, Cuba,
Egypt, El Salvador, Fiji, Greece, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Israel, Japan, Liechtenstein, Myanmar, Peru,
South Africa, Turkey, Ukraine and Yemen, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Dilja
(Albania), Mr. Cappagli (Argentina), Mr. Dauth
(Australia), Mr. Almansoor (Bahrain), Mr. Ivanou
(Belarus), Mr. Heinbecker (Canada), Mr. Giraldo
(Colombia), Mr. Ognjanovac (Croatia),
Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla (Cuba), Mr. Aboul Gheit
(Egypt), Mr. Lagos Pizzati (El Salvador),
Mr. Naidu (Fiji), Mr. Vassilakis (Greece),
Mr. Zarif (Islamic Republic of Iran),
Mr. Gillerman (Israel), Mr. Haraguchi (Japan),
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein), Mr. Swe
(Myanmar), Mr. De Rivero (Peru), Mr. Kumalo
(South Africa), Mr. Pamir (Turkey),
Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine) and Mr. Alsaidi (Yemen)
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to His Excellency Sir Jeremy Greenstock,
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Sir Jeremy Greenstock to take a seat at
the Council table.

The Security Council will now continue its
consideration of the item on its agenda. Members of
the Council have before them document S/2003/191,
which contains the report of the Secretary-General
submitted pursuant to resolution 1456 (2003).

In View of the long list of speakers before us, I
would kindly request all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than seven minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
We have 27 speakers on the list. So, every minute that
participants add to their seven minutes of speaking
time adds half an hour to the deliberations of the
Council. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate their text in writing and to
deliver the condensed versions in the Chamber.

In another measure to optimize the use of our
time in order to allow as many delegations to take the
floor as possible, I will not individually invite speakers
to take seats at the table or invite them to resume their
seats at the side of the Chamber. When a speaker is
taking the floor, the Conference Officer will seat the
next speaker on the list at the table. I think that that is a
procedure that served us well yesterday, and we would
like to continue this procedure, if the Council agrees.

I thank representatives for their understanding
and their cooperation.

I shall first give the floor to the Chairman of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee of the Security Council,
Sir Jeremy Greenstock.


