Mr. Maiga (Mali) (spoke in French): I would like
to start by thanking you, Mr. President, for having
responded promptly to my delegation's request, on
behalf of the group of Islamic States Members of the
United Nations, for an urgent meeting of the Security
Council to examine the serious situation prevailing in
the occupied Palestinian territories, including
Jerusalem.

I would also like to thank Ambassador Nasser Al-
Kidwa, Permanent Observer for Palestine, for his
statement. It constitutes an extremely useful update
today as we debate the question of Palestine. I would
also like to present the sincere condolences of my
delegation to the families of the Palestinian martyrs
who have fallen on the field of honour and to hope for
the prompt recovery of the thousands of injured.

The overall situation in the occupied territories,
since we last considered the question in March 2001,
has deteriorated significantly with a further escalation
of violence, the excessive and ongoing use of force by
Israel, so-called targeted assassinations of Palestinian
political figures, in violation of international law,
recourse to combat aircraft against Palestinian towns,
the permanent blockading of the territories, massive
human rights violations and today the occupation by
the Israeli authorities of Orient House and eight
Palestinian institutions in East Jerusalem, as well as an
armed incursion into the city of J enin, under the control
of the Palestinian Authority.

This dark picture clearly shows the endless
suffering of the Palestinian people. These acts of sheer
provocation by the Israeli authorities show a worrisome
turn in events in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict to the
effect that they not only seek to deprive the Holy City
of Al-Quds of its particular legal status recognized by
Israel since 1967, but are also a flagrant violation of
the agreements between Israel and the Palestinian
National Authority. This is why the commitment of all
of us, in particular the Security Council, is necessary to
bring them to an end, redress matters and avoid the
unfortunate consequences that might jeopardize
international peace and security in the region of the
Middle East.

On 7 October 2000 the Council adopted
resolution 1322 (2000), in which it condemned the
excessive use of force by Israel, the occupying Power,
and called upon Israel to discharge its obligations
consistent with the Fourth Geneva Convention, which
applies to all the occupied Palestinian territories,
including Jerusalem. Today we are compelled to
acknowledge that almost 10 months after the adoption
of that resolution, Israel continues to have recourse to
force, as we see in the raids it perpetrated on
Palestinian cities on 18 May, tank incursions in
autonomous territory, and the intensification of the
hateful targeted-assassination campaign.
Confronted with this situation, Mali - as well as
Palestine, the Organization of the Islamic Conference
and the rest of the international community -
resolutely condemns the excessive use of force by
Israel in response to protests by Palestinian civilians in
the occupied territories, including Jerusalem. Mali also
condemns measures to lock down the territories,
restrictions on the circulation of people and goods and
the refusal to pay to the Palestinian Authority its
customs revenue, as well as all other measures of
collective punishment. These measures have a
disastrous impact on the Palestinian economy and on
the daily life of the inhabitants, and they transform the
life in the territories into a constant struggle for
survival.

My delegation remains convinced that the
situation would not have deteriorated to this extent if,
in December 2000 and then in March 2001 the Council
had reacted favourably to the draft resolutions
presented by the high-level conclave of the Non-
Aligned, which merely called for deployment of United
Nations observers in the field in order to protect
Palestinian civilians from the violence and crimes
perpetrated by the occupying Power, Israel.

Events throughout the territories clearly
demonstrate that deploying observers remains a topical
issue. Such a deployment would be a positive
contribution by the Security Council to the peace
process and would create a favourable climate for the
resumption of dialogue and negotiation. Better yet, the
question of observers falls clearly within the debate
currently under way within the Council on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, as well as on
conflict prevention. The Council cannot adopt
standards and a type of behaviour that are different in
the case of Palestinian civilians, because this would
jeopardize its credibility and would confirm the
accusations of a much-derided policy of double
standards whenever Israel is at stake. Inaction on the
part of the Council would only increase tension and
lead to a worsening of the situation. Furthermore, the
impunity that the Israeli authorities seem to enjoy
further intensifies the cycle of violence.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that my
delegation hopes that today's meeting will lead to the
taking of enforceable decisions and immediate action
that reflect the primary responsibility of the Council in
maintaining international peace and security. Indeed,
the Council is duty bound to play its part and fully
shoulder the burden of its responsibilities by applying
various forms of pressure to Israel so that it brings to
an end its policy of terror against the Palestinian people
and reverses the serious and illegal measures that it has
taken with respect to Orient House and other
Palestinian institutions in East Jerusalem.

Before concluding, I would like to reaffirm my
delegation's support for the peace initiatives of Egypt
and Jordan and the recommendations of the Mitchell
fact-finding committee. If implemented by the parties,
these different measures would help them to emerge
from the present deadlock and put and end to the
violence.

