Mr. Serry: It is an honour to brief the Security
Council for the first time. I look forward to doing so
regularly in the course of my tenure as Special
Coordinator, in the service of the Secretary-General
and the United Nations.

After two months in Jerusalem, I am deeply
conscious of what is at stake today in the Middle East
peace process. I am also impressed by the calibre and
2

scale of the work of the United Nations on the ground
in difficult, and even dangerous, circumstances. I am
convinced of the importance of the United Nations
playing its full political, development, humanitarian
and human rights role.

I wish to thank President Abbas and Prime
Minister Olmert and their Governments, as well as the
Governments of Egypt and Jordan and the Secretary-
General of the League of Arab States, for the warm
welcome they have given me. I look forward to paying
further introductory visits in the region. I also wish to
express my appreciation to my Quartet partners and
Quartet Representative Tony Blair for the support and
cooperation they have extended to me.

Today, I will brief the Council on developments
since the last report, on 30 January (see S/PV.5827),
and offer an initial assessment of the situation. I turn
first to the bilateral negotiations.

Israeli Foreign Minister Tzipi Livni and
Palestinian lead negotiator Ahmad Qurei are meeting
on a continuous basis. President Abbas and Prime
Minister Olmert continue their fortnightly meetings.
We welcome the determination of the parties to
continue those negotiations despite challenges on the
ground, and in an atmosphere of confidentiality. The
talks need to make tangible progress on all core issues
without exception.

I was also pleased to meet United States
Lieutenant General William Fraser when he visited the
region for the first time to lead United States efforts to
monitor the implementation of phase I Road Map
commitments, as agreed at Annapolis. I have offered
full United Nations support to the United States-led
monitoring process and look forward to regular Quartet
consultation on it.

Palestinian Authority Prime Minister Fayyad and
his Government continue to promote good governance
and revive the economy. Steps this month included
addressing electricity subsidies, the finalization of
measures to ensure financial transparency and efforts
to ensure that Palestinian Authority ministries and
agencies develop coordinated and standardized project
proposals. We remind donors of the urgency of their
quickly disbursing the generous pledges made last
December in Paris. Quartet Representative Tony Blair
continues his work on economic development projects
and other confidence-building measures.
08-2520]

Efforts to improve the security performance of
the Palestinian Authority continue. Palestinian security
forces carried out operations against militants in
several West Bank cities. A Palestinian military court
sentenced two individuals to 15 years in prison for
killing two Israelis near Hebron in December. Israel
stopped pursuing 32 Fatah militants after they
surrendered to Palestinian Authority security forces
and successfully completed a three-month trial period.
The death of a Hamas detainee from what an official
autopsy found was a heart attack has led to allegations
of mistreatment of detainees by Palestinian Authority
security forces. President Abbas has called for an
investigation. Approximately 1,000 Palestinian
Authority security officers are being trained in Jordan,
with support from the United States security
coordinator, with a view to their redeployment in April
and May. The European Union Police Mission for the
Palestinian Territories (EUPOL COPPS) continues to
support the Palestinian civilian police and criminal
justice system in the West Bank.

However, the security situation for both Israelis
and Palestinians remains a matter of deep concern. One
Israeli has been killed and 27 injured by Palestinian
militants. Forty-five Palestinians have been killed and
139 injured during Israeli incursions into Gaza and the
West Bank. I am particularly alarmed at the number of
incidents on both sides where children are being killed
or injured.

On 4 February, a suicide attack in Dimona by two
bombers from Hebron, for which Hamas claimed
responsibility, killed one Israeli and injured six others.
Over 320 rockets and mortars have been fired from
Gaza, with the town of Sderot again coming under
particular attack. We unreservedly condemn
indiscriminate rocket and mortar firing towards civilian
population centres and crossing points, and suicide
attacks against civilians, and call for their immediate
cessation. Israeli interlocutors regard the continuation
of such attacks as the biggest obstacle to progress in
the peace process.

Corporal Gilad Shalit of the Israel Defense
Forces (IDF) is in his twentieth month of captivity in
Gaza, and Hamas continues to deny the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) access to him. We
call for access to be provided and for his release.

Over 10,000 Palestinian prisoners remain in
Israeli prisons. President Abbas has appealed for
08-25201
further Palestinian prisoner releases, building on the
steps already taken in that regard.

Israeli military operations into Gaza and the West
Bank have continued throughout the reporting period.
There have been several instances in which civilians
have been killed or injured - including last Saturday,
when three civilians were killed by a ground-to-ground
missile fired into Beit Hanoun. Even if not intended,
such casualties are deplorable and should be the
subject of transparent investigation and accountability
measures. While we are cognizant of Israel's security
concerns, Israel is obliged not to take disproportionate
measures or to endanger civilians. The United Nations
principled opposition to extrajudicial killings is
compounded by the frequency with which such
operations are carried out in densely populated civilian
areas.

Citing security concerns, the IDF is also
continuing operations in the West Bank. Those actions
undermine the Palestinian Authority's own security
efforts. Improved IDF cooperation with the Palestinian
Authority security forces in the West Bank is crucial.

In that context, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) has reported that there
are 580 obstacles to Palestinian movement in the West
Bank, a level that has stayed steady for many months,
and has even increased, despite Palestinian Authority
security efforts and Israeli pledges to remove obstacles.
Closure levels must be reduced significantly if the
Palestinian economy is to revive and if donor
assistance is to produce long-term results.

Phase I of the Road Map, to which the parties
recommitted at Annapolis, requires the Government of
Israel to freeze all settlement activity, including
"natural growth", and to remove all outposts erected
since March 2001. However, construction continues in
settlements throughout the West Bank, including in
East Jerusalem. Tenders for new housing continue to be
issued by the Israeli Government, and no outposts have
been removed. Continued settlement activity is illegal
anywhere in the occupied Palestinian territory and is an
obstacle to peace. I should also inform the Council that
settlement expansion was cited by several Palestinian
and Arab interlocutors as among the biggest factors
undermining confidence in the Annapolis process and
prospects for a viable Palestinian State.

In the same vein, and despite the Road Map
obligation to re-open Palestinian institutions in East
3
Jerusalem, an order was recently issued by the Israeli
Government continuing their closure for a further six
months. Israel should demonstrate with concrete and
urgent steps its commitment to phase I of the Road
Map, as called for by Quartet principals when they last
met in Paris.

Construction work on the barrier continues within
occupied Palestinian territory, in deviation from the
Green Line and contrary to the International Court of
Justice advisory opinion.

I now turn to the situation in Gaza, which is
unacceptable and also unsustainable in humanitarian,
human rights, security and political terms. The Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs will brief
the Council on the severe humanitarian situation in
more detail. Several factors have created a dangerous
cocktail for Israel, Egypt and the Palestinians, causing
deep suffering and damaging prospects for a two-State
solution.

The Hamas takeover last June violently removed
the Palestinian Authority from Gaza, including from
the crossings. A degree of order has been established,
but the rule of law is absent. Major changes are taking
place outside a legal framework. Many independent
institutions have been closed, or replaced and restaffed
so that they are controlled by Hamas but disconnected
from their headquarters in Ramallah. The civilian
justice system has ceased to function, as have
important instruments of good governance and social
regulation in Gaza. Allegations of human rights abuses
in Gaza continue to be made by various Palestinian and
international non-governmental organizations operating
in the Strip.

Despite statements of intent, Hamas has not acted
with sufficient determination to bring about an end to
rocket attacks by militant groups. Hamas itself also
carries out periodic rocket firing and regular mortar
fire, to say nothing of the recent suicide bombing.
Reports of smuggling continue to be of concern, as are
reports of outside militant groups now gaining a
foothold in Gaza. We continue to call on Hamas to live
up to the responsibilities it has taken on itself and to
choose the olive branch over the gun.

However, Israeli measures amounting to
collective punishment are also not acceptable. We call
on Israel to meet its obligations towards the civilian
population of Gaza under international law.
The breach at Rafah at the end of January caused
understandable relief in Gaza, as civilians sought basic
commodities and a respite from the pressure cooker
conditions under which they are forced to live. Egypt
moved to re-establish order along the border earlier
this month. But the situation remains extremely fragile.
Unless addressed, it will remain a danger to the safety,
security and well-being of the Palestinian population,
to the security of Egypt and of Israel, and to the
sustainability of the political process itself. Only
yesterday, several thousand people protested against
the conditions they face, and the Israel Defense Forces
increased its military presence in areas surrounding the
Strip.

In the light of these developments, the United
Nations has actively made the case with all parties and
our Quartet partners that a different and more positive
strategy for Gaza is required.

To this end, Quartet envoys are agreed that we
should now work towards resumption of normal
economic life for the people of Gaza, pursue
arrangements that ensure the security of Israel, Egypt
and the Palestinians, and support the legitimate
Palestinian Authority. Rocket fire and suicide attacks
should cease, as should all acts of violence, so that an
atmosphere of calm is created. The humanitarian needs
of the civilian population must be met, including the
uninterrupted provision of essential goods and services,
including fuel and power supplies. Stalled United
Nations and other projects in Gaza should resume, and
the movement of United Nations and humanitarian
personnel needs to be facilitated. Conditions need to be
established to allow the reopening of crossings, as
envisaged in the Agreement on Movement and Access.

It is therefore of crucial importance now that
Israel, Egypt and the Palestinian Authority develop a
positive strategy for Gaza designed to achieve those
goals. Quartet members, individually and collectively,
are ready to provide support for such efforts, including
the European Union Border Assistance Mission at
Rafah, as appropriate. Egypt's efforts along the border
and diplomatically to find durable solutions to this
crisis are to be commended. The Quartet has also stated
publicly its strong support for the proposal of the
Palestinian Authority to resume operations at the
crossings.

Turning to the regional aspect, the Governments
of Egypt and Jordan and the Secretary-General of the
08-2520]
League of Arab States have underlined the importance
of the continued commitment of Arab countries to the
Arab Peace Initiative. However, they have stressed
their growing concern regarding the direction of the
peace process, as well as developments in Gaza, and
regarding the implications for the region should the
peace process not succeed.

During the reporting period, the situation in the
occupied Syrian Golan has remained largely quiet,
other than an incident on 11 February in which two
Syrian youths, residents in the Golan, were shot by an
Israeli soldier and subsequently treated in hospital.

I should add that I am not briefing on Lebanon
this month in view of the forthcoming report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution
1701 (2006).

Allow me to conclude with some brief personal
impressions. From what I have seen in several field
visits, including to the West Bank, Gaza and southern
Israel, ordinary people, understandably, have little
confidence that the political process is delivering.

In the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, the
imposing presence of the barrier, the expanding
settlements, the unremoved outposts, the system of
closures and constant military incursions have grave
implications for the human rights, economic life and
social fabric of the entire population. In Gaza, the
deprivations of basic human dignity are even more
acute, and the sense of abandonment and frustration is
palpable.

In southern Israel, communities that believed
Israel's disengagement from Gaza would bring security
face daily rocket attacks, while Israelis generally
continue to believe that they must primarily rely on
Israeli security measures for their safety. In the region,
there is a growing sense of disquiet about the state of
the political process.

I applaud the sense of responsibility and indeed
political courage that Prime Minister Olmert and
President Abbas have shown in re-embarking on the
political process despite public scepticism and many
anxieties. The Annapolis process needs to proceed, and
it needs support. The international community should
do everything it can to ensure that the parties move
ahead in the bilateral negotiations towards an
agreement on all core issues without exception.
08-2520]

But the Annapolis process can be sustained only
by real changes on the ground. First, a major
intensification of efforts in the West Bank is required,
including more substantial and urgent Israeli actions
and continued and intensified efforts by the Palestinian
Authority, in accordance with phase I of the Road Map.
Secondly, we believe a different and more positive
strategy for Gaza is a humanitarian, security and
strategic imperative, for Israel, Egypt and the
Palestinian Authority, and we welcome the united
engagement of the Quartet on this issue.

We will continue to remind all parties of the
framework of international law and to work closely
with Quartet partners, countries of the region and the
Council towards implementation of the Road Map. The
goal must be an end to the occupation that began in
1967, the coexistence in peace and security of the State
of Israel and the State of Palestine and a
comprehensive regional peace, in fulfilment of
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and
1515 (2003), and the Arab Peace Initiative.

