The President (spoke in French): I warmly welcome the ministers and other representatives present in the Security Council Chamber. Their presence today underscores the importance of the subject matter under discussion. In accordance with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representatives of Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Croatia, Egypt, El Salvador, Fiji, the Gambia, Georgia, Guatemala, India, Iraq, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malta, Morocco, Nepal, the Netherlands, Norway, Pakistan, Peru, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey and Ukraine to participate in this meeting. In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Michelle Bachelet, United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights; Mr. Francisco de Roux, President of the Commission for the Clarification of Truth, Coexistence and Non-Repetition of Colombia; and Ms. Yasmin Sooka, Executive Director of the Foundation for Human Rights in South Africa, Trustee of the Desmond Tutu Peace Centre and Chair of the Commission on Human Rights in South Sudan. Ms. Bachelet is joining today's meeting via video- teleconference from Geneva. In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the following to participate in the meeting: Mr. Robert Mardini, Permanent Observer of the International Committeeof the Red Cross to the United Nations; and His Excellency Mr. Bjern Olof Skoog, Head of Delegation of the European Union to the United Nations. The Security Council will now begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. I wish to draw the attention of Council members to document S/2020/98, which contains the text of a letter dated 4 February 2020 from the Permanent Representative of Belgium to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note on the item under consideration. I now give the floor to Ms. Bachelet.
