Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First, I would like to welcome you, Mr. Minister, and
to thank you for coming to New York, despite a very
busy schedule and the long distance, to preside
personally over today's very important meeting. I also
thank the Secretary-General for his presence and for
his statement to the Council.

I listened attentively to the briefings by Mr. Ould-
Abdallah, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for West Africa, and by Mr. Diouf,
representative of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), and I thank them for their
presentations.

We are pleased to note that, since last year's open
Security Council meeting (see S/PV.4933) and
presidential statement (S/PRST/2004/7) on cross-
border problems in West Africa, some very positive
developments have taken place in that region. Cross-
border problems have been the object of the full
attention of the countries concerned. In addition,
coordination and collaboration among entities of the
United Nations system, subregional organizations such
as ECOWAS, the countries in that region and donor
countries have been strengthened. The reactivation of
the Mano River Union gives cause for hope. ECOWAS
has established its Small Arms Control Programme to
combat the illegal trade in small arms and light
weapons. The peace processes in Sierra Leone and
Liberia have also made headway. All those
developments have created favourable conditions for
resolution of cross-border problems.

China appreciates the positive efforts made by all
parties and calls upon the international community to
provide further assistance. At the same time, it is
necessary to recognize that, because of their
complexity and their interconnected nature, cross-
border problems in West Africa remain very serious
and have taken a toll on the peace and stability of the
area.
Some of the current issues are: the essentially
uncurbed illegal proliferation of small arms and light
weapons; the use of child soldiers and mercenaries;
lack of resources for disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programmes; the recessive
economic situation that has led to very high youth
unemployment; and the deteriorating humanitarian
situation in certain areas.

Some countries have been unable to break the
impasse in their peace processes. The chaotic flows of
refugees that have long been troubling the area have
not eased. We believe that the solution of cross-border
problems in West Africa ultimately depends on
domestic stability in the countries concerned.

We support the West African countries in their
efforts to adopt measures to promote the peace process
and to achieve substantive results. At the same time, in
the light of their internal situations, genuinely effective
measures must be adopted and the breeding grounds
for cross-border problems must be eliminated. Here,
we must proceed from the regional perspective and
adopt integrated strategies.

We encourage subregional organizations such as
ECOWAS and the Mano River Union to play their role,
and we call upon the international community to
provide financial support to aid them in capacity-
building. The international community should also
address and resolve the root causes of cross-border
problems. The basic way to achieve lasting peace in
West Africa is to promote comprehensive and
sustainable social and economic development in order
to solve the ever-worsening problem of high youth
unemployment and to address and resolve the serious
humanitarian problems in that area.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2005/86)
and the outcome of the Security Council mission to
West Africa have yielded many helpful
recommendations for settlement of cross-border
problems. They merit serious study by the parties
involved with a view to their implementation.

In order to solve cross-border problems in West
Africa, the help of the international community,
especially that of the United Nations, is essential. We
agree that the United Nations peacekeeping operations
and political missions in the area should strengthen
their coordination. We hope that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for West
Africa will play a coordinating role. We agree that the
consolidated appeals process for West Africa should
focus this year on alleviating the ever-worsening
humanitarian and security situation in the subregion.

I reaffirm that China is ready to make joint efforts
with the rest of the international community to promote
a satisfactory solution of cross-border problems in
West Africa at an early date.

