Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French): I
would like to join with Ambassador Barbalic' in
congratulating you, Mr. President, on convening this
constructive discussion of peacekeeping operations. I

also welcome the presence among us of Mr. Alain Le
Roy, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Lieutenant General Sikander Afzal,
Lieutenant General Babacar Gaye, Major General
Moses Bisong Obi, Major General Robert Mood and
Major General Luiz Guilherme Paul Cruz, whom I
thank for their very informative briefings.

My delegation would also like to praise the
efforts of the United Nations aimed at promoting
peace, knowing that, as Mr. Le Roy reminded us, more
than 120,000 people are involved in 16 peacekeeping
operations on four continents. We pay a well-deserved
tribute to the Blue Helmets serving throughout the
world. Gabon also wishes to express its great sadness
at the loss of many peacekeepers in recent years. The
road accident that cost the lives of four Sierra Leone
peacekeepers in the province of Southern Darfur on
1 August have added to the list of the deceased.

Having listened to the various speakers, and
focusing primarily on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), I would like to discuss the following
two points: the consolidation of progress achieved in
defining and implementing mandates; and the
challenges encountered in implementing those
mandates.

Turning to our first point - progress achieved in
defining and implementing mandates - with regard to
Darfur, my delegation welcomes the fact that
UNAMID is reaching full deployment for its military,
police and civilian components, with 88 per cent, 70
per cent and 75 per cent of the authorized numbers,
respectively. We are also pleased with the increasing
number of UNAMID patrols and their further
expansion into the territory, which has considerably
reduced attacks on civilians and helped improve their
living conditions.

With regard to MONUSCO, Gabon welcomes the
new mandate for the United Nations Mission, which
provides, among other things, for the completion of the
ongoing military operations in North and South Kivu
and in Orientale province, as well as for an
improvement in the means available to the Government
to protect its people effectively and to strengthen State
authority throughout the territory. MONUSCO is also
giving support to the victims of the explosion that took
place in the village of Sange in South Kivu on 2 July,
proof that the new civilian protection mandate is being
implemented. The success of this operation is partly
due to the coordinated action that on this occasion
prevailed between the Congolese authorities and the
United Nations teams on the ground.

In Gabon's view, the mandate has the merit of
providing for a future reconfiguration of the Mission
based on developments on the ground, thus making the
mandate more realistic. We also welcome the fact that
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon visited Kinshasa to
preside over the ceremony marking the succession
from MONUC to MONUSCO on 1 July. We take this
opportunity to salute Mr. Alan Doss, head of MONUC,
and to Lieutenant General Babacar Gaye, outgoing
commander of MONUC and MONUSCO, for their
excellent work in recent years in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We would also like to welcome
the appointment of Mr. Roger Meece as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and head of
MONUSCO and of General Chander Prakash as the
new Force Commander of MONUSCO. We have noted
the start of the first phase of the drawdown of
MONUSCO, as provided for in Security Council
resolution 1925 (2010).

Finally, my delegation is pleased to note that,
increasingly, new, multidisciplinary approaches are
being integrated into peacekeeping mandates, in line
with the Secretary-General's 2008 report, such as
strengthening the rule of law, protection of civilians,
applying mechanisms for preventing the resurgence of
conflicts and implementing reconstruction
programmes.

I shall now turn to the second point of my
statement - the challenges encountered in carrying
out the mandates of United Nations missions. The
complexity of current crises is leading to difficulty in
the implementation peacekeeping mandates, and these
crises are often the result, of course, of shortfalls in
financial and material resources.

With regard to the Sudan, UNAMID reports a
significant deficit in terms of airborne military
capacity, including utility helicopters needed for air
reconnaissance missions. We deplore the fact that
UNAMID also faces restrictions on its freedom of
movement, which have increased from 21 per cent in
May to 77 per cent in June.

With regard to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, my delegation remains concerned by the scale
of the humanitarian tragedy caused by the fighting
between the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Ugandan rebels of the Allied
Democratic Forces/National Army for the Liberation of
Uganda. In this context, we welcome the decision
taken by the Mission on 19 July to establish an
advanced outpost in Mutwanga and to set up a
temporary base there in order to increase security in
the area and allow for the deployment of personnel and
the distribution of humanitarian aid in secure
conditions.

My delegation encourages the international
community to provide the various missions with
financial and material resources commensurate with
the situation and developments on the ground and to
work for constructive dialogue with host countries.
Furthermore, my country advocates for the language
factor to be taken into account when choosing force
commanders, for greater collaboration with regional
and subregional organizations, and for greater attention
to be paid to aspects relating to prevention.

I should like to pay tribute to General Obiakor for
his excellent work with the United Nations over these
past years, and I wish him every success in his future
endeavours.

