Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I
thank Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs
Rosemary DiCarlo and Assistant Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs Ursula Mueller, for their
enlightening briefings about the ongoing tragic situation
in Ukraine, which, now more than ever, requires the
attention of the international community.

After more than four years of conflict in the
Donbas region, fighting continues unabated. Not one
day passes without a military and civilian victim or
without shots, including from heavy weaponry, being
fired into areas where civilians live. For more than four
years, including recently at a ministerial meeting held
on 11 June, France and Germany, together with the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), have spared no effort, within the framework
of the Normandy format, to bring the parties together,
facilitate the implementation of the Minsk agreements
and help end the conflict. My German colleague, whom
I am pleased to welcome to the Chamber, and I will
hold a press briefing at the end of today's meeting, as
the representatives of two mediating countries of the
Normandy format.

Beyond Donbas, whenever possible, France
condemns the illegal annexation of the Autonomous
Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol and calls
on all States Members of the United Nations to reiterate
their support for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
okaraine within its internationally recognized borders.
In that tense environment, three recent developments in
particular deserve our attention.

First, allow me to mention once again to the so-
called elections planned for 11 November in the two
separatist areas of Donetsk and Luhansk. Whereas we
endeavour under the Normandy format to move towards
the holding of local elections according to Ukrainian
law and the Minsk agreements, the current initiative
is a flagrant attempt to undermine the sovereignty of
the Ukrainian State. It is contrary to the commitments
made, in particular by Russia, when the agreements
were signed. We therefore encourage all Member
States to firmly and publicly condemn the organization
of those illegal elections. We hope that Russia can use
its influence with the separatist entities to suspend the
organization of the so-called elections. Instead, it should
strive to foster the right conditions for the holding of
the local elections stipulated in the Minsk agreements,
which is one of the keys to restoring peace. It should
be noted that, for its part, Ukraine has signalled its
commitment to the political component of the Minsk
agreements by renewing the law on the special status of
Donbas, which it adopted in September 2014.

Secondly, we deplore the lack of progress on
security issues in Donbas. The ceasefire, which has
been renewed several times, has not materialized in a
sustainable manner on the ground. Moreover, we have
recently seen an increase in the level ofviolence, with an
average of more than 1,000 incidents per day, according
to the observations of the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine. Similarly, the withdrawal of heavy
weaponry has still not been implemented. For four
years, the civilian population - including children and
the elderly, as Ms. Mueller reminded us - have been
targeted practically every day by such weapons.

We are still awaiting progress - especially from
Ukraine - on the three pilot disengagement areas.
All commitments made must be respected; this is not
a matter of pick-and-choose obligations. France cannot
emphasize enough the urgent need for progress on
each of the measures necessary to improve the security
situation, which is essential for reaching a settlement of
the conflict.

Thirdly, and finally, France expresses its deep
concern about the humanitarian situation described
by the Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs. There are nearly 1.5 million displaced persons
in Ukraine, while more than 700,000, on both sides of
the line of contact, who are receiving humanitarian
assistance. As stated in the presidential statement
of 6 June (S/PRST/2018/12), the situation calls for
more robust action by United Nations humanitarian
agencies on the ground. To achieve that goal, France
calls on all the parties to facilitate humanitarian access
for United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organizations to provide aid and assistance, not only to
civilian populations but also to prisoners of war. With
the harsh Donbas winter approaching, it is now more
necessary than ever to relieve the suffering of the most
vulnerable people.

The situation in Ukraine is not necessarily
inevitable. It is up to Russia to take the decision to
put an end to the illegal annexation of Crimea and use
its influence over the separatist entities in Donbas to
guarantee the immediate implementation of the Minsk
agreements. We also encourage Ukraine to show
greater political will and play its part in implementing
the agreements, which should lead to the return of
lasting peace.

