Mr. Mercado (Philippines): I join other
delegations in welcoming you, Sir, to the Chair. I
should also like to welcome the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), Ambassador Soren Jessen-Petersen, and to
thank him for introducing the report of the Secretary-
General, as well as for his update on the situation in
Kosovo. We also welcome the President of the
Coordination Centre of Kosovo and Metohija,
Mr. Nebojsa Covic.

The Philippines is encouraged by the Secretary-
General's assessment that much progress has been
made in efforts to promote multi-ethnicity in Kosovo,
and we hope that that momentum will pave the way for
the start of discussions of its final status sooner, rather
than later. We are pleased to note the progress achieved
in the implementation of such standards as functioning
democratic institutions, freedom of movement,
sustainable returns and minority rights. We are also
heartened by the determination exhibited by Kosovo's
leaders to pursue the implementation of these and other
standards.

The Philippines welcomes the resumption of
direct dialogue on practical matters between Belgrade
and Pristina after a lull of more than 12 months and the
expressed willingness of Belgrade to engage in that
important process. We look forward to the planned
meetings between President Tadic and President
Rugova and Prime Minister Kostunica and Prime
Minister Kosumi, and hope that those high-level
interactions will contribute constructively to the
process.

The Philippines, however, shares the assessment
of the Secretary-General and the representative of
Serbia that much more needs to be done in
implementation of the standards. While such efforts
may not be enough to lead to the immediate resolution
of Kosovo's final status, we are confident that the
necessary political will can be mustered in the coming
days and weeks to catapult the process in the right
direction.

Kosovo is the last piece of the Balkan jigsaw
puzzle, and it is of the utmost importance that all actors
engage constructively so as to put the final piece of the
puzzle in place as soon as possible. In this connection,
the Philippines throws its full support behind the
Secretary-General's proposal to carry out a
comprehensive review of the implementation of the
standards over the next several weeks. We also
welcome the positive outcome of last Monday's
Contact Group meeting in London, which endorsed the
comprehensive review proposed by the Secretary-
General. However, the international community must
also make it clear that the comprehensive review was
proposed on the premise that Kosovo's leaders would
continue to make progress in the implementation of the
standards. Discussion of Kosovo's final status will
therefore be dependent on the outcome of the review.

Kosovo's leaders hold the key to the future. If
they want to open the door to final status, they will
have to make significant strides in implementation of
the standards in the weeks and months to come. They
need to collectively demonstrate a genuine and
concrete commitment to create a society where all
communities can coexist peacefully and in which the
rights of members of all of Kosovo's minority groups
are respected, safeguarded and guaranteed. The
Provisional Institutions must exert greater efforts to
convince Kosovo Serbs to participate in the process.
Meanwhile, Belgrade must also do its share in moving
the process forward.

Kosovo cannot allow its past to rule its present
and its future. In his report to the Security Council
(S/2005/335), the Secretary-General takes note of the
principles laid down by the Contact Group for a
solution to Kosovo's final status, which exclude the
partition of Kosovo, its union with any country or part
of any country, and its return to the situation before
March 1999. As the time to decide Kosovo's fate draws
nearer, my delegation believes that the Council should
start to consider its exit strategy for the province.
Kosovo's future is well within sight, but it is up to
Kosovo's leaders and its people to determine how and
when they will get there. We in the international
community should continue to encourage them and
show them the way.

Lastly, allow me to again express my delegation's
support for the earlier recommendation that the
Security Council send a mission to Kosovo either
before, during or after the comprehensive review. It is
important that the members of the Council have a firm
grasp of the situation on the ground, if and when
Kosovo's final status is taken up.

