Mr. Kim Bong-hyun (Republic of Korea): It is
my distinct honour and privilege to attend this open
debate and to address one of the most important issues
in the work of the Security Council. Today's thematic
debate, under the agenda item "United Nations
peacekeeping: a multidimensional approach", is timely
and appropriate, since maintaining international peace
and security nowadays requires more integrated and
comprehensive approaches to peacekeeping, post-
conflict peacebuilding, and development.

The Republic of Korea warmly welcomes you,
Sir, in presiding over this meeting, and commends
the leadership of the Government of Pakistan for
organizing today's open debate. My delegation also
extends its high appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his presence and informative briefing.

The scope of United Nations peacekeeping
activities has continually expanded. The mandates of
modern-day peacekeeping missions have become more
diversified and multidimensional to meet the changing
demands on the ground since the first mission in
1948. In this regard, I duly recognize the strengthened
structure of United Nations peacekeeping operations
under the initiative of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.

My country, the Republic of Korea, experienced
a devastating war between 1950 and 1953, and has
developed from being the beneficiary of an early
United Nations military intervention and the recipient
of development assistance to being a contributor
to United Nations peacekeeping operations and a
new donor of development cooperation with many
developing countries. Out of this unique peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding process in my country,
I would like to offer my own perspective on this issue.
Our commitment to these operations is firm, and our
goal of ensuring their relevance for the future is clear.
To succeed, we must build an integrated framework that
can encompass the changing realities of the conflict
and post-conflict landscape.

We can identify important elements to be considered
in making the integrated framework: fragile post-
conflict situations, potential relapses into conflicts, and
the international development cooperation mechanism.
While peacekeeping mandates in the most traditional
sense are still valid, the modern realm of United
Nations peacekeeping activities should overlap with
that of peacebuilding and development cooperation.
It is therefore timely that the Security Council should
take stock of the instruments of peacekeeping, clarify
its multiple dimensions, and decide on its future.

Having said that, I would like to emphasize the
following.
First, an international development cooperation
mechanism should be considered and incorporated
into multiple dimensions of peacekeeping operations.
Peacekeeping operations can learn lessons from
the principles and guidelines of the international
development cooperation regime that has been
developed and agreed upon by the United Nations
funds and programmes, agencies and other
development institutions. In particular, development
cooperation strategies for fragile States, which are
now being developed and applied to several States
by the Development Cooperation Directorate of
the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development, can be included in the planning process
of peacekeeping operations. We encourage the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to closely
cooperate with development actors when it drafts a
peacekeeping operation plan for a specific country.

Secondly, before laying out specific mandates for
a mission, the resources of the United Nations country
team and civilian sector should be taken into account in
order to properly determine the scope of a mission and
the capacities it requires. The available expertise and
capacities of other national and international partners,
including regional and subregional organizations,
should also be taken into account. Doing so will help
reduce potential duplication of work and ensure the
continuity of peacekeeping, peacebuilding and the
development of the host country. In short, the aim is
to balance long-term goals with the short-term realities
on the ground, harmonizing the two whenever possible.

Thirdly, the significance of national ownership
cannot be overemphasized in sustaining peace, security
and development. The Republic of Korea has learned
the importance of national ownership through its
own experience. Immediately after the war in 1953,
the Korean people, with a strong sense of national
ownership, worked hard to achieve security, peace
and development with United Nations assistance, and
have come a long way during the past half century.
This is why we believe that the peacekeeping and
peacebuilding efforts of the United Nations should be
designed to strengthen the sense of national ownership
of the people affected by conflicts.

Fourthly, it is not practical to apply the same
strategies to all missions. There is no one-size-fits-all
set of peacebuilding priorities that is good for every
peacekeeping mission. Tailored strategic assessment is
crucial in configuring any peacekeeping mission. Their
mandates should therefore be clear and feasible.
Fifthly, the protection of civilians, especially
women and children, under imminent threat of physical
violence must be taken into account in the early phases
of mandate drafting and throughout the life cycle of
United Nations peacekeeping missions.

Lastly, women must be included as active
participants at every stage of peacebuilding, peace
agreements and development programmes, including in
decision-making roles. Women are essential partners in
any peaceful society and contribute to the three pillars
of sustainable peace, namely, economic recovery, social
cohesion and political legitimacy.

Since joining the United Nations, in 1991, the
Republic of Korea has participated in 19 missions.
Recently, our engineering contingent in the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti was redeployed
home after having successfully fulfilled its mandate
of recovering and restoring national infrastructure
following the earthquake in Haiti in 2010. In March
we will dispatch another engineering unit to the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) to
implement the mandate to build UNMISS's capacities
for early peacebuilding and reconstructing the
horizontal infrastructure in South Sudan. One Korean
infantry battalion with the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon has also successfully conducted its
surveillance and civil-military operations since being
deployed in 2007.

My delegation stands ready to continue our
multifaceted contributions to the noble cause of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, with a view to a more
secure and sustainable peace around the globe. The
Security Council has made great strides in streamlining
that process, and its momentum must continue.
We look forward to working within the Council on
multidimensional ways to make, keep and build peace.

