Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): Allow
me, Madam President, to thank you for the
commendable initiatives your delegation has taken in
order to enable the Council to deal with this important
question. I would also like to thank the Vice-Prime
Minister of Guinea-Bissau and the representative of the
World Bank for their very important statements.

Despite the return to calm, the situation in
Guinea-Bissau continues to require the ongoing
mobilization of the international community in support
of that country. The failed attempt by General Mane to
regain control of the army by force is a stark reminder
that the peace-building process in the country is still
fragile and that there can be lasting stability only if the
military junta recognizes the authority of the
democratically elected civilian power, particularly of
President Yala, and withdraws completely from the
political scene.

Nevertheless, the attitude displayed by the young
servicemen during this crisis offers a glimmer of hope,
being a sign of the emergence of a new generation that
respects the rule of law and the primacy of
constitutional institutions. The political dialogue which
has been started between the two parties in power, the
efforts made by the Assembly of Guinea-Bissau to
reconcile differences between the Government and the
army, as well as the organization of municipal
elections, which we hope will take place as planned
before the end of the year, can only strengthen trust
among the people of Guinea-Bissau, and deserve our
encouragement and strong support.

My delegation also believes that the
strengthening of the police force and the speeding up
of the process of demobilization and reintegration of
former combatants will definitely make it possible to
further consolidate a climate of peace and security in
Guinea-Bissau, provided, of course, that the necessary
resources are mobilized in time.

We would also strongly encourage the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the United
Nations Peace-building Support Office in Guinea-
Bissau (UNOGBIS), whose role is very valuable, to
intensify their efforts and to bring together all the
political factions in a spirit of reconciliation and
cooperation.

The current crisis in Guinea-Bissau prompts the
international community to redouble its efforts to help
the Government to establish real civilian authority in
the country, as well as democratic institutions. This
process clearly must go hand in hand with economic
recovery and reconstruction of the country. However,
this difficult but very necessary task can be completed
only if the international community continues to
support and assist Guinea-Bissau, whose growing
needs are becoming ever more urgent. The extreme
poverty in the country, the precariousness of its
economic situation and the inability of the
Government, because of lack of resources, to meet the
most elementary needs of the population are all factors
highly conducive to political instability and social
unrest.

We cannot hope to establish real, lasting peace
and stability if the economic situation remains
precarious, if the unemployment and underemployment
rate remains as high as it is and if the public sector
bills are not paid on time.

The international community must match its
commitment to Guinea-Bissau with specific measures
to ease poverty and relieve its external debt. Hence the
need for urgent action to prevent the country from
sliding into another crisis whose consequences would
be disastrous for the country and for the people of
Guinea-Bissau, who have suffered too much already,
particularly since experience has shown us that
preventive action is much more productive and costs
less.

Aware of all these security, economic and social
priorities, Tunisia, which has always advocated the
eradication of poverty as a factor of stability, strongly
supports the appeal of the Secretary-General for the
international community, as well as the world's
financial institutions, to assist the Government of
Guinea-Bissau in its efforts and to provide urgent
financial and economic assistance before the round
table to be held in February.

