Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): Recently, you, Mr. President,
led the Security Council on a trip to Somalia and South
Sudan. There, the members of the group witnessed
for themselves the value and the difference that
humanitarian workers can make in the lives of displaced
persons and others affected by conflict.
Today's briefing on the occasion of World
Humanitarian Day is very timely. We thank the
President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross and the Director of The Liaison Office for their
helpful briefings. We also thank the Deputy Secretary-
General, His Excellency Mr. Jan Eliasson, for his
presence. His remarks were inspiring, and the deficit of
humanity to which he so accurately referred is indeed
at the heart of the problem that we are addressing this
morning.

Eleven years ago today, the world was shocked by
the appalling news of the deliberate attack by terrorists
on the Baghdad headquarters of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq. Twenty-two people,
including Sergio Vieira de Mello, lost their lives in that
atrocity, which also left more than 100 others injured.
The attack was a wake-up call to the international
community. It also reminded us of the stark reality that
the provision of humanitarian assistance in situations
of conflict was not without grave risks.

Since the 2003 attack in Baghdad, hundreds of
humanitarian workers have been attacked, kidnapped
or killed in the line of duty. That is the reality in which
humanitarian workers operate in many parts of the
world today. They face such risks daily as they go about
their noble duties. That does not have to be the case.
Indeed, it should not be so.

We condemn in the strongest possible terms such
cowardly and outrageous attacks, which contravene
the highly protected status of humanitarian workers
under international humanitarian law. The foundation
of the protection afforded to humanitarian workers
lies in the fundamental principle of international
humanitarian law, which draws a clear distinction
between combatants and non-combatants. As persons
not participating in conflict, assaults on humanitarian
workers are unacceptable and indefensible.

States bear the primary responsibility for the
protection of civilians, including humanitarian workers.
However, most conflicts occur in a fluid atmosphere
of lawlessness, where governance structures are weak
and State authority is lacking. The situation is further
compounded by the proliferation of non-State actors,
including extremist groups, terrorists and criminal
networks. Such groups are usually ignorant of or
lack respect for human rights and the principles of
international humanitarian law.

Given the multiplicity of warring factions, it has
proved cumbersome in certain instances to negotiate
with every warring faction for the safe passage of
humanitarian personnel and assets. Strengthening
coordination among humanitarian actors is expedient,
within their respective mandates, in order to
complement their efforts and to enhance the safety
of their personnel. In addition, smart and adequate
security measures must be put in place to protect aid
workers. However, care should be taken to ensure that
such protective measures do not affect aid workers'
neutrality of passage or increase hostilities towards
them. We take note of the remarks by the Director of
The Liaison Office in that regard.

In that context, we also note the adoption of
alternative protection measures, such as community-
based policing, which are increasingly being adopted
by humanitarian agencies. Nigeria reiterates that the
parties to an armed conflict - State and non-State
actors alike - must take appropriate steps to ensure the
safety of humanitarian personnel. In order to to prevent
a culture of impunity, we call on States to ensure that
credible and timely investigations into alleged attacks
on humanitarian workers are conducted and that the
perpetrators of such acts are held accountable. When
States are unwilling or lack the capacity to prosecute
such violations, the onus of referring such violations to
international mechanisms so that they can be addressed
and remedied lies with the international community.

Finally, we believe that it is essential to mitigate the
intensity and frequency of attacks against humanitarian
workers. The international community must remain
engaged in exploring various means to safeguard
their safety and security in the theatres of conflict
around the globe. We express our heartfelt gratitude to
humanitarian workers for their courage and dedication
to alleviating the suffering ofpeople affected by conflict
despite the challenges that they face. We offer our
deepest condolences to the families of those who have
lost loved ones in the course of providing humanitarian
assistance to those in need.

