Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): Ijoin earlier speakers in
thanking the Under- Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Herve' Ladsous, and the Deputy Police
Commissioner of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan, the Police Commissioner of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Police Commissioner
of the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) for
their respective briefings, which we have listened to
very carefully. In line with its strong commitment to
United Nations peacekeeping, Malaysia has contributed
personnel to all three Missions.

I wish to begin by reaffirming Malaysia's support
for resolution 2185 (2014), which paved the way for the
Council's closer engagement with the men and women
serving in the police components of United Nations
peace operations, including through meetings such as
these. We strongly support the convening of similar
meetings in the future and hope that the discussion
and outcome of this meeting will contribute to the
Secretary-General's report requested in paragraph 33
of resolution 2185 (2014).

I wish to pay tribute to the bravery and sacrifice
of United Nations police personnel in the field and to
their commitment in discharging the mandates and
responsibilities with which they have been entrusted by
the United Nations in pursuit of lasting peace, security
and stability in their respective theatres of operations.

One ofthe most significant policy shifts concerning
the scope and role of United Nations police operations
relates to the protection of civilians, with increased
emphasis on both the protection of women and girls,
including protection from sexual and gender-based
violence, and the protection of children in armed
conflict - mandates that we welcome and strongly
support. In that regard, we also support the call by
earlier speakers for the deployment of more women
police personnel on the ground. Through individual
police officers and formed police units (FPUs), United
Nations police have a niche role, including through
training and capacity-building, and in particular in
assisting national authorities to uphold their primary
responsibility for protecting civilians. In that context,
Malaysia fully supports the efforts of United Nations
police to enhance the accountability of national security
forces as a means to further strengthen the rule of law.
Once local police are empowered and the security
sector is reformed over time, the United Nations can
hand over the business of the maintenance of law and
order to the Governments concerned.

Malaysia recently pledged additional contributions
to United Nations police. Specifically, it will contribute
280 officers and personnel from the Royal Malaysia
Police to be deployed as two teams of FPUs, as well
as 100 police officers and personnel to be deployed
as individual police officers. Malaysia is currently
working to deploy those officers as soon as possible.

We agree with the view that the current ongoing
review processes of United Nations peace operations,
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture and the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, present opportunities for
effecting improvements to the operational capabilities
and capacities of United Nations police and for better
clarifying its role and functions, among other things.
To that end, Malaysia looks forward to working
with all interested partners and stakeholders. We
also see much scope for enhancing interactions and
consultations between the Council and the troop- and
police-contributing countries.

In support of your call, Mr. President, to keep this
briefing meeting interactive and lively, I conclude
at this juncture with three questions for the briefers.
For Mr. Gregory Hinds, as the Mission is currently in
drawdown mode, how has that affected, if at all, the
tasks related to transferring responsibility to Liberian
security institutions? If it has affected them, I request
him to elaborate on the specific challenges faced and
possible solutions to address them. I also ask him
to elaborate on the experiences of UNMIL's police
component in implementing the protection-of-civilians
mandate, including by its family protection unit. I ask
the other Police and Deputy Police Commissioners to
elaborate on how the use of technology such as social
media and telecommunications equipment has, or has
not, helped in discharging their respective mandates,
in particular with regard to the rule of law and
institution-strengthening activities.

