Mrs. Smith (Norway): Like other speakers, I
firmly condemn the terrorist attack in Abuja today. A
Norwegian junior professional officer was among the
deceased. Our thoughts go to the United Nations, the
people of Nigeria, and the victims and their families.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
Nordic countries: Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway
and Sweden.

United Nations peacekeeping is crucial in
supporting countries affected by armed conflict. The
Nordic countries are longstanding supporters of this
key United Nations endeavour. Between us, we
participate in nine of the current United Nations
operations. Three of them are headed by
representatives from the Nordic countries, two of
whom are women. That is no coincidence. We strongly
believe that we need more women at the top level in
United Nations peacekeeping and that we must
continue to strive for proper integration of the gender
perspective in all activities.

We welcome this opportunity to discuss
peacekeeping in the Security Council. Our main focus
will be on the issues of protection, capabilities and
partnerships.

The primary role of the United Nations with
regard to the protection of civilians should be to assist
host Governments in carrying out their responsibility to
fulfil this vital task. Strengthening good governance,
security and justice sector reform, and the participation
of women are key issues in this regard. At the same
time, the United Nations must be prepared and able to
provide robust assistance when needed. The effective
implementation of all aspects of protection mandates
requires adequate capabilities, training, planning and
strategy.

The Nordic countries fully agree with India's
focus on the need for better alignment between
mandates and capabilities. Discrepancies between
stated objectives and the availability of capabilities can
undermine the credibility of the United Nations.

To meet future demands, the United Nations
needs to apply a more comprehensive and capability-
driven approach. The Nordic countries support the New
Horizon initiative as a solid basis for improving the
United Nations capacity to deliver on all parts of the
mandates. The ongoing efforts of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field
Support to move the focus from numbers to skills and
capacity are highly commendable. Likewise, the
United Nations must make more efficient use of
available resources, both in-house and internationally,
in particular from the South. In this light, we welcome
the recommendations of the civilian capacities review
(S/2011/85).

Civilian capacities, including rule of law and
gender expertise, play a key role in the transition from
conflict to peace and development. Together, we must
build on the momentum that has been generated by the
review, and continue to work for the implementation of
the recommendations. As Nordic countries, we stand
ready to share our expertise in developing civilian
capacities in peacekeeping and peacebuilding.

We must also continue to strengthen the United
Nations capacity to deliver as one. We cannot look at
peacekeeping in isolation from peacebuilding and
longer-term development. A well-integrated and more
coherent United Nations is a more effective United
Nations. This requires an ability to prioritize and to
think strategically across sectors and divisions.

Partnership is a key word. We acknowledge the
importance of further enhancing the relationship
between troop- and police-contributing countries and

11-4820!)
United Nations bodies. The Secretariat and the Security
Council will benefit from closer engagement in the
formulation of new mandates as well as in the
adjustment of existing mandates.

Close relations between the United Nations and
host Governments will also benefit all parties involved
and pave the way for early transition. In order to
succeed with those very sensitive peacebuilding tasks
that tend to be included in peacekeeping mandates,
national ownership is vital. This is particularly true
with regard to security sector reform.

Enhanced cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations is another key
partnering issue. Cooperation and coordination are
important means to ensure that the increased role of
regional organizations in peacekeeping contributes to
the efficient use of scarce resources. This is highly
relevant in Africa, where the African Union is
shouldering a heavy burden alongside the United
Nations.

The Nordic countries are jointly engaged in a
capacity-building programme with the Eastern African
Standby Force Coordination Mechanism. We are
delighted with the progress made by our East African
partners. Last week, the Standby Force signed a
memorandum of understanding with the African Union
Commission to enhance the capabilities of the African
Union Mission in Somalia. This memorandum is a
milestone in the operationalization of the African
Standby Force, as it will provide the framework for the
first ever deployment of a regional African standby
force.

Let me conclude by expressing the Nordic
countries' appreciation of India's initiative to organize
today's debate.

