Mr. Skinner-Klee (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Guatemala thanks the delegation of Senegal, as President
of the Security Council this month, for organizing this
open debate, and we welcome the country's Minister
for Foreign Affairs, His Excellency Mr. Mankeur
Ndiaye. We are grateful for the briefings by the Deputy
Secretary-General and the other briefers this morning,
which were extremely informative.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.

Guatemala thanks the President for the concept
note (S/2016/927, annex) that he has circulated on
peace operations facing asymmetrical threats. We
share the views expressed in the concept note that most
crises today can be classified as internal conflicts or
intra-State conflicts, where there are confrontations
between Government forces and non-State armed
groups. As a consequence, security in implementing
operations on the ground has become a lot more
complicated. My delegation is concerned by and greatly
regrets that 34 Blue Helmets were killed and another
190 injured between January 2015 and October 2016.
Improving the protection and security of personnel
in peacekeeping operations should continue to be a
fundamental priority. In that respect, we welcome the
fact that measures are being taken to improve security
analysis on proposed initiatives by making timely
decisions on activities that need to be undertaken and
on how to manage the risks that personnel face on
the ground. That information needs to be shared with
troop-contributing countries in a timely fashion. The
safety of personnel is a non-negotiable requirement that
calls for more attention.

The reviews conducted in 2015 regarding the
work of the Organization in the areas of peace and
security, specifically the recommendations on peace
operations in the report (see S/2015/446) of the High-
level Independent Panel on Peace Operations and on
peacebuilding in the Rosenthal report (see S/2015/490),
and on women and peace and security, have underscored
the need for the United Nations to adapt to new situations
and circumstances that have a bearing on conflicts by
investing more in prevention than in containment.

Our delegation aligns itself with the report of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations,
given that such operations, in terms of their structure
and characteristics, have not been created to participate
in active military counter-terrorism operations, both
because of their lack of capacity in the field oflogistics
and other areas, and above all because it distorts the
doctrine that underlies peace operations. We are willing
to consider emerging circumstances, but not to change
the very meaning of peacekeeping operations without a
broad and informed consensus.

However, we acknowledge the relevance of the
views expressed by the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Herve' Ladsous; we
cannot deny that extremist groups are an emerging
phenomenon. That means that it is necessary to develop
creative approaches to address such armed groups
without compromising the foundational doctrine of the
Organization's work.
In his Action Plan to Prevent Violent Extremism, the
Secretary-General made it clear that the phenomenon
affects the purposes and principles of the United
Nations. It undermines peace and international security,
human rights and sustainable development. There is no
country in my region that is immune to those effects.
The reality on the ground is also alarming. Of the 11
countries that are most affected by global terrorism,
seven of them have peace missions with mandates from
the Organization. Regarding the current situation, the
international community has witnessed an increasing
number of confrontations between armed political
groups and militia groups, where crime, terrorism
and violent extremism prevail. In some cases, the
Governments of host countries to peace missions have
encountered numerous challenges in seeking to protect
their population.

Peacekeeping missions are not designed to, or
principally aimed at, combating terrorism. Guatemala
maintains its doubts as to the achievements and the
implications that so-called peacemaking operations
have. We believe that those types of operations distort
the basic function that they pursue, bearing in mind that
peacekeeping operations are not designed or equipped
to impose political solutions through the continuous
use of force.

It is important that the international community
acknowledge that conflict prevention is a shared
responsibility. It must be coordinated among all
stakeholders, namely, the States involved, international
and regional organizations, the specialized agencies
and, of course, civil society organizations, for the
purpose of working to solve the original causes of
the conflict and refine the essential elements of
peacekeeping operations.

In conclusion, I would like to mention something
else that is no less important. Waiting for conflict
situations to be included on the agenda of the Council
is tantamount to adopting a reactive approach rather
than a preventive one. We need to invest in prevention
so that we do not have to wait for conflicts to break
out in order to adopt the necessary measures. General
Assembly resolution 70/262 and Council resolution
2282 (2016) were adopted in April and sent out a clear
message: we must break the silos in the Organization,
which is a fundamental requirement if we are to abide
by the three pillars of the Charter of the United Nations,
namely, development, human rights, and peace and
security.

