The President: I shall now take the floor in my
capacity as the representative of Japan.

First, I express my appreciation for the kind
words addressed to the presidency of February. It is
important that the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL)
swiftly reach its full operational capacity under the
new leadership of the Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Michael von der Schulenburg.
We are encouraged by the increasing stability of Sierra
Leone as well as by the successful elections in July
2008 and the by-elections of last month. Such progress
indicates that a democratic culture is now taking
further root in Sierra Leone.

Sierra Leone represents a model of the transition
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding. Major
peacebuilding challenges remain, however, in good
governance and creating development opportunities for
the public. We believe the following areas should
receive priority attention focused on the human
security perspective: first, strengthening good
governance, core democratic institutions, dialogue for
national cohesion and reconciliation and accountability
in public services. We support the efforts by President
Koroma to fight corruption and to change the attitude
of those working in the public sector.

Secondly, drug trafficking and piracy in Sierra
Leone's coastal waters must be controlled. The
concerted efforts of the Government of Sierra Leone

and international partners must be accelerated.
Regional cooperation through the Economic
Community of West African States is important in
addressing those emerging threats. Thirdly, measures
must be taken to improve the livelihood of the people.
Urgent support needs to be extended to create job
opportunities for young people. We also need to
support the Government's efforts to reduce its high
dependency on food imports and to achieve self-
sufficiency by 2010, putting to use the valuable human
resource of young people in rural areas. Electricity
supply and basic transportation infrastructure are
essential as well.

Those priority areas are all reflected in President
Koroma's Agenda for Change, the Peacebuilding
Cooperation Framework and the Joint Vision of the
United Nations Family for Sierra Leone. I hope that
synergy among those frameworks can be achieved. I
particularly appreciate the initiative of the Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General in formulating
the United Nations Joint Vision. It represents a
conscious effort to address priority areas in a fully
coordinated and integrated manner by stakeholders on
the ground: the United Nations system, the World
Bank, the International Monetary Fund and the African
Development Bank. We believe that such an approach
could provide a good model for other peacebuilding
efforts. What matters most is not the strategy itself, but
its implementation.

The international community should strengthen
political, economical and technical support. We must
keep up the momentum. Together with traditional
partners, efforts are needed to attract new partners and
broaden the donor base. We welcome the many new
partners now joining. Japan has extended assistance in
the energy sector and for youth employment and is now
considering assistance for rice production through the
framework of the Coalition for African Rice
Development.
We commend the good work done by the
Peacebuilding Commission and believe that the
Council should endorse the conclusions and
recommendations of the second biannual review of the
Peacebuilding Cooperation Framework. It may also be
appropriate to examine the frequency of reporting as
the situation warrants.

I now resume the functions of the presidency.
Since there were some questions and comments raised,
I invite the Executive Representative to take the floor
again.

