Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): It is with great satisfaction and enthusiasm
that Equatorial Guinea expresses its appreciation for
the convening of this meeting, which allows us once
again to analyse and share perspectives on the political
and institutional situation in Guinea-Bissau.

My delegation would like to thank Mr. Taye-Brook
Zerihoun, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, and Ambassador Mauro Vieira for their very
relevant briefings.

I would like to focus my speech on three vital
points. First, we stress the importance of the current
electoral process in ensuring a return to political and
institutional stability in Guinea-Bissau. Secondly, we
underscore the urgent need for far-reaching reforms to
move the country forward. Lastly, I will share my views
on the post-election period.

The main challenge to the consensus-based
Government of Prime Minister Aristides Gomes,
formed seven months ago, has been to create a political
environment that builds trust and is conducive to the
holding of free and transparent legislative elections,
in particular by updating the electoral register and
establishing a new mapping division that, in theory,
would enable the Government and the National Electoral
Commission to hold elections in an atmosphere of
peace and tranquillity. Furthermore, despite the clear
desire of the United Nations and other regional and
international partners for the legislative elections to
be held on 18 November, in accordance with the legal
and constitutional timelines, organizing the elections
was fraught with difficulties, including a delay in the
delivery of electoral kits. That led the Government
to postpone the electoral census process, which was
suspended by decision of the Guinea-Bissau Public
Prosecutor's Office, following an investigation into
irregularities reported in the process.

Nonetheless, Equatorial Guinea takes note of the
announcement made yesterday by President Jose Mario
Vaz to hold legislative elections on 10 March 2019.
It would be advisable for all stakeholders in Guinea-
Bissau to refuse to allow the holding of elections to
undermine the fragile stability achieved thus far. In
that regard, it is essential that the parties concerned
continue to examine any initiative that could lead to
the implementation of other important provisions of the
Conakry Agreement that would contribute to ending
the current political crisis. In addition, we commend the
efforts of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) and regional
and subregional actors, such as the African Union,
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries,
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the European Union and the ECOWAS
Mission in Guinea-Bissau, whose support, through
their good offices function, is vital to ensuring that the
electoral process is brought to a satisfactory end.

We take note of the recommendation of the
Secretary-General for a UNIOGBIS drawdown once
the electoral process has been completed. After two
decades in Guinea-Bissau, we believe that it makes
sense to redefine the objectives of United Nations
presence in the country. We also recommend that the
political mission, in particular after its drawdown,
continue working closely with key regional actors in
support of the institutional reform programme.

Elections are by no means a panacea to the
country's problems. That is why there is ongoing
focus on the need to implement reforms in the areas of
security, justice and public administration, including in
the education and health sectors. Firm political will and
a sense of ownership and identification on the part of
national authorities are crucial to that end.

In conclusion, the path to restoring stability post-
elections will be a very important phase, since it will
enable the new Government to build on its reforms.
In that regard, UNIOGBIS will again have the
opportunity to continue assisting national authorities
in implementing their reform programme by providing
strategic support and advice on strengthening their
democratic institutions. Once the country is politically
stable and the long cycle of instability ends, it would
be well advised to seriously address the need for
sustainable economic development. To that end, it will
be essential to continue seeking additional partners to
implement social and economic projects initiated by the
new Government following presidential elections next
year. It is important for Bissau-Guineans to remain
united in the difficult and crucial times their country
will face in the near future.

