Mr. Serrano: I thank you, Madam for giving the
floor to the European Union. The candidate countries
Croatia and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia; the countries of the Stabilisation and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro and Serbia; as
well as the Republic of Moldova and Armenia align
themselves with this statement.

Since our last open debate in April on this issue
(see S/PV.6298), two major developments have
occurred: the Gaza flotilla events of 31 May and the
beginning of proximity talks in early May. The Israeli
military operation in the morning hours of 31 May in
international waters against a flotilla sailing to Gaza
resulted in the loss of nine lives and directed
international attention to the unsustainable situation in
Gaza. The European Union called for an immediate,
full and impartial inquiry into these events, which
should include credible international participation.
Furthermore, the European Union declared its
readiness to contribute to the implementation of a
mechanism that would allow for full and regular access
to Gaza based on a list of prohibited goods. The
European Union High Representative discussed this
matter with the Israeli and Palestinian leadership
during her visit to the region last weekend and will
present options to the European Union Foreign Affairs
Council next Monday.

The European Union has welcomed the Israeli
Government's recent announcement, which is a
significant step forward in the review of Israel's policy
on Gaza. The implementation of commitments
undertaken will be key. The European Union is ready
to help in the opening of the crossings, but has
expectations linked to volumes, exports, the movement
of persons and security. These expectations are, of
course, applicable to all existing crossings.

The objective remains the full implementation of
Security Council resolution 1860 (2009), as well as the
2005 Agreement on Movement and Access, leading to
the immediate, sustained and unconditional opening of
Gaza crossings for the flow of humanitarian aid,
commercial goods and persons. Israel's legitimate
security concerns should also be addressed and Gilad
Shalit must be released without delay and without
conditions.

The launch of proximity talks between Israelis
and Palestinians was welcomed by the European Union
and its Quartet partners. We called on the parties to
pursue them in good faith. These talks are a significant
step towards the resumption of direct bilateral
negotiations. The European Union supports the
continued efforts of Senator Mitchell in this regard.

The overall aim of negotiations between the
Parties is - within 24 months, as set out by the
Quartet in March - a settlement that results in the
emergence of an independent, democratic and viable
Palestinian State living side by side in peace and
security with Israel and its other neighbours. A
comprehensive peace, which is a fundamental interest
of the parties in the region and the whole international
community, must be achieved on the basis of the
relevant Security Council resolutions, the Madrid
principles, including land for peace, the Road Map, the
agreements previously reached by the parties and the
Arab Peace Initiative.

It is the view of the European Union that
substantive discussion of all final status issues should
commence as soon as possible. The implementation in
the coming weeks of confidence-building measures on
the ground would help in reaching this goal. The
European Union calls on all parties to refrain from all
provocative actions.

The European Union remains deeply concerned
about the situation in East Jerusalem. Recent
settlement activity, house demolitions, evictions and
deportations underline the need to resolve through
negotiations the status of Jerusalem as the future
capital of two States. We particularly deplore the recent
house demolitions in East Jerusalem, which do not
contribute to the establishment of an atmosphere of
confidence, which is crucial at this stage of the
negotiation process.

The European Union commends all initiatives
that contribute to improve the well-being of the
Palestinian population, especially in Gaza, such as the
recent summer games held by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) in Gaza. High Representative
Ashton visited a summer camp on her recent visit to
Gaza. This initiative can count on the continued
political and financial support of the European Union
and its member States. It serves as a much needed
counterbalance to the backdrop of violence and
poverty, and it provides Gazan children with
recreational and educational opportunities. The
European Union strongly condemns the recent attacks
on UNRWA's summer camps.

The European Union expresses the hope that both
parties to this conflict will engage in substantive
discussion of final status issues so that, before the end
of the current session of the General Assembly, we can
take note of urgently needed progress towards peace
and stability for the people of the Middle East.

