Mr. Al-Hinai (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Sir, and the Council
members for your prompt response to the request made
by the Arab Group to hold this meeting in order to
consider the deteriorating situation in the occupied
Arab territories.

Since the Council adopted resolution 1397 (2002)
on 12 March, the Palestinian people have been
subjected to a campaign of murder, siege and starvation
by the Israeli forces of occupation. Despite the
adoption by the Council of three resolutions calling on
all concerned parties, particularly Israel, to implement
a ceasefire and to withdraw all forces without delay,
the demands and appeals have not been heeded. The
Israel military machine persists in killing scores of
Palestinian civilians, including the elderly, women and
children.

Faced with such defiance and Israel's persistent
disrespect for the Security Council resolutions, we
would like to ask what measures the Council could take
that would enable it to implement its resolutions
regarding Israel. We would like to associate ourselves
with previous speakers who have made it clear that the
Council is being put to the test now, more than at any
other time in the past. Either the Council proves to the
world that it is acting without any double standards by
forcing Israel to implement the relevant resolutions, or
it remains silent, as has been the case in the past, and
deals with Israel as if it were a country above the law
and international legitimacy.

Such a situation cannot continue for long. We
believe that it is necessary for the Council to act with a
degree of responsibility to force Israel to implement
relevant Security Council resolutions, particularly
resolution 1402 (2002), requesting Israel to withdraw
its forces from the territories under the control of the
Palestinian Authority without delay. That means the
immediate implementation of that resolution.

Military options, which impose solutions by
force, are not an appropriate means to settle conflicts.
The best testimony to that is that, in spite of the
incredible pressure that Israel is exerting on the
Palestinian people and its courageous leadership to
make unreasonable concessions under the threat of
force and weapons, that pressure has not broken the
will of the Palestinian people or the will of its
leadership, since their struggle against the occupation
is legitimate and is very soundly grounded in
international law.

We believe that a settlement to the conflict in the
Middle East cannot be reached unless the parties are
convinced of the usefulness of peaceful negotiations. In
this regard, we call once again on all countries
concerned, countries with influence, and on the
Council to urge Israel to heed the call for peace by
immediately stopping all acts of violence and
withdrawing its forces from all Palestinian towns and
villages; to arrange for necessary international
protection of the Palestinian people without delay; to
restart the peace process and reach a solution to the
Middle East conflict through direct negotiations with
the legitimate elected leadership of the Palestinian
people, represented in the person of President Yasser
Arafat and by the Palestinian Authority.

Even if Israel decides to withdraw its forces from
Palestinian territories, we would still request that such
withdrawal be immediate and from all areas that have
been reoccupied. We do not consider this as a prompt
response to the will of the international community.
Rather, it is a very late response.

The Security Council should not stop at this, as if
nothing has happened. We request that the Council
consider the adoption of punitive measures against
Israel and make it bear responsibility for all the
bloodshed and destruction. The Council should also
consider the steps necessary to provide protection for
the Palestinians, as has already been stated by the
representatives of Mauritius and South Africa.

This is the path to peace. Israel must choose
between the path of peace, which ensures its right to
live in peace, and the path of war, which can only lead
to further violence and the killing of innocent people
on both sides.

