Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the convening of today's meeting by the
Chadian presidency. I thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Haysom and Executive Director
Fedotov for their briefings. I also thank Ambassador
Tanin for his statement.

The year 2014 is crucial in terms of Afghanistan's
political, security and economic transition. Since
the beginning of the year, Afghanistan has smoothly
concluded its presidential election and the formation
of a new inclusive Government. It has been steadily
promoting economic and social development.

The Afghan people are facing a new opportunity
of unity and stability, peaceful reconstruction and
development. A solid foundation has been prepared
for a transformation that will begin in 2015. China
congratulates the Afghan Government and the people
on their achievement.

At the same time, a stable and prosperous
Afghanistan with all of its ethnic groups living in
harmony requires a continuing unwavering effort on
the part of the Afghan Government and people and
sustained attention and assistance on the part of the
international community. I would like to emphasize the
following points.

First, the promotion of the national reconciliation
process is key. In order to achieve peace and stability
Afghanistan must commit to broad-based, inclusive
political reconciliation. Chinese President Xi Jinping,
in meeting with President Ghani Ahmadzai in October,
emphasized that all parties should support an Afghan-
led and Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation process.
It is China's hope that all parties in Afghanistan will
demonstrate wisdom and sincerity, place the interests
of the Afghan people before anything else and actively
participate in the Afghan reconciliation process.
Together with the international community, China
intends to provide constructive assistance to promote
the Afghan reconciliation process.

Secondly, maintaining a stable security situation
is a prerequisite. At present, the Afghan security
situation remains grim, with frequent violent attacks.
The international community must continue to assist
Afghanistan in the capacity-building of its national
security and police forces. It must support the efforts
of the Afghan security forces in maintaining domestic
security and stability and effectively responding to
any security threats or challenges in order to ensure
conditions conducive to achieving Afghanistan's
socioeconomic development and its citizens' well-
being.

Thirdly,therealizationofsustainablesocioeconomic
development is fundamental. Poverty is the breeding
ground of extremism. China will increase its support
to Afghanistan's peace and reconstruction efforts, help
Afghanistan in formulating national socioeconomic
development plans, train professionals in various fields,
strengthen infrastructure construction and facilitate
local economic development. The international
community must also fulfil its commitment to assist
Afghanistan in developing self-sufficiency capacities
aimed at independent development.

Fourthly, strengthening international and regional
cooperation is a priority. Afghanistan cannot realize
development and prosperity without the support and
assistance of the international community, especially
the countries in the region. The international
community should resolutely support Afghanistan's
good-neighbour relationship with the countries in
the region and support Afghanistan's participation in
international and regional cooperation efforts with a
view to further integration in the regional economic
sphere.

We support the continued leading role of the
United Nations and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in coordinating
international assistance on behalf of Afghanistan.
It is China's hope that UNAMA will strengthen
communication, coordination and cooperation with the
Afghan Government and enhance the confidence of
the international community in Afghanistan's smooth
transition process.

China is a good neighbour of Afghanistan. China
is also a good friend of Afghanistan. China hopes to
see a unified, stable, well-developed and friendly
Afghanistan. China is firm in supporting active efforts
to ensure Afghanistan's peace and reconstruction
process.

During President Ghani Ahmadzai's visit to China
at the end of October, China and Afghanistan issued
a joint declaration on strengthening their strategic,
cooperative partnership. The Chinese Government has
decided to provide Afghanistan with grant assistance
in the amount of 5500 million in 2014, and ¥1.5 billion
over the next three years.

To support capacity-building in Afghanistan, in
the next five years China will assist Afghanistan in the
training of 3,000 professionals from various fields and
hold counter-terrorism and counter-narcotics training
seminars.

China also hosted, in Beijing, the fourth Heart of
Asia-Istanbul Process Ministerial Conference. China
is actively committed to facilitating Afghanistan's
regional cooperation and pushing for an early resolution
of the issue of Afghanistan, with a view to achieving
long-term peace and stability and economic and social
development in the region.

China looks forward to working with the
international community in its steadfast efforts to
jointly support Afghanistan in its early realization of
political reconciliation, economic recovery and long-
term development and the security and prosperity of
Afghanistan and the region.

