Mr. Kdriisi (Hungary): I would like to thank
Australia for convening this open debate on counter-
terrorism.

While I fully support the statement to be delivered
later by the observer of the European Union, I wish to
add a few observations in my national capacity.

To combat and uproot terrorism we must apply
a broad spectrum of economic, financial, social,
educational, administrative and legal measures - and
force, ifnecessary. Much has been said on those aspects
today. Right now, I would like to focus on some legal
elements, particularly concerning accountability
for crimes committed by terrorist actors. All who
commit criminal acts or acts of terror - or who
merely think about joining a terrorist group - must
be aware that the day when they have to give account
for the crimes committed will inevitably come. As
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon noted in 2013,

"Terrorism festers where conflicts are endemic and
where human rights, human dignity and human
life are not protected and impunity prevails"
(S/PV6900, p. 2).

Based on that often-repeated observation, Hungary
appreciates the robust measures and comprehensive
approach taken by the Security Council in resolutions
2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014). My country also commends
the Council's stronger focus on accountability in
the fight against terrorism. Resolution 2170 (2014)
reinforces the concept that widespread or systematic
attacks directed against any civilian populations
because of their ethnic or political background, religion
or belief may constitute a crime against humanity, and
it emphasizes the importance of accountability. It also
urges all States to cooperate and bring to justice those
who perpetrate, organize or sponsor terrorist acts of
any kind.

Those two resolutions have already become
important reference points and a mobilizing force for
accountability, as we have seen in the recommendations
contained in the newly published report of the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on the Syrian Arab Republic on the activities of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). However,
the Commission of Inquiry seems to be convinced
that besides domestic action and regional international
cooperation, as outlined in two resolutions,
international accountability mechanisms, including the
International Criminal Court, should also be engaged.
That buttresses the requests that the Council has already
heard on the need to act decisively when accountability
is in jeopardy and, as the Secretary-General has put it,
impunity prevails.

Furthermore, we have no reason to doubt that the
fact-finding mission requested by the Human Rights
Council in its resolution S-22/1 will find alarming
circumstances related to ISIL activities in Iraq. Iraq
and the international community will therefore have to
ensure ISIL's accountability for war crimes and crimes
against humanity committed against, in particular,
women, children and religious and ethnic minorities.

