Mrs. Carrion (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I too
thank Ms. Nakamitsu for her briefing.

The use of chemical weapons, wherever it may
take place, is a serious threat to international peace and
security, as well as a grave violation of international
law. Uruguay therefore condemns in the most emphatic
terms any use of toxic chemicals as weapons in the
Syrian conflict. These actions constitute war crimes,
and those responsible for these crimes must be brought
to justice.

We reiterate that until the entire Syrian chemical
arsenal, declared or not, has been destroyed or
safeguarded, we will not be able to close definitively
the dossier on Syria's chemical weapons in the
Security Council. In that vein, we encourage the
Syrian authorities to cooperate with the Organisation
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) to
clarify all omissions and discrepancies in the initial
declaration. We also note the latest monthly report of
the Director General of the OPCW, stating that it has
received the documents requested from Syria to clarify
and resolve all pending cases related to the initial
Syrian declaration, and that high-level consultations on
the matter will resume shortly.

Uruguay calls for a continued search for a consensus
that will make it possible to overcome differences
among members of the Council and to prevent new
incidents of chemical-weapons use in Syria, as well as
for the combat against the impunity of those responsible
for these atrocities. In the months to come, the OPCW-
United Nations Joint Implementation Mechanism (JIM)
will have to determine those responsible so that the
Security Council can finally take action in this regard,
action which has been delayed far too often.

Uruguay reiterates its full support for the serious
and impartial work of the JIM, and we trust in the
leadership and demonstrated experience of Mr. Edmond
Mulet, Head ofthe independent panel ofthe Mechanism,
so that in the coming months the authorship of these
incidents and others investigated during the second year
of the mandate given by the Council can be established.

In conclusion, we reiterate our call on all members
of the Council to overcome our internal differences
so that we can find a political solution that will put an
end to the violence, make it possible to consolidate a
ceasefire, ensure the protection of civilians and give
new hope to the hundreds of thousands of Victims that
the authors of the serious crimes committed in Syria
will be brought to justice.

