Ms. Coelho da Cruz (Angola): May I begin, Sir, by
congratulating you, on behalf of my Government, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. I should like also to congratulate your
predecessor, Ambassador Lavrov, on the positive work he
did during his mandate.

As we meet today, the prospects of a long and
lasting peace in Angola are still a mirage. After some
promising and encouraging signs following the
legalization of UNITA early this year, the peace process
is now taking a serious and dangerous turn owing to the
progressive and rapid deterioration of the security
situation in many parts of Angola. As a matter of course,
UNITA, instead of fulfilling its commitments and
obligations under the peace process, has chosen to launch
armed attacks with a View to occupying additional
territory, targeting mainly the civilian population, local
government authorities, the national police and the armed
forces.

As a result of this wave of violence, more than 650
people have been killed, 500 wounded and more than 600
kidnapped; most of the Victims were civilians.
Furthermore, UNITA has reoccupied 90 localities where
state administration had already been normalized. Not
only is this a step backward, but it has also led to a huge
increase in the number of refugees and displaced persons.

My Government strongly condemns these actions,
which constitute a blatant Violation of the Lusaka Protocol
and the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Furthermore, this pattern of violations casts serious doubts
on UNITA's alleged commitment to the full
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol. Were it not for
UNITA's systematic bad faith and stonewalling of the
application of the peace accords, Angola would now be
at peace.

The present crisis and deadlock in the peace process
is not just the result of its complexity. UNITA's stance
leads us to believe that the present scenario is a strategy
by UNITA leadership to hamper the Government's ability
to function, to worsen the social and economic situation
and to provoke chaos, hoping to create an environment
for UNITA to assume power in Angola by force.

There is hard evidence to support this. First, UN ITA
leadership intentionally lied to the United Nations and the
international community regarding the demobilization and
demilitarization of its forces. It still maintains a number
of military units, composed of thousands of heavily armed
men. Secondly, UNITA is avoiding the normalization of
state administration in its key sites, namely, Andulo,

 

Bailundo, N'Harea and Mungo. Those areas are used to
receive armaments and other materiel smuggled in from
international arms dealers. Thirdly, UNITA is postponing
over and over again its full installation in the capital, using
baseless and suspicious excuses.

Last weekend, more than 150 civilians were cruelly
killed by UNITA forces during an armed attack that
culminated in the occupation of the city of
Kunda-Dia-Base, Malange Province. And less than a month
ago, more than 300 civilians were assassinated in Bula,
Lunda Norte Province, by UNITA forces.

The Angolan people, outraged by these repugnant
killings, hope that the international community, and the
Council in particular, will take steps to put an end to these
atrocities. Condemnations alone are not enough to force
UNITA to stop such barbaric actions and adhere to the
peace process. Stronger action is needed. The Angolan
Government, as a Member of the United Nations family, is
entitled to receive the necessary support from the United
Nations in order to prevent a new escalation of the war.

The imposition of sanctions by the Security Council
against UNITA sent a clear message to the UNITA
leadership that the international community will not tolerate
its delaying tactics and plans to return to war. We therefore
believe that in order to be more effective, the existing
sanctions should be coupled with other measures likely to
tighten the isolation of UNITA's military wing.

It seems that UNITA's military wing does not
understand yet that its actions aimed at jeopardizing the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol and its attempts to
take power by force are in vain. UNITA's actions will only
lead to a further loss of life among the innocent people it
claims to defend and to the destruction of the country for
which it claims to fight. Instead of resorting to manoeuvres
bound to delay the fulfilment of its outstanding duties in the
peace process, UNITA leadership must strive to allow the
unconditional and unfettered normalization of state
administration along the areas it still occupies, cease
immediately all military attacks, demilitarize de facto all its
forces by the end of this month and install its headquarters
in the capital by 27 August.

The Angolan Government, still committed to a
peaceful solution to the conflict, will continue to do its
utmost to avoid a resumption of the hostilities and achieve
a successful outcome to the peace process. We hope that
the draft resolution to be adopted today can help to
persuade UNITA to abide by its obligations.

Finally, let me express once again our tribute to the
work of the late Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Maitre Alioune Blondin Beye, for the cause of
peace in Angola. We are confident that his replacement,
Mr. Issa Diallo, will pursue the role of Mr. Beye with the
same dynamism and wisdom.

We would like also to take this opportunity to
express our appreciation to the three observer countries
for their efforts in bringing peace to Angola.

