Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to express my gratitude to the Chair
of the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), His Excellency Ambassador
Oh Joon, for his comprehensive briefing. We also
express our appreciation for the great efforts made by
Ambassador Oh Joon during his country's chairmanship
of the Committee, which has experienced a great deal
of activity recently - including the open debate held in
May (see S/PV.7169), which resulted in the adoption of
a presidential statement (S/PRST/2014/7), as well as the
Committee's participation in 59 outreach activities and
visits to Member States, most recently to the United
Kingdom. The Committee also engaged with 18 States
out of the total 20 that have not yet submitted national
reports, in an effort to achieve reporting universality,
as that continues to be a challenge for the Committee
and its work in future.

The growth in the strength and capabilities of
terrorist organizations and their sources of financing,
as well as their control over vast areas in certain States,
makes the possibility of their use of non-conventional
weapons, including nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons, a real danger. That should serve once again
to draw our attention to the major responsibility that
every State has to comply fully with resolution 1540
(2004).

Jordan has taken concrete steps in compliance
with resolution 1540 (2004) and subsequent relevant
resolutions, adopting a number of relevant deterrent
and preventative laws at the national level, as well as
implementing effective control measures to monitor
exports and prevent the spread of nuclear, chemical
and biological weapons and their means of delivery.
Jordan has also acceded to a number of international
and regional conventions in that area. I would also
like to underscore that Jordan submitted its third
national implementation report last month, covering
the concrete progress made from 2006 to 2014. In that
context, we also look forward to cooperating with
international partners to prepare for the 2016 Nuclear
Security Summit.

We express our appreciation of the work of the
1540 Committee and the Expert Group in facilitating
assistance, and we look forward to an expansion of
such activities through the Committee's fourteenth
programme of work, which is scheduled to begin soon.
We urge the Expert Group, in particular, to pay greater
attention to facilitating assistance, closing technical
gaps and building the capacity of States.

We also express our appreciation for the assistance
of States and international organizations that provide
technical and other forms of assistance. We urge donors
to continue providing such support, which benefits
donors and recipients alike in such a way that we could
even call it mutual assistance, taking into consideration
the prevailing security environment in our States. Here,
we underscore the importance of the Committee listing
the Australia Group as a provider of assistance without
delay with a view to helping to promote the capacities
of States requiring such support.

As Council members will be aware, the Committee
is preparing for the comprehensive review of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) in 2016.
Considering the importance of that review, we propose
that the Committee give serious consideration to the
possibility of creating a fifth working group devoted to
preparations for the comprehensive review.

