There is a relationship between respect for human rights and the incidence of mass atrocities and war crimes. Respect for human rights is the best way to prevent those atrocities. It is particularly important today, Human Rights Day, that we remind this organ to ensure respect for human rights. Another way to prevent mass atrocities is accountability. In that respect, Germany welcomes the progress made in the pursuit of justice for victims of the most severe crimes and atrocities in Darfur. The Juba Peace Agreement, which was signed in October, not only paved the way towards sustainable peace in the Sudan but also opened the door to full and unlimited cooperation with the International Criminal Court (ICC) and reaffirmed the Sudanese commitment to resolution 1593 (2005). Germany especially welcomes the establishment of a truth and reconciliation commission in relation to Darfur and, likewise, of a special court for Darfur crimes. Germany encourages the Sudanese authorities to implement concrete first steps to ensure accountability at the national level as soon as possible. Practical cooperation with the International Criminal Court also remains important. In line with the principle of complementarity, it is indeed the primary responsibility of States to investigate and prosecute crimes under the Rome Statute. Germany encourages the Sudan to continue its efforts in support of justice for the victims. However, if crimes under international criminal law do not fall under the Sudan's national jurisdiction, it also needs to fully cooperate with the United Nations and the ICC. Those obligations were recently reaffirmed in the Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan, specifically the obligation to arrest and surrender suspects for whom arrest warrants have been issued. Finally, we once again call on the States Members of the United Nations, in particular the members of the Council, to keep up their support for the International Criminal Court as a key element of our common fight against impunity. We ask them to respect the independence of the Court and abstain from undue interference. We call on those who have not yet joined the Rome Statute to do so.
