Mr. Miranda (Angola) (spoke in Portuguese; interpretation provided by the delegation): It is a great
honour for me to address this forum in my capacity as
Chairman of the Political Committee of the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement. Allow me first to commend the
initiative to convene this joint meeting with the
members of the Security Council. Although this has
become a routine practice, it is more important than
ever today because it occurs on the eve of a decisive
stage in the implementation of the Lusaka Agreement
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo: the
launching of phase III of the deployment of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC).

The fundamental reason for this meeting is to
determine together how to ensure the maintenance
and strengthening of the ceasefire, to achieve the
disarmament and demobilization of the armed groups,
to accelerate the withdrawal of foreign forces, to step
up the internal dialogue and, most important, to
contribute substantially to the restoration of peace and
stability to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
These tasks are crucial, urgent and unavoidable. Their
successful implementation can make the difference
between pursuing the path of lasting peace or returning
to large-scale warfare and insecurity, not only in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, but in the Great
Lakes region as a whole.

The progress achieved to date in the
implementation of the Lusaka Agreement raises hope
and optimism for the effective completion of future
stages. The most important of these advances has been
the ceasefire. Despite some setbacks, which are very
common in efforts of such complexity, the observation
of the ceasefire by the parties demonstrates their will to
end the war and to resolve their problems peacefully. It
also shows that there can be no military solution to the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We are still concerned, however, by the ongoing
military activities in parts of the country, particularly in
the eastern Congo, involving the forces of some
signatories to the Agreement and of others that are not
parties to the ceasefire. If it continues, this situation
may imperil the ceasefire and launch a new wave of
hostilities.

It is up to us to find an effective political solution
to this problem. The solution should not be limited to
the suspension of military aid to armed groups. We
must also provide the conditions and guarantees for
disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement
and full reintegration of all armed groups living in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

A positive step in this direction was the recent
measure announced by the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to disarm about
3,000 former Burundian combatants now living in
Kamina. We praise this step, which is so propitious for
the Lusaka Agreement. It is very important to
emphasize that the combatants must see an alternative
to war. They must be encouraged to abandon their
weapons and return to their land. They must be given
effective guarantees of physical integrity and a
prospect of social reintegration for themselves and
their families.

With the completion of the disengagement and
force deployment, despite minor problems that have
arisen, the total withdrawal of Namibian forces and the
partial withdrawal of Angolan, Ugandan and
Zimbabwean forces now under way, the basis has been
established for phase III of MONUC deployment. The
Political Committee will take the necessary measures
to ensure that all signatories fulfil, totally and in good
faith, the obligations freely undertaken to make peace
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo a fact.

In this context, I welcome the Secretary-
General's recommendation to the Security Council that
it authorize the start of phase III in accordance with the
MONUC report. I also appeal to the members of the
Council to support this recommendation so as to allow
the broadening of MONUC operations throughout the
territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
This would build trust among all the parties involved.

The Political Committee also understands that the
future phases of the ceasefire agreement process,
especially the full withdrawal of foreign forces, will
require the further involvement of the United Nations
to accelerate the return of peace to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It is therefore necessary to
reflect on the need for the Council to authorize the
deployment of a peacekeeping force in that country.
The people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
have suffered for a long time, and continue to suffer
from the effects of a devastating conflict that has killed
hundreds of thousands of its children, destroyed its
economy and infrastructure, and spread misery among
most of its population. Sixteen million of its people are
now dependent on emergency food assistance.

We must allow the Congolese themselves to
resolve their own internal problems, achieve genuine
national reconciliation, rebuild their economy and
establish a democratic society in peaceful coexistence
with its neighbours in accordance with the principles
and norms of international law. For that to happen, all
States must respect the sovereignty, territorial integrity
and independence of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

The difficulties arising in the inter-Congolese
national dialogue show that certain problems have not
been taken into account. We hope that the preparation
of the work of Durban will take into account all
pending questions so that the national dialogue will in
fact be all-inclusive and fruitful.

To summarize, I would like to express my
conviction that there is a great need for a return to
peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It will
allow the transformation of the Central Africa region
into a zone of peace, security and cooperation, which is
a sine qua non for the harmonious development of that
region's countries. To reach this dream, the
international community and the Security Council in
particular have a very important role to play.

I must also take advantage of this occasion to
praise the commitment of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Kofi Annan, and his Special Representative to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mr. Namanga
Ngongi, the head of MONUC, General Diallo, and the
head of the Joint Military Commission, General
Mwaniki, to bring peace to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We also praise the efforts made by all
parties that led to the co-location of MONUC and the
Joint Military Commission in Kinshasa, the capital of
the country.

