Mr. Valero Bricefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to
congratulate you for presiding over the Security
Council, at a time when we examine such an important
agenda item.

The Government of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela is firm and unequivocal in its condemnation
of terrorism. It repudiates any terrorist activity
committed by anyone, whether it is individuals,
organizations or States. We need to recall that
resolution 1373 (2001) prevents States from providing
refuge to those who commit acts of terrorism and
prohibits the refusal of requests for the extradition of
terrorists for political reasons.

On this occasion we remember the serious crimes
committed by terrorists in 1976, in which a fatal
bombing of a Cuban airliner in Barbados took the lives
of 73 innocent people. Among them were 24 members
of Cuba's fencing team, all teenagers, who were
wearing their gold medals won at the Youth Fencing
Championships in Caracas.

It was considered one of the worst acts of
terrorism in civil aviation history. How did this crime
happen? The explanations can largely be found in the
United States. The declassification of official
documents, now published on the Internet and
available to all of us and circulated in books
worldwide, has revealed the authorship of this flagrant
act of terrorism.

Three months before the Cuban aircraft was shot
down, the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) informed
its authorities that an extremist group planned to put a
bomb on a Cubana Airlines flight. The State
Department's Bureau of Intelligence and Research
reported to then Secretary of State Henry Kissinger
that a CIA source had overheard Luis Posada Carriles
say, a month before the attack, "we are going to bring
down a Cuban airplane". The United States
Government, with foreknowledge of this situation, did
not warn the Cuban authorities about this terrorist
threat.

It has been clearly shown that the masterminds of
the attack were Luis Posada Carriles and Orlando
Bosch, and that those who planted the bombs on the
plane were the Venezuelans Hernan Ricardo and
Freddy Lugo. These individuals belonged to the
Coordination of United Revolutionary Organizations,
an umbrella group of Cuban exile organizations that
was formed in 1976, according to the FBI, to "plan,
09-60696
finance and carry out terrorist operations and attacks
against Cuba".

According to their confessions, Hernan Ricardo
and Freddy Lugo placed the C-4 explosives aboard the
aircraft in a tube of toothpaste and a camera. They got
on the CU-455 flight in Trinidad at 12.45 p.m., bound
for Barbados. During the flight, they placed the C-4
explosives. The terrorists got off the plane during its
brief stopover at Seawell Airport in Barbados. Nine
minutes after takeoff, a terrible explosion brought the
aircraft down in full flight. It fell into the waters of
Deep Water Bay, off the coast of Barbados.

In Port of Spain, the terrorists were arrested and
interrogated by detectives from the Trinidad Police
Department, to whom they confessed their guilt in
writing and admitted to being CIA agents working for
Luis Posada Carriles. Venezuelan police arrested Luis
Posada Carriles and Orlando Bosch in Caracas and
found, in Posada's office in Caracas, a Cubana de
Aviacien flight schedule and an intelligence report
written by Hernan Ricardo on Cuban diplomats and
business entities in Barbados, Colombia, Panama and
Trinidad.

After the arrests, Trinidad, Barbados, Guyana and
Cuba ceded jurisdiction over the downing of the
passenger plane to Venezuela, and the four criminals
were prosecuted in Caracas. Lugo and Ricardo were
sentenced to 20 years. Orlando Bosch was released,
supposedly, for good behaviour. But before the
Venezuelan courts could issue a verdict on Luis Posada
Carriles, he escaped in 1985 from the prison of San
Juan de los Morros, Guarico State, Venezuela.

Luis Posada Carriles spent the next few years in
various countries of Central America, working for the
security services of El Salvador, Guatemala and
Honduras. But in the 19905, he again turned his
attention to Cuba. He recruited Salvadoran and
Guatemalan mercenaries, smuggled explosives into
Cuba, including bombs that exploded at hotels and
restaurants in Havana in 1997, killing an Italian tourist,
Fabio Di Celmo, and leaving several injured.

For a long time, Luis Posada Carriles, although
not a United States citizen, lived in complete freedom
in Miami. The authorities of this country knew of his
stay but did not detain him. Upon learning of this
situation, in May 2005 Venezuela asked the United
States Government to detain Posada Carriles
preventively so that he might face trial on 73 counts of

first-degree murder in relation to the downing of the
Cuban airliner. The extradition request made by
Venezuela to the United States Government is based on
three specific instruments: the extradition treaty
between the United States and Venezuela, which
remains in force; the Convention for the Suppression
of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation;
and the International Convention for the Suppression
of Terrorist Bombings.

Only after Posada called a news conference in
Miami on 16 May 2005, at which he openly boasted
that the State Department was not even looking for
him, did the United States Government proceed to
arrest him. Posada was charged, however, with illegally
entering the United States. Thus began a legal charade
designed to divert attention from the Venezuelan
extradition request, which remains neglected by the
Justice Department to this day.

On 11 January 2007, the United States
Government, rather than charge him with murder and
terrorism, accused Posada Carriles of seven counts of
immigration fraud. Today, Posada Carriles is free and
lives in Miami. He is a veritable czar of terrorism.

Our country has urged the Government of the
United States to extradite this terrorist to Venezuela so
that he may face trial. If the United States Government
decides not to grant the extradition, international law
obliges the United States to try him in court under
article 7 of the Montreal Convention on Civil Aviation.
By allowing Posada to remain at liberty in this country
and by not accepting the request that he be extradited
to Venezuela, the United States is in violation of
resolution 1373 (2001), which we are discussing today.

The Bolivarian Government stands by the
extradition request and calls on the United Nations to
rule on this horrible case. For the past several years,
Venezuela has told the Security Council that impunity
is the absence of justice, and its prevalence over time is
as ominous as the act of terrorism itself. Venezuela
demands once again that the United States Government
comply with its extradition treaty with Venezuela or
prosecute and punish Luis Posada Carriles as a
terrorist.

