Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): I also want to thank
Under-Secretary-General O'Brien for her insightful
and comprehensive briefing on the Secretary-General's
report (S/2011/360).

The Secretary-General's report does not just paint
a vivid picture of the challenges in the fight against
piracy off the coast of Somalia. It also profiles a range
of options to address the threat with a renewed sense of
urgency. Nigeria shares this sense of urgency, including
with regard to the need for swift action, considering the
devastating impact of piracy on Somalia, the Horn of
Africa and especially international trade. We share the
Special Adviser's basic premise that convergent
comprehensive measures are required to co-opt the
menace, in particular the establishment of a legal
regime to prosecute piracy cases. We believe that such
a regime should be anchored in internationally
supported, Somali-led objectives and national
ownership.

Nigeria supports the measures the Secretary-
General has outlined in the report to engender global
cooperation in the fight against piracy. We believe that
overcoming the jurisdictional, legislative and
constitutional challenges to multinational prosecution
of piracy cases requires international cooperation.
Mindful of the significant investment required, we

welcome the Special Adviser's estimated timeline of
two to three years for developing the requisite national
and regional legal regime and infrastructure to combat
piracy. The depth of talent and ability within the
Somali diaspora should be explored to augment local
capacity and build a robust extraterritorial legal
system.

Nigeria views broad-based regional criminalization
of piracy and the establishment of specialized piracy
courts within Somalia and the region as imperative in
the fight against piracy. To foster regional cooperation,
we support enhanced coordination and information-
sharing among the private sector, law enforcement
agencies and relevant international and regional
organizations. Indeed, we support the strengthening of
anti-money-laundering capabilities in the region.

As significant as these counter-piracy measures
are, they will require a determined, cohesive
government to steer their implementation. With the
Al-Shabaab-driven insurgency and the incessant
wrangling plaguing the leadership of the Transitional
Federal Institutions, piracy has not yet received the
desired robust response from the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG). Stabilizing Somalia's political
environment is therefore a prerequisite to a
comprehensive and enduring counter-piracy action.

As expressed in resolution 1976 (2011), Somali
authorities should assume the responsibility of creating
clear political and economic alternatives to piracy.
Reviving Somalia's domestic industry is in consonance
with the Special Adviser's suggested cluster of
measures for preventing piracy. The TFG institutions
should now begin the process of building consensus on
national goals around the Kampala accord, following
the resignation of Prime Minister Mohamed. We
encourage parliament to revise Somalia's law to
provide a sound criminal and procedural basis for
prosecutions. States in the region should also take
similar actions under their domestic laws, in
accordance with resolution 1918 (2010).

Considering the negative effects of illegal fishing
and maritime pollution, Nigeria remains unwavering in
its support of the Special Adviser's recommendation on
the establishment of an independent committee to
investigate allegations of illegal fishing and dumping
of toxic waste in Somali waters. We also renew our call
for generous contributions to the trust fund for this
purpose.
With regard to the appropriate reach of an
extraterritorial court, our view is that it is primarily a
jurisdictional issue. Nigeria has always viewed piracy
as a crime of international jurisdiction. Therefore,
pirates may be prosecuted by any regional court of
sufficient competence within Somalia and the region.
However, given the necessary challenges to managing
a regional court, we believe that such a forum should
be reserved for high-profile cases of regional
significance.

