Ms. Goolab (South Africa): I would also like to
thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo and Mr. Mark Lowcock
for their briefings on the situation in Syria.

South Africa is deeply concerned about the ongoing
violence in parts of Syria. The shelling and airstrikes
that have resulted in the death and injury of civilians
is unacceptable. We appeal to all parties to stop the
bombings of civilian infrastructure and ensure that the
civilians in the area are not used by non-State actors
as human shields. We call on all parties to observe
their commitments to cease hostilities and uphold their
obligations to international humanitarian law.

We call on all parties to refrain from any attacks on
education and health facilities. Those establishments
should be places of refuge and safety, and their special
status under international humanitarian law must be
protected. Tens of thousands of children, the most
vulnerable members of society, are unable to sit their
final exams due to the destruction of schools, the
escalation of violence and the resulting displacement.

The increase in violence has severely impacted
the already fragile humanitarian situation. The large
number of people fleeing from one region to another
further strains limited humanitarian resources. As
we have heard before, Syria, the region and the
international community cannot afford a full-scale
military incursion, as it could result in a large-scale
humanitarian catastrophe.

The suspension of some humanitarian operations
in the area also negatively impacts the humanitarian
response, particularly for those who need it most.
Humanitarian agencies are doing extraordinary work
in trying to assist all those who need it. We, too, must
do all we can to assist both the humanitarian agencies
and those who most urgently require their support. It is
essential that the access to, and delivery of, aid to all
those who so desperately need it be guaranteed by all
parties. In that regard, we urge the full implementation
of all the relevant agreements, including the September
2018 ceasefire memorandum and the recent ceasefire
brokered between Russia and Turkey, which we hope
will lower tensions and de-escalate the violence. South
Africa calls on all parties to adhere to the provisions set
out in the ceasefire agreements.

South Africa urges all parties to fully engage in
the political processes currently under way, as the
situation in Syria cannot be solved through military
means. An inclusive, negotiated, political settlement is
the only way to achieve long-lasting peace and security
for all Syrians. My delegation supports the Secretary-
General in his statement that the solution for Syria must
be political.

In conclusion, it is important to note that the
presence of any foreign military forces operating in
the country without the permission of the Government
of Syria undermines and violates Syria's sovereignty
and territorial integrity. As mentioned previously, the
presence of unauthorized external forces serves only to
further destabilize the situation.

