Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Sandra Honore, for her
comprehensive briefing. I again wish to assure her
of the full support of France for the activities on the
ground under the particularly difficult conditions in
Haiti during the past few days. She has our full support.
I would also like, through her, to express our support
for all staff of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH).

I endorse the statements to be delivered by the
observer of the European Union and the representative
of Peru on behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti.

At a time when Haiti continues to assess the
terrible human and property toll of the recent passing
of Hurricane Matthew, we would like to express our
condolences to all Haitians for the recent victims.
At this difficult time, France stands with Haiti. My
country decided to respond immediately to the call of
the Haitian authorities for humanitarian assistance.

The President of the Republic stated that all available
resources would be mobilized to implement emergency
assistance as quickly as possible in coordination
with our European partners and the international
community. That mobilization has already begun. On
5 October, at the request of the Haitian authorities, a
French military aircraft flew reconnaissance flights
to assess the damage done to the infrastructure and
to determine what was needed to be delivered by way
of humanitarian assistance. With 60 French military/
civilian security personnel and 90 tons of equipment,
including 2 water purification plants, 6 sanitation units,
medical kits and humanitarian first aid, are currently
being transported or are about to be routed locally.
Moreover, the French food-aid credits to Haiti have
been refilled.

Finally, two helicopters have been made available
by the Airbus Foundation for the purposes of medical
transport and first-aid delivery to the most isolated
areas. Of course, all of that is being carried out within
the framework set by the Haitian Government and its
representatives in the regions impacted by the disaster.
Furthermore, France, together with the international
community, calls for heeding the urgent appeal launched
by the United Nations in the aftermath of the disaster.

This terrible tragedy reminds us once again of the
scope of the humanitarian challenges facing Haiti and
its people. We are particularly concerned, in the current
context, by the resurgence of cholera cases. France
fully supports the efforts undertaken by the Haitian
authorities with the support of the United Nations.
We have contributed to several quick-impact projects
on the ground since 2010. We have relayed the call of
the Secretary-General to bolster that mobilization and
will carefully examine the proposals to be made to the
General Assembly to intensify efforts to combat cholera
in Haiti, as well as to provide assistance and financial
support to the Haitians most directly affected by the
disease. More needs to be done by the international
community to finally eradicate cholera in Haiti.

France hopes that the electoral process under way
will be concluded as quickly as possible so that Haiti can
finally put an end to the uncertainties surrounding that
issue. More than ever, Haiti needs stable institutions
with democratic legitimacy that will enable it to
tackle the various economic, social and humanitarian
challenges that the country faces.

France has taken note of the revised electoral
timetable announced by the Provisional Electoral
Council and the postponement of the elections, originally
scheduled for 9 October, because of the consequences
of the passing of Hurricane Matthew. We urge all
Haitian political stakeholders, including the provisional
President, to do their utmost to ensure that the elections
are held in the near future and that constitutional order
is established as quickly as possible. Each individual
must Show responsibility and restraint in that regard.
It is important that the forthcoming elections be led by
the Haitians themselves and conducted in a transparent,
open, inclusive and credible manner. France will
contribute to that goal by participating in the electoral
monitoring mission, established by the Organization of
American States.

More than 12 years after the deployment of
MINUSTAH, the conditions on the ground have
profoundly changed, as have the country's needs. We
have gradually moved from a peacekeeping situation to a
context where the United Nations is called upon to assist
in development and the construction of a State under a
robust rule of law. Attending to that changing reality
will help us to provide the most effective assistance to
the Haitian people. The security and stabilization of
Haiti in the long term depend first and foremost on the
Haitian authorities shouldering their responsibility, as
well as on the sustainable development of the island.

France is pleased to see that the security situation
is generally stable. While it remains tenuous,
owing to political tensions related to the successive
postponements of the electoral cycle, it has nonetheless
been competently managed by the Haitian security
forces. In that regard, we welcome the growing
authority of the Haitian National Police, demonstrated
by its increasing ability to act largely independently.

It is now important that the ongoing discussions on
the future of MINUSTAH be conducted as speedily as
possible. France fully supports the recommendations
contained in the Secretary-General's latest report
(S/2016/753), particularly with regard to the limitation
of the extension of the next mandate to only six
months, as well as the implementation, at the end of
the current six-month mandate, of a strategic review
that will allow us to consider whether the context is
ripe for the drawdown of MINUSTAH and for its
replacement by a new form of United Nations presence.
Indeed, we believe it important that the relaunch of the
Mission's reconfiguration not be indefinitely delayed
on account of the political stalemate, as there is a risk of
jeopardizing the United Nations capacity to best meet
the needs of the Haitian population.

The situation in Haiti concerns us all even more
today. The support of the international community and
the engagement of the United Nations remain even more
necessary than ever, but our responsibility in the Council
is to do all we can to ensure that that engagement is as
appropriate and as effective as possible. The challenges
facing Haiti and the expectations of its people commit
us to taking the decisions necessary. Haitian political
stakeholders today must be fully aware of that.

