The President: The Security Council will now resume
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Today's meeting represents a further step in the
Council's continuing effort to address in a comprehensive
and concrete manner the recommendations contained in the
report of the Secretary-General of 13 April 1998 on the
causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa, which was requested by
the Council in its statement of 25 September 1997
(S/PRST/1997/46) and is contained in document
S/1998/318.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council recalls the report of the
Secretary-General of 13 April 1998 on 'The causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa'. While reaffirming
its primary responsibility under the Charter of the
United Nations for the maintenance of international
peace and security, it underlines the increasingly
important role of regional arrangements and agencies
and of coalitions of Member States in the conduct of
activity in this field. The Council reaffirms that all
such activity taken under regional arrangements or by
regional agencies, including enforcement action, shall
be carried out in accordance with Articles 52, 53 and
54 of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations. It also underlines the importance of all such
activity being guided by the principles of sovereignty,
political independence and territorial integrity of all
States, and by the operational principles for United
Nations peacekeeping operations set out in the
statement of its President of 28 May 1993.

"The Security Council welcomes the Views
expressed by the Secretary-General in paragraphs 42
to 44 of his report, in particular as they relate to
Africa. It recognizes that the authorization by the
Council of action by regional or subregional
organizations, or by Member States or coalitions of
States, can be one type of effective response to
conflict situations, and commends Member States
and regional and subregional organizations which
have undertaken efforts and initiatives towards the
maintenance of peace and security. In order to
enhance its ability to monitor any activities that it
has authorized, the Council expresses its readiness to
examine appropriate measures whenever such an
authorization is being considered.

"In this regard, the Security Council notes that
there is a wide variety of arrangements and
relationships which have developed in different
instances of cooperation between the United Nations,
Member States and regional and subregional
organizations in the maintenance of peace and
security, and that monitoring requirements will vary
and should be tailored according to the specifics of
the operations in question, including in relation to
ongoing peace efforts. But in general, operations
should have a clear mandate, including a statement
of objectives, rules of engagement, a well-developed
plan of action, a time-frame for disengagement and
arrangements for regular reporting to the Council.
The Council affirms that a high standard of conduct
is essential for successful operations, and recalls the
role of the United Nations in setting general
standards of peacekeeping. The Council stresses that
missions and operations must ensure that their
personnel respect and observe international law,
including humanitarian, human rights and refugee
law.

"The Security Council is also of the view that,
where necessary or desirable, monitoring of such
activities could also be enhanced by the inclusion of
certain civilian elements, for instance dealing with
political and human rights issues, within missions
and operations. In this context, the Security Council
also recognizes that the attachment of a United
Nations liaison officer or team could improve the
flow of information between the Council and those
engaged in the conduct of an operation authorized
by it but carried out by a coalition of Member States
or a regional or subregional organization. It
expresses its readiness to consider, in consultation

 

with the Member States and regional or subregional
organization concerned, the deployment of liaison

officers to such operations, on the basis

of
recommendations by the Secretary-General and as
proposed in paragraph 8 of its resolution 1197 (1998)
of 18 September 1998. In the case of operations
conducted by regional or subregional organizations,
the Council also expresses its readiness to consider, in
consultation with the regional or subregional
organization concerned, whether the deployment of
liaison officers at the headquarters of the organization
would be valuable.

"The Council also underlines that the monitoring
of such operations could be enhanced by the improved
flow and exchange of information, inter alia, through
regular submission of reports, as in the case of the
Inter-African Mission to Monitor the Implementation
of the Bangui Agreements in the Central African
Republic, and through the holding of regular briefing
meetings between its members and regional and
subregional organizations and Member States
conducting such operations, and troop contributors and
other participating Member States.

"The Security Council shares the view of the
Secretary-General that one possible means of
monitoring activities of forces authorized by it, while
also contributing to the broader aspects of a peace
process, is through co-deployment of United Nations
observers and other personnel together with an
operation carried out by a regional or subregional
organization or by a coalition of Member States. The
Council agrees with the Secretary-General that, while
such collaboration is not applicable in all cases, co-
deployment can make an important contribution to
peacekeeping efforts, as in the cases of Liberia and
Sierra Leone, where United Nations observer
missions have been deployed alongside the
Monitoring Group of the Economic Community of
West African States.

"The Security Council underlines the
importance, whenever the United Nations deploys
forces alongside forces of regional or subregional
organizations or Member States, of establishing a
clear framework for cooperation and coordination
between the United Nations and the regional or
subregional organization or coalition of Member
States concerned. Such a framework should include
specifying objectives, the careful delineation of the
respective roles and responsibilities of the United
Nations and the regional or subregional organization
or coalition concerned and of the areas of interaction
of forces, and clear provisions regarding the safety
and security of personnel. The Council also stresses
the importance of ensuring that United Nations
missions maintain their identity and autonomy with
regard to operational command and control and
logistics.

"The Security Council urges Member States
and regional and subregional organizations to ensure
the Council is kept fully informed of their activities
for the maintenance of peace and security. The
Council undertakes to consult regularly with
Member States and regional and subregional
organizations involved in such activities to facilitate
this."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1998/35.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.40 p.m.
