Mr. Wane (spoke in French): On behalf of Under-
Secretary-General Herve Ladsous, I would like to
thank the Senegalese presidency for convening this
very timely discussion. I must also admit, as a former
staff member of the African Union Commission, where
I worked for over 20 years, that I feel particularly
honoured and grateful to be able to brief the Security
Council on a subject of vital importance not only for
Africa but also for our system of collective security.
It is an issue on which I have been working diligently
throughout my entire career within the African Union
(AU), and obviously I feel strongly committed to
the partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union, because I firmly believe that there is
no alternative to a close partnership between the two
organizations. In the context of my new functions at the
United Nations, I am grateful to be able to contribute
towards strengthening that partnership. Once again, I
thank, you, Mr. Minister, for having taken the initiative
of convening this very timely meeting.

(spoke in English)

Iwould like to begin by making several statements of
fact. First, the cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union on peace and security is not new
and has grown into a strategic partnership - a stronger
partnership based on an innovative and forward-
looking reading of Chapter VIII of Charter of the
United Nations. Today's debate will, without any doubt,
contribute to that partnership. Mr. Ladsous addressed
the Security Council during the open debate (see S/PV.7694) last May to measure the progress achieved
in strengthening the partnership in the area of peace
and security on the continent. That debate took place
on the tenth anniversary of the beginning of annual
consultations between the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council.

The Secretary-General has repeatedly underscored
that strengthening global and regional partnerships
is absolutely critical, especially in Africa. His report
(S/2016/780) on the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union, which Special
Representative Haile Menkerios will present shortly,
is testimony to the mutual efforts made over the years
towards building the strategic relationship between
the two organizations. The relationship between the
Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council is also of primary importance. I note
that both Councils now meet annually in New York and
Addis Ababa. While further harmonization of efforts
could be still further encouraged, it is unanimously
acknowledged that there are plenty of areas of common
interest for the African Union and the United Nations
to work on together.

The Secretariat and African Union Commission
have also enhanced their cooperation at the strategic
level - through the Joint Task Force, which meets
twice a year, and through the annual desk-to-desk
meetings, the next one of which is scheduled for
December in Addis Ababa. That also includes monthly
director-level video tele-conferences and daily
working-level interactions. In an innovative move, AU
Peace and Security Council experts will be hosted later
this month here at Headquarters by the Secretariat for
a familiarization visit, with a View to forging better
knowledge and understanding of its internal processes.

My second point follows logically from the
partnership to its operational dimension. In that regard,
I would like to mention the considerable progress made
in the area of operational support, as was already been
highlighted by the report (see S/2015/446) of the High-
Level Independent Panel on Peace Operations. For
more than 10 years, strong cooperation between the
African Union and the United Nations on planning
and supporting peace operations has become the norm.
That has included experiences relating to transitions
from AU operations to United Nations peacekeeping
operations, such as in the Central African Republic
and Mali, the joint management of hybrid operations
in conjunction with the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, and through providing
logistical support packages funded through assessed
contributions to African Union-led missions, such as
the African Union Mission in Somalia.

In assessing the 13-year history of cooperation at
the operational level, the September report (8/2016/809)
entitled "Report of the joint African Union-United
Nations review of available mechanisms to finance
and support African Union peace support operations
authorized by the United Nations Security Council"
provides Member States with the first comprehensive
account of mechanisms used in the past and still
readily available, as well as more general concluding
observations on key lessons learned. I wish to draw
the Council's attention to the fact that two out of the
five concluding observations from the report relate
to the need for the United Nations to adapt to the
increasing complexity of the security challenges that
the international community is facing, particularly in
Africa, either in its own interventions or in support of
African Union peace support operations.

I would like to cite several statistics to illustrate the
importance of Africa for peacekeeping, and vice versa.
Nine out of 16 of the United Nations peacekeeping
missions are deployed in Africa. Those missions alone
account for 83 per cent of all uniformed personnel
and 86 per cent of the financial resources approved
for United Nations peacekeeping missions. As of July,
African States represented 20 of the top 30 contributors
ofuniformed personnel to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Approximately 50 per cent of all uniformed
peacekeepers come from African Union member States.

This brings me to my third point. The complexity of
the current conflicts in Africa and the trends observed
highlight the need to strengthen further the United
Nations operational cooperation with and in support of
African Union peace support operations. In doing so,
we ought to be pragmatic and results-oriented, driven,
as we should be, by the imperative to respond to the
needs on the ground, assist countries and shattered
communities to turn the page of violence and conflict,
and consolidate peace where it has been achieved.

This, in our view, reinforces the calls made several
times in the past by the Council and by the African
Union Peace and Security Council to seek ways to
ensure predictable, flexible and sustainable financing
for African Union peace support operations authorized
by the Security Council.

In his report dated 2 September 2015 on the future
of United Nations peace operations (S/2015/682), the
Secretary-General commended the African Union's
commitment to self-reliance, including to financing
25 per cent offuture African Union peace operations. He
then urged Member States to give urgent consideration
to how the United Nations can respond to that initiative.
On 18 July, the Secretary-General welcomed the historic
decision taken by the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the African Union in Kigali, setting
out concrete steps towards self-reliance, particularly in
relation to the AU peace and security budget.
Today's debate is an opportunity for Member States
to initiate a response. In so doing, they will enhance the
role of the United Nations and strengthen the regional
response.

For our part, we in the Secretariat will continue
to work closely with the African Union so as to
generate, as much as possible, harmonized approaches
between the Secretariat and the Commission. For this
purpose, we will naturally rely on our Office to the
African Union, which I should like to commend for its
central role in strengthening the partnership between
the African Union and the United Nations. Having
worked with the Office in Addis Ababa in connection
with my former responsibilities at the African Union
Commission, I can testify to the quality and the strength
of the contribution that the Office is making to the
relationship between the African Union and the United
Nations. Whatever efforts can be made to enhance the
capacity and resources ofthe Commission are of course
welcome steps towards a stronger partnership between
the two organizations.

It may sometimes seem simpler for each
organization to work on its own given the obstacles that
may surface as soon as concrete steps towards closer
cooperation are contemplated. The tendency has often
been to highlight the challenges rather than innovative
mechanisms for cooperation, but it is, rather, such
innovation that we need to encourage and spur in order
to circumvent these challenges.

Whatever the challenges in the cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union,
and this is my final observation, there is in fact no
alternative to a stronger partnership. There is now a
clear recognition of the fact that no single organization
can effectively address on its own the increasingly
complex, multifaceted peace and security challenges
of today, as noted by the Secretary-General in his
report dated January 2012. Our only option is to
overcome these challenges. While the United Nations
has the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, the African Union
is one of our most important partners in confronting
common challenges in Africa. It has also expressed a
willingness to play a role in, and has put efforts into,
building the peace and security architecture. The path
to the future is therefore one of innovation, creativity
and pragmatism.

Let me once again sincerely thank Senegal for
having convened this meeting and also thank the
members ofthe Council for their continued commitment
to a stronger partnership between the United Nations
and the African Union in our joint efforts to address
the peace and security challenges confronting us on the
African continent.

