Mr. Sanader (Croatia): Allow me to begin by
welcoming President Robinson and President Byron, as
well as Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow. After
carefully listening to their reports, I want to reaffirm
once more Croatia's firm commitment to continue with
the implementation of our Constitutional Act on full
cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY).

(spoke in French)

I should like to underscore the importance that
my Government and I myself attach to the work of the
Tribunal, as well as the need to achieve the goals for
which the Council established the Tribunal. In both our
capacity as a member of the Security Council and as
one of the main proponents for the establishment of the
Tribunal, Croatia will continue to call for and provide
full support for the fulfilment of the Tribunal's
mandate and for the prosecution of persons responsible
for crimes.

(spoke in English)

Indeed, the Tribunal is said to be the key force in
a process that respects victims by providing justice -
a process that, by providing justice, paves the way for a
better future, one of peace, security, reconciliation,
cooperation and prosperity.

Croatia has gone a long way in that regard. Along
that path, we have never forgotten our starting point.
We still remember Ovcara and the other 142 mass
graves across our country. We still have vivid
memories of the complete destruction of Vukovar and
the shelling of Dubrovnik, Osijek, Zadar, Gospie and
so many other cities and towns in Croatia. We regret
that some of the perpetrators of those crimes are still at
large. We regret that Goran Hadiie has not yet been
turned over to The Hague. We certainly regret that
Ratko Mladie is still at large. He and Hadiie are
responsible for the gravest crimes committed in Europe
after the Second World War, namely, the massacres in
Srebrenica and Vukovar. Most of all we regret that the
Milosevic indictment came too late, and indeed without
a sentence. His death made it impossible for a sentence
to clearly outline the development of a policy that used
aggression and the systematic application of war
crimes.

Yet, our regret has not prevented us from looking
towards the future or from rebuilding our country on
the premises of respect for human dignity, the rule of
law and international justice. In Croatia we made the
choice to strengthen our democratic institutions, reform
our judiciary and develop a State where nobody is
above the law. With that belief and with our
commitment to fundamental democratic values, we
have succeeded in putting Croatia on the track towards
development, reconciliation and progress. We have also
strengthened our society internally and strengthened
our position in the world. We joined NATO and became
a full member of the Euro-Atlantic family of
democracies. One of the conditions for achieving that
goal was full cooperation with the ICTY.

We are glad that in his report (see S/2009/252)
the Prosecutor confirmed Croatia's overall good
cooperation with the ICTY. With regard to a single case
pertaining to the delivery of documents, Croatia differs
with the Prosecutor's assessment. While fully
cooperating with his Office, we also note that,
according to the ICTY rules of procedure, the
Prosecutor is a party during the judicial proceedings. It
is for that reason that, pursuant to the rules of
procedure of the ICTY, Croatia has submitted to the
Trial Chamber a request to confirm the fulfilment of
Croatia's obligations in providing the requested
documents or establishing their chain of custody. In the
meantime, Croatia will continue to fully cooperate with
the Prosecutor's Office.

Croatia will continue to support the Tribunal, in
the belief that the ICTY is serving the purpose for
which it was established by the Security Council. As a
member of the Security Council and as a member of
NATO and a future member of the European Union,
Croatia will actively support the achievement of those
goals, fully aware that they will be the measure to
define the Tribunal's legacy. Croatia very much
appreciates and supports President Robinson's and the
Tribunal's efforts to ensure the early and orderly
completion of its work. The Tribunal has now entered a
critical period, in which it will be necessary to begin to
downsize while continuing to work on the remaining
cases and on the transition towards an appropriate
infrastructure that will take up the Tribunal's residual
functions in the future.
Finally, let me repeat the message that I delivered
two years ago at the General Assembly. Everybody
everywhere should have no doubt that any and all
crimes against humanity will not be allowed to go
unpunished. That is our common responsibility. Only
then can we create a better world for posterity.

