Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
I thank Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson,
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) Chair Patriota and
Adminstrator Clark for their statements this morning.

Maintaining international peace and security is a
struggle we contend with across the globe. Increasingly,
we see that building peace is a challenge that we must
take on with even greater urgency. Building peace
requires a commitment by the international community
to stay involved and a commitment by post-conflict
countries to uphold the spirit of inclusivity.

A 2010 World Bank report entitled Conflict
Relapse and the Sustainability ofPost-Conflict Peace
found that 90 per cent of the conflicts that occurred
in the past decade took place in countries that had
previously experienced civil war. The problem of civil
war, the report found, is not a problem of preventing
new conflicts from arising but of permanently ending
those that have already started. That reality is sadly
brought to life today in the Central African Republic
and in South Sudan. Their relapses into conflict remind
us of the need for sustained international engagement
in post-conflict countries and demand of us that we
examine how effective our engagement has been and
how we can improve upon it in the future.

The Peacebuilding Commission and its country-
specific peacebuilding configurations have helped to
focus international support for post-conflict countries,
build institutions, promote an open political climate
and advance stability through development. With the
review of the PBC coming up in 2015, now is the time to
look at the impact of long-term peacebuilding and how
the Council can contribute to that discussion.

We recently saw a successful example of
peacebuilding in Sierra Leone, where the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone was
recently closed by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon in
an acknowledgement of how far the country has come
since its civil war. The peacebuilding mission there
contributed to building strong political institutions and
helped solidify gains that the Government and people
of Sierra Leone had achieved. Earlier this month,
Alhaji Babah Sawaneh, a former child soldier from
Sierra Leone, spoke to the Council (see S/PV.7129) and
offered proof of the country's healing process. Armed
now with a bachelor's degree, Alhaji is an example of
the good things that can happen when stability takes
root.

Even as Sierra Leone enjoys stability and the
United Nations peacebuilding mission draws down, we
are reminded that long-term development efforts and
continued economic growth are at the foundation of
any sustainable peace. We appreciate the strengthened
United Nations-World Bank partnership and urge
greater dialogue between the World Bank and the
Security Council to facilitate post-conflict development
strategies. We have seen too often the recurrent issues
that make countries vulnerable to relapse: erosion of
inclusive political settlements, lack of Government
capacity, especially in public finance and the rule of
law, and insufficient economic growth and job creation.
South Sudan is an example of what happens when
political inclusivity is lost, as well as a reminder that
we cannot let other countries slip down that path.

In Burundi, inclusivity was a key component of the
Arusha Agreement that ended the conflict there in 2001.
Today, we are increasingly concerned by signs that
the country is moving away from that inclusive spirit.
Efforts by the Government to shut down - sometimes
violently - meetings of the political opposition are
deeply troubling. The international community must
maintain its focus on Burundi and continue to work
with the Government to foster open political space and
credible elections in 2015.

The post-election transition plan for Guinea-
Bissau developed by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ramos-Horta, and the strategic
objectives outlined by the Chair of the PBC Guinea-
Bissau configuration, Mr. Patriota, are examples ofhow
a peacebuilding office and the PBC can develop strategic
frameworks and coordinate international support for
institution-building. Their plans, which call for fast-
tracking needed reforms, will help the Government of
Guinea-Bissau to hit the ground running. By helping
Governments become more responsive and better able
to deliver services to their people, peacebuilding efforts
can contribute to restoring Government credibility.

Maintaining international peace and security
requires strong Government, but also engaged and
dedicated communities. All sectors of society must be
included in the peace process and throughout the post-
conflict period. It is particularly critical to ensure the
inclusion of women in political dialogue and mediation
efforts. Truth and reconciliation commissions are an
essential tool that post-conflict societies can use to help
build an inclusive and sustainable peace. We urge the
Government of Sri Lanka to move forward on creating
such a commission to help their country heal, and we
welcome their recent consultations with South Africa
in that regard.

The 2015 review of the PBC and peacebuilding
architecture will provide an opportunity to focus on
ways to sharpen the PBC's potential. The United States
attaches great importance to that review and intends to
engage actively, including as a member of the Security
Council, and to work closely with PBC members and
countries on and off the PBC agenda to enhance the
PBC's impact.

Finally, we will be successful in achieving those
goals only if we have the people on the ground with the
right skills and background to tackle those complicated
problems. The United State welcomes the progress
made in the Secretary-General's civilian capacity
review. We encourage the United Nations system to
apply the lessons learned from that review in planning
for future post-conflict engagements.

