Mr. Barkin (United States of America): I thank
Ambassador Pecsteen de Buytswerve for his briefing
today. His work as Chair of the of the Security
Council Committee pursuant to resolution 751 (1992)
concerning Somalia continues to contribute not only to
the work of the Council, but also to the international
efforts to advance peace and stability within Somalia
and in the region.

Despite positive developments, the Federal
Government of Somalia continues to face significant
challenges on its path towards building a safe, stable and
prosperous country. Somalia's ongoing humanitarian
crisis remains particularly concerning. An estimated
1.7 million people in Somalia face life-threatening food
insecurity, and at least 4.2 million people require urgent
humanitarian assistance. The seemingly endless cycle
of attacks against civilians, including those cited in the
latest report of the Panel of Experts (S/2018/1002) and
echoed in numerous prior reports from United Nations
experts, must cease in order for Somalia to prosper.

I note that Al-Shabaab was once again responsible
for the highest number of attacks against civilians.
We are committed to the Somalia sanctions regime,
and to using this regime to disrupt Al-Shabaab and
its ability to conduct attacks against forces from
Somalia, the African Union Military Observer Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) and the United States. As
part of that effort, we look forward to cooperating
closely with the Federal Government of Somalia and
the international community to disrupt and ultimately
eliminate the sources of financing for Al-Shabaab
and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Shams (ISIS) in
Somalia. Al-Shabaab continues to expand its revenue
base through extensive informal taxation, and ISIS
increasingly uses Somalia as the financial conduit to
its regional affiliates. We look to partners to strengthen
information-sharing on those threats both with the
Federal Government of Somalia and multilaterally.
As we work to counter terrorism in Somalia, the
United States continues to build the capacity of the
security forces of the Federal Government of Somalia to
secure and properly manage their conventional-weapon
stockpiles to prevent pilferage and unauthorized
transfers. International partners can help by coordinating
closely on their respective security assistance efforts
with the Somali Government. AMISOM. and the
Somali Government should continue working towards
a conditions-based transfer of security responsibilities.

Finally, and in complete agreement with my
colleagues from Germany and Great Britain with
respect to the Federal Government of Somalia's
non-cooperation with the Panel of Experts, we continue
to encourage Somali officials to engage with the Panel
and work to address the challenges - as highlighted
by the Panel - that impede Somalia's progress towards
security and stability.

The ongoing refusal of the Federal Government of
Somalia to engage with the Panel of Experts and support
its work is troubling. The Panel serves as the eyes and
ears on the ground in Somalia and the region for the
sanctions committee, and ultimately for the Council.
We will not ignore or enable the ongoing efforts of the
Federal Government of Somalia to stymie the work of
the Panel of Experts. We look forward to engaging the
Council, the sanctions committee, the Panel of Experts
and our Somali partners to further the objectives of
peace and stability in Somalia and the region, and
ultimately to ensure a better future for all Somalis.

