The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a brief statement in my capacity as the
representative of Gabon.

I would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Zachary
Muburi-Muita, for his briefing and to congratulate him
on his work as Head of the United Nations Office to
the African Union since its creation by the Secretary-
General in July 2010.

My country places great importance on the work
of the Office and its contribution to cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union
(AU), in particular on issues related to peace, security
and development.
The representative of Portugal recalled some
specific concerns that deserve the attention of the
Office. In May, at the meeting between the Security
Council and the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union in Addis Ababa, I presented an
assessment of cooperation between the two bodies on
behalf of the Security Council. I noted the progress
made in several areas, including strengthening dialogue
and contact on issues related to peace and security;
United Nations support for the Ten-Year Capacity-
Building Programme for the African Union; and
assistance to the African Union and regional African
organizations to help them develop the necessary
capacity to plan, deploy and carry out peacekeeping
operations.

Nevertheless, members of the two Councils
recognized that more needed to be done in terms of
planning strategy and mobilizing resources. That is
precisely the role and place of the Office. Specifically,
it is able to enhance synergies in follow-up activities,
evaluate results and develop response strategies, as do
the African Union Mission in Somalia, the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and
the United Nations Mission in the Sudan. In that
respect, we would like to recognize the commitment of
the contributors, Uganda and Rwanda.

The recommendations made in the Prodi report
(see S/2008/813) and the relevant subsequent reports of
the Secretary-General are, in our view, the foundation
for the work of the Office in implementing the
recommendations contained in the reports themselves
and in analysing methods for improving and
strengthening the relationship between the United
Nations and the African Union.

In conclusion, I would like to assure the Council
of my country's and my delegation's support. We will
be sure to give special attention to the next report of
the Secretary-General on the partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I once again give the floor to Mr. Muburi-Muita
to respond to the statements and comments made by
delegations.
11-38140

