Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank Under-Secretary-
General Feltman and the Deputy Chief Monitor of the
Organization of Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine,
Mr. Alexander Hug, for their briefings on recent
developments in the situation in Ukraine.

We are deeply disturbed by the evolving turn of
events in eastern Ukraine. The ceasefire brokered in
Minsk is holding in general, despite difficulties with
localized violations of the ceasefire and the persistent
dire humanitarian situation, the increasing number of
displaced people and persistent killings, as detailed in
the latest report ofthe Office ofthe High Commissioner
for Human Rights. However, the large-scale military
operations of the past few days represent a real setback
to the expectations we nourished for a real consolidation
of the ceasefire as a step towards tangible progress
towards sustainable peace in Ukraine.

As we have stated on previous occasions when this
issue has been brought to the attention of the Security
Council, we reiterate our recognition of the inalienable
right of Ukraine to its independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity, in accordance with international
law and the Charter of the United Nations. We also
reaffirm our principal opposition to threats or use of
force as a means of solving disputes among States.

Therefore and in conclusion, we call for the
immediate cessation of hostilities and urge the parties
to return to the negotiating table in the framework of the
Trilateral Contact Group. We call for the withdrawal of
heavy weapons and the full return to the provisions of
the Minsk package of measures. We further request that
the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission be given access
to monitor and verify the parties' full compliance with
the Minsk agreements. Too much blood has been shed
and too much senseless suffering has already been
endured by the Ukrainian people. We urge strict respect
for the international commitments agreed to in Minsk
and international guarantees that the people of Ukraine
may be allowed to live in peace, freedom and security.

