Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I
thank Presidents Meron and Joensen and Prosecutors
Brammertz and Jallow for their reports (see S/2014/546, S/2014/556, S/2014/826, S/2014/827 and S/2014/829)
and for their steadfast commitment to advancing global
justice. As the world faces the continued horrors of mass
atrocities in Syria, South Sudan, the Central African
Republic and elsewhere, their critically important
work reaffirms the importance of our collective efforts
to bring to justice those responsible for committing
atrocity crimes.

Approximately 20 years ago, the Security
Council established these two historic institutions,
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). The United States has
strongly supported those courts, which have served
as models of fairness, impartiality and independence
in the trials of more than 200 defendants accused of
the worst crimes known to humankind: genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity.
As Justice Robert Jackson said in his opening
address to the Nuremburg Tribunal, such grave crimes
cannot be ignored, because the world cannot bear
them being repeated. These Tribunals have established
the truth about atrocities committed in the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda, and by doing so have sent a
message to those who might unleash similar violence
and laid the foundations for lasting peace and security.
We have supported these courts because they stand for
justice. They represent our steadfast commitment to
ensuring that those who perpetrate the world's worst
crimes are held accountable; for we on the Council
learned long ago that lasting peace is advanced, not
undermined, by justice.

The United States commends the efforts of the
Presidents and Prosecutors to efficiently transfer the
remaining functions to the Mechanism for International
Criminal Tribunals. We recognize that the challenges in
completing the closure of the Tribunals and the utmost
need to preserve the fairness of the judicial process in
completing the trials and appeals.

The ICTY is continuing to focus on completing
all trials and appeals, and we are pleased that final
judgements in certain appeals cases are expected early
next year. We continue to support the ICTY's important
work in moving forward thoroughly and expeditiously
to render verdicts in cases that serve the broader needs
ofjustice while protecting the rights of the accused.

We note in particular that a judgement in the trial
of Radovan Karadzic' is expected next year. He stands
accused as an architect of the Srebrenica massacre,
the single worst crime committed on European soil
since the Second World War. Individuals now have the
opportunity, after many years, to testify to the horrors
of what they and their loved ones experienced. They
stand not just as victims, but as empowered survivors.
They bear witness, and in so doing they advance both
justice and peace.

We await thejudgement in the trial ofVojislav Seselj,
who stands accused of crimes against humanity and
violations of the laws and customs of war. Unfortunately,
Seselj's conduct following provisional release by the
court on humanitarian grounds on 6 November has
unearthed some of the painful divisions of the past.
The United States condemns his hostile public rhetoric
since his release - rhetoric that promotes a backwards-
looking agenda and poses a challenge to regional
reconciliation. We urge all Governments and leaders in
the region to continue working towards reconciliation,
to avoid inflammatory statements and, importantly,
to ensure continued cooperation with the Court. We
strongly urge all parties to work to ensure that the
integrity of the judicial process is both respected and
protected.

Turning to the ICTR, we commend the Tribunal for
completing all trials at the trial level and recognize with
appreciation its continuing efforts to finish appeals in a
timely manner. We are pleased to hear that the branches
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals in Arusha and The Hague continue to take
over most prosecution and judicial responsibilities.

However, the United States is deeply concerned that
nine ICTR fugitives remain at large, including three
leaders alleged to have had key roles in the Rwandan
genocide: Augustin Bizimana, Felicien Kabuga and
Protais Mpiranya. These men have evaded justice,
but they have not escaped our continued attention and
our steadfast determination to see each of them face
justice for the horrific crimes of which they have been
accused. We will not and we cannot forget them, and
we will never forget their victims. They and six other
fugitives indicted by the Tribunal must be brought
to justice. As the Ambassador of Rwanda noted, in
Kagali in July, the United States Department of State
announced an international fugitives initiative with the
Prosecutor of the Residual Mechanism, the Prosecutor
General of Rwanda and INTERPOL to disseminate
information to the public and renewed calls for
international cooperation in tracking and arresting the
nine remaining fugitives. The United States continues
to offer up to $5 million in rewards for information
leading to their arrest, whether they will be prosecuted
in the Mechanism or in Rwandan courts.

The demand for justice and accountability by
victims and survivors of mass atrocities around
the world has never been stronger or louder or more
important. These two institutions have brought
to justice some of the worse mass murderers and
criminals in the history of the world. They have made
immeasurable contributions to ensuring accountability,
advancing peace and reconciliation, truth and justice.
They stand as powerful lessons to those perpetrating
mass atrocities today. The world cannot, and we will
not, forget.

