Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): At the outset, my
delegation would like to say that it is pleased to see you,
Sir, the First Deputy Foreign Minister of the Czech
Republic, presiding over this meeting of the Security
Council.

The Indonesian delegation would like to express its
sincere and heartfelt condolences to the people and
Government of the United States over the death of scores
of innocent civilians in Oklahoma City earlier this week.

 

My delegation would also like to convey its
appreciation to the authors of the draft resolution before us
today, which extends, until 5 July 1995, the partial easing
of the sanctions against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
(Serbia and Montenegro) originally adopted under
resolutions 943 (1994) of 23 September 1994 and
970 (1995) of 12 January 1995.

At the time of the adoption of resolution 970 (1995),
my delegation expressed its serious reservations regarding
the extension of the easing of sanctions against the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. However, the Indonesian
delegation stated then that, since resolution 943 (1994) had
already initiated the process of relaxing sanctions, we
emphasized the need for scrupulous fulfilment by the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia of the commitments it had
undertaken to close its border with the Republic of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

Over the past 100 days, my delegation has carefully
examined the periodic reports of the Co-Chairmen of the
Steering Committee of the International Conference on the
Former Yugoslavia (ICFY). It notes the consistent
assessment by the Mission Coordinator that the authorities
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia continue to provide
satisfactory cooperation with the ICFY Mission and that the
Mission continues to enjoy full freedom of movement
within the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro). Equally, however, my delegation cannot be
impervious to the constant flow of information that
indicates that a more effective closure of the border has yet
to be achieved. Few items of news have attracted as much
attention as the reports of helicopter flights in contravention
of the border closure. These incidents are reflected in the
recent reports of the ICFY Co-Chairmen. Our delegation
has also learned of reports of circumvention of the border
closure in the form of the transhipment of goods from the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia through the Republic of
Croatia to the areas of the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina under the control of the so-called Bosnian
Serb forces.

The Indonesian delegation is of the View that the draft
resolution before us maintains a correct balance between
recognition of the evaluations contained in the reports of
the Co-Chairmen of the ICFY relating to the cooperation by
the authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
(Serbia and Montenegro) and the continuing imperfections
in the border closure.

The draft resolution is not one directed against those
who are genuinely concerned to ensure the border closure:
it contains elements that recognize the importance of the
cooperation by authorities of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia in ensuring the border closure. The partial
suspension of sanctions against the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia has, after all, been extended. Rather, the
resolution is one directed against those who are
determined to violate the border closure.

The Indonesian delegation must emphasize once
again, however, that the international community expects
a most rigorous implementation by the authorities of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia of the commitments they
have undertaken. Nor can we be oblivious to the fact that
recognition of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina by
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has yet to occur. Such
an act would contribute immeasurably towards the
creation of an environment that would be favourable to a
lasting and comprehensive peace in the region.

The draft resolution before us contains a number of
important elements based on the experience of the past
100 days; some of these, we hasten to add, are
reaffirmations of previous commitments intended to
ensure a more effective implementation of the border
closure. We attach great importance, for example, to the
provision addressing the possible diversion of goods -
except foodstuffs, medical supplies and clothing for
essential humanitarian needs - from the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia through the Republic of Croatia
to the areas of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina
under the control of the so-called Bosnian Serb forces.

We also deem it important that the draft resolution
provides for a thorough investigation of alleged breaches
of the border closure, including those relating to aerial
violations, and stresses the importance of prosecuting
persons suspected of violating the border closure.

My delegation is also heartened by the recognition
in the draft resolution of the need to provide the ICFY
Mission with the capacity to discharge its tasks
effectively. The financial difficulties facing the Mission
have rightly seized our attention. This problem must be
addressed immediately lest it seriously impair the ability
of the Mission to certify the border closure credibly.

Further, my delegation would like to emphasize that
the draft resolution before us today provides that the
Co-Chairmen of the ICFY should make use not only of
information made available to them from the Mission, but
also from all other available sources that are deemed
relevant. This, in our view, is an important aspect of the

 

draft resolution and forms part of an effort to assist the
ICFY constructively in the implementation of its tasks.

At this juncture, it would be remiss of me if I failed
to pay tribute to the members of the Mission for their
tireless efforts in fulfilling their important duties under
difficult physical and operational constraints.

The conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina has lasted for
far too long. Resolutions have been passed and statements
issued by this body, yet death and destruction continue to
be inflicted on the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina. A
lasting settlement can be achieved only if all the parties
concerned share a true commitment to peace. The draft
resolution before us represents a means to encourage the
Bosnian Serbs to accept the Contact Group peace plan and
all the relevant resolutions of the United Nations Security
Council and General Assembly. It must therefore be
energetically implemented, as befits measures imposed
under Chapter VII of the Charter.

In light of these considerations, my delegation will
support the adoption of the draft resolution.

