Mr. Thaci (interpretation from Albanian; English text provided by delegation): Allow me, first, to
express my gratitude for this opportunity to address
the members ofthe Security Council as the year ends to
inform them about the progress achieved in Kosovo in
recent months and the challenges ahead of us.

The year 2014 marks the fifteenth anniversary of
the end of the war in Kosovo, which was immediately
followed by the establishment of a United Nations
protectorate. Fifteen years seems like a long time.
However, as compared to many frozen conflicts that
burden international relations across all continents,
I believe that we can safely conclude that the United
Nations in Kosovo has indeed been of the most
successful missions in the Organization's entire history.

Kosovo is today a free and stable democracy with
a growing economy, a Constitution and modern laws
that guarantee the rights of all citizens, especially the
rights of minorities. Kosovo has undertaken a genuine
decentralization of power. Kosovo has formally entered
into the European Union (EU) integration process by
initiating the signing of a stabilization and association
agreement, which just a few years ago was considered
a very difficult task. Thanks to dialogue with Serbia
and the historic Brussels Agreement, Kosovo has been
transformed from an importer of security resources to
an exporter of global initiatives for peace and tolerance.

On this occasion, I would like to extend my thanks
to EU member States and the United States, as well
as to our neighbours in Serbia, for their courage and
commitment. That courage and commitment to the
future of our children was in evidence when we decided
to normalize relations between our two countries and
to look to the future of our two States as neighbours
that aspired to the ideals of the family of Euro-Atlantic
nations.

The Council is already aware that, in the course
of all of the meetings we have had here in the Security
Council, the north of Kosovo has been in a constant
state of crisis. That has raised concerns about a possible
escalation of violence, as well as uncertainty as to what
laws are in force and which constitution is applied there.
We are aware that Kosovo Serb citizens have feared
and distrusted the Government of Kosovo because of
everything that has happened in the past decades. But
let me also tell the Council that this year has been the
year of the cementing of the territorial integrity of the
Republic of Kosovo.

The participation of Serbs from the northern
part of Kosovo for the first time in national elections
organized under the laws of Kosovo, as well as the
Serbian leadership's participation in negotiations for
the establishment of governing institutions following
the June elections, is a good omen and inspires great
hope that even this painful chapter is beginning to be
resolved. That is based on the wishes of the people of
Kosovo, Albania, Serbia and others, who all share the
same dreams, the same hopes and the same rights to
a secure future with a focus on the economy and the
creation ofnewjobs. The citizens ofKosovo today - be
they Albanian, Serb, Bosniak, Turk or Ashkali - are
not interested in nationalistic speeches and their old
ethnic dreams. They want jobs, they want progress and
they want to see peace after decades of discrimination,
war and uncertainty.

Therefore, the year 2014 will go down in Kosovo's
modern history as the year when the entire territory
of Kosovo, the north and the south, participated in
the democratic process and worked together to create
institutions that are responsible for reflecting and
working for the welfare of the citizens of Kosovo. I
would like to thank the missions of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the United
Nations, the EU and the United States, as well as the civil
society organizations that helped us organize excellent
elections with the highest democratic standards on
8 June, elections that saw the participation of all the
communities in Kosovo.

There are five major developments that I wish to
emphasize during my appearance before the Council
today, on behalf of the Republic of Kosovo, that will
confirm that along with us, it, too, can be proud of this
joint success in Kosovo.

The first one, as I mentioned earlier, is that Kosovo,
in the span of six months, organized two successful
elections: local ones at the end of2013 and national ones
in June 2014. They were considered by international
observers to be free, well organized and democratic
elections.

The elections included the election of Serb mayors
in the north, who are now integrated into the Kosovo
legal system and, above all, enjoy legitimacy and
are accepted by the entire community living in the
north. The results of the national elections were even
better, because they were tallied throughout the entire
territory of Kosovo. Kosovo today can be considered
an established democracy capable of fully organizing
elections independently and respecting the results.

The second thing I wanted to mention is that
although we have experienced political gridlock,
it never evolved into a violent crisis. While violent
protests have occurred in neighbouring countries, with
police violence and the delegitimizing of independent
institutions such as the supreme and constitutional
courts, Kosovo has proved that whether we are in the
opposition or in the Government, whether we are in the
majority or in the minority, the political class respects
the Constitution and obeys the law; it respects the
decisions of the Constitutional court; and it respects
the country's president, Mrs. Jahjaga. Our President
happens to be the first woman President in the entire
Balkans. All of this is a sign of Kosovo's political
emancipation.

We had our share of disagreements during the
months after the election. The winning party and the
opposition could not find common ground. We had
moments of uncertainty, but they never led to violence
or threats to our common goal, which is to be future
members of the EU family and the NATO alliance.

I am happy to inform the Council that through
respect for the decisions of the Constitutional Court
and, thankfully, the role of the President as facilitator,
the two largest parties in Kosovo, the Democratic
Party of Kosovo - the winning party - and the
Democratic League of Kosovo, along with the parties
representing minorities, have reached an agreement to
form a government. I believe that this formula will be
implemented next week, with new institutions of the
Republic of Kosovo.

It is of particular importance that this coalition
was achieved by Kosovo political parties without
outside interference, which is a great achievement if
we compare it to the United Nations protectorate or
the situation at the beginning, when the international
community played an important role. Now we finally
have a process and local results that make us proud
of the fact that Kosovo has passed the test of political
maturity.
The third point I wanted to mention is that political
stability has also helped Kosovo succeed internationally.
This year was one of transition during which elections
were held in Serbia, our partner in dialogue, as well
as in the European Parliament, as I noted in Kosovo.
There was also a change in EU commissioners, but
despite all of this, international recognition of Kosovo
remained an undeniable element of the Balkans policy
architecture.

On this occasion, I would like to thank the countries
of Tonga, Lesotho, Togo and the Solomon Islands, which
recognized the independence of Kosovo, bringing the
number of recognitions to 108. Our diplomacy called
this a year of multilateral inclusion, during which
Kosovo became a member of the Venice Commission of
the Council of Europe and many regional organizations.

The dialogue with Serbia has continued. At the
technical level, we have achieved many successes
in the normalization of relations, although, to be
honest, much remains to be done. Serbia has signed an
agreement with Kosovo that ensures the normalization
of relations, but there is still much resistance to its
full implementation. I know that it is not an easy
task. I wish to reaffirm that the Republic of Kosovo
will implement every agreement and every obligation
that we have undertaken in order to integrate the Serb
minority. I often meet with Serb leaders, and there have
been tendencies to locate Kosovo in the international
arena, which does not help either Serbia or Kosovo.

Allow me to state with particular pride that Kosovo
has become a member of the International Olympic
Committee. The youth of Kosovo, from the world judo
champion, Ms. Majlinda Kelmendi, to the thousands
of young people who have dreamed of representing the
colours of Kosovo in the international arena, will now
have the opportunity to compete anywhere in the world
as equals with other athletes. Just imagine; only six
years after Kosovo became independent, we are already
a part of the Olympic family and will have the Kosovo
flag flown at the Rio Olympics.

On behalf of the Republic of Kosovo and its
institutions, I would like to thank in particular all of
the States members of the International Organization
of la Francophonie for supporting Kosovo's recent
accession. The organization offered its strong support
during the Senegal summit in November, unanimously
supporting Kosovo's membership as an observer in
the large francophone family. Kosovo's membership
in this community will reflect its cultural values and
standards and best practices in terms of international
cooperation.
The fourth point I wanted to make is related to
global developments and the respective role of Kosovo.
The global fight against terrorism and the spread of
religious radicalism has affected Kosovo in the same
way as it has many countries of the world. There are
also marginal groups in Kosovo, as in all European
countries, that are recruiting and advocating for the
participation ofKosovars on the side ofthe Islamic State
in Iraq and Syria in Syria and in Iraq. This phenomenon
is a source of concern, but the Government has taken
important steps to put an end to such tendencies. We
have arrested several dozen suspected militants and
those who inspired them, including a number ofimams
who are believed to be inciting hatred. We will not
compromise with radicalism. We have already prepared
a law against Kosovar participation in foreign wars and
are working actively to promote Kosovo as a global
dialogue platform for religious tolerance.

I want to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, and the United States Department of State,
which in their reports this year have praised Kosovo's
role in promoting religious tolerance. Kosovo is an
example of peacemaking and of the building of a
genuine democracy following genocide and war.

Yes, I am aware of and strongly condemn the
occasional attacks against the Serbian Orthodox
Church. Bishop Teodosije and other Serbian priests are
an essential part of Kosovo, and Serbian churches are an
important basis of our common heritage, but let me say
that not every incident that is reported here has religious
or ethnic connotations. Often they are acts of vandalism
carried out by provocateurs or attacks for economic
benefits. There are fewer interreligious incidents in
Kosovo than in many neighbouring countries. I know
one thing: that Kosovo will not be 100 per cent free if
all of its citizens are not able to speak openly, to move
fearlessly and to practice their religion freely. But I can
promise the Council here today that Kosovo is and will
remain free.

The last point I will discuss here today is our
commitment to future projects. I also thank all present
for their patience and for the concerns they have
expressed in the course of this discussion.

Kosovo has achieved phenomenal success in the
context of the World Bank's doing business index. In
the last six years, Kosovo has had the highest economic
growth rate in all of Eastern Europe, with an average
rate of 4.5 per cent. Kosovo also has the lowest public
debt in the Balkans, which does not exceed 10 per cent of
the gross domestic product. Kosovo is the country with
the most Internet connectivity in the Balkans; close to
90 per cent of the population has access to high-speed
Internet, a result of our young demographic profile
and of a large diaspora and the need to be in touch
with our families. We are now in the final stages of
bringing foreign investors into the tourism and energy
sectors, and in the past eight years we have built 1,500
kilometres of roads and highways as well as 120 new
schools. Thus, the old image that Council members may
have for Kosovo has changed and is changing every day.
In digital diplomacy, culture, sports and peacemaking,
we have demonstrated innovation and vision.
Nevertheless, we still have many challenges ahead
of us. We will establish a specialist court to shed light
on the allegations concerning war crimes. Kosovo has
faith in justice. We are working to combat corruption
and organized crime. Those challenges also have a
regional element of cooperation and the exchange
of information. I therefore ask the Council today to
recognize Kosovo's progress and our willingness to
face new challenges. If Kosovo is to enjoy complete and
irreversible success, Council members need to confirm
the progress that we have made throughout the years
since the late and much respected Sergio Vieira de Mello
first led the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo. The new reality requires courage
from Council members in order to open a new, normal
political relationship between the United Nations and
Kosovo. I am convinced that, thanks to the Council's
understanding, that will happen very soon and Kosovo
will be an equal member of the United Nations family.

The President (spoke in French) I shall now give
the floor to members of the Security Council.

