Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I would like to
congratulate His Excellency President Santos Calderen
on presiding over the Security Council's open debate
today. It is also a matter of great satisfaction that
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, his Special Envoy
President Clinton, President Preval of Haiti, the
Foreign Minister of Colombia, the Vice-Minister of
Brazil and the Minister of State of the United Kingdom
are in our midst today. We appreciate their taking time
off to address us on the situation in Haiti. Their
participation in today's debate underlines their
commitment to the cause of Haiti. We have benefited a
great deal from their views.

The Security Council, along with the other organs
of the United Nations system, has continued to pay
attention to the situation in Haiti by holding regular
meetings and, in this context, we are glad that the
Colombian presidency of the Council has organized
today's open debate. We hope that the sustained
engagement of the international community and the
Council in developments in Haiti will not only reassure
the people and Government of Haiti, but also bring
about greater coherence in the efforts of multilateral
agencies and bilateral partners in assisting the Haitian
authorities.

We all know well the extent of devastation that
was caused in Haiti by the earthquake, which took the
lives of some 300,000 and injured an equal number.
While Haiti was battling to overcome this disaster, an
outbreak of cholera further aggravated an already grim
situation. Amidst all this, the country plunged into a
political crisis with a series of electoral disputes in
presidential and legislative elections. The return of
erstwhile Haitian leaders from exile seemed to add to
the political tensions.

With a change in Government and the challenge
of sustaining recovery efforts, Haiti will face testing
times this year too. It is a matter of satisfaction that the
preliminary results of the run-off election held last
month have been announced and that Mr. Michel
Martelly has been declared the winner. It is our hope
that the final result of the presidential election will be
announced soon and that all political actors in Haiti
will accept it. In that connection, we note with
appreciation the roles played by regional organizations,
in particular the Organization of American States, in
resolving electoral disputes during the first phase of
the presidential election. It is critical that the transition
of power be smooth. We also hope the political
leadership in Haiti will show maturity at this difficult
time and live up to the expectations of the Haitian
people.

Haiti requires the sustained support of the
international community in its national efforts towards
long-term recovery, reconstruction and development.
With nearly 680,000 persons still living in camps and
millions living in extremely difficult conditions,
including the lack of access to clean water, sanitation
and other basic services and recovery efforts, the need
of the hour is not only solidarity and commitment but
also an acceleration in the pace of reconstruction
efforts. Simultaneously, it is also necessary to focus on
governmental reforms towards good governance, the
rule of law and institution-building in a process owned
and led by Haiti.

Better coordination between aid agencies, donors
and the Government of Haiti requires no emphasis.
That would not only avoid duplication but also direct
aid to sectors considered most necessary by the
Government and people of Haiti. The various United
Nations agencies also have to work hard towards
improving Haiti's technical capacity to fully and
properly utilize aid.

India has made a modest contribution to the
efforts of the Haitian authorities to deal with the
situation there. In the immediate aftermath of the
earthquake, on behalf of India, I handed a modest
offering to my colleague the Permanent Representative
of Haiti. India also made a contribution to Central
Emergency Response Fund, which was put to good use

in the earliest stages of recovery work in Haiti. We
have also pledged to reconstruct one of the
Government ministries, to be identified by the
Government of Haiti. We await an indication as to
which building we should start preparations to rebuild.

In recognizing the need to provide basic
amenities - shelter, drinking water and sanitation -
to the Haitian people, we have joined our partners
Brazil and South Africa in expanding the India-Brazil-
South Africa (IBSA) trust fund for the waste
management project in Haiti, both in its area of
coverage and its scope to handle different types of
waste. IBSA is also involved in other projects in this
effort and devoting resources for the reconstruction of
a community health centre in Haiti.

We highly commend and support the role played
by peacekeepers of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) in the humanitarian and
recovery efforts in aid of local authorities in Haiti. We
are proud of their sterling efforts, both on the civil and
military and police sides, in the immediate aftermath of
the disastrous earthquake, despite the tremendous
losses that they themselves suffered. We are also happy
to note the important role played by MINUSTAH in
ensuring a peaceful run-off election in March. I also
recall the contributions made by the Indian police
officers deployed with MINUSTAH, presently
numbering 470 in three contingents, two of which were
deployed by India after the earthquake at the request of
the United Nations.

We hope that, with the support of the
international community, Haiti will this year not only
recover faster from the effects of last year's disasters
but also show political resilience to achieve much-
needed reforms to improve the living conditions of the
Haitian population. India is committed to our collective
efforts to achieve those goals.

