Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I do apologize for asking for the floor again,
but I should like to continue this discussion that has
developed and which relates to the implementation of
Security Council resolutions on Iraq.

Some of my colleagues have just said in response
to my statement that their use of force against Iraq -
which has continued all along and which has
intensified in the last year and a half - is based on a
resolution of the Security Council. We have also heard
an accusation against Baghdad in the discussion,
namely, that it does not approve certain contracts to
supply goods from a given country. Of course, these
are important questions, and I think it is very useful for
us to discuss them today - not because I want to
engage in confrontation or get into an argument about
it here, butjust because unless we discuss these matters
openly, honestly and in the presence of our colleagues
who are not members of the Security Council, then we
would just be pretending that there are resolutions and
there are realities.

I think we need to have a comprehensive
consideration of all aspects of the Iraqi situation that I
mentioned at the end of my previous statement. We
would like to know about many things. We would like
to find out, for example, who specifically works in
Iraqi Kurdistan. Which non-governmental
organizations are operating there? Diplomats of which
countries are visiting Iraqi Kurdistan without
requesting visas to visit Iraq? And how, in general, are
the activities of the United Nations in northern Iraq
carried out? Who crosses the Iraqi border, and how?
In our resolutions we reaffirm each time the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq. I think the
Secretariat of the United Nations, which is present in
northern Iraq, has some kind of information as to how
these resolutions are implemented vis-a-vis Iraqi
Kurdistan. We heard that the Permanent Representative
of Iraq to the United Nations had submitted the letter of
his Foreign Minister to the effect that his territory had
been attacked again. We do not discuss these questions.
We think this is the reality, and it has nothing to do
with the resolution that we quite rightly reaffirm each
time in our meetings.

I would be very grateful if the Secretariat could
finally carry out a comprehensive analysis of what is
happening with regard to the implementation of
Security Council resolutions on Iraq. And, secondly,
what is happening generally in Iraq and whether what
is happening generally in Iraq and around Iraq is in
accordance with Security Council resolutions. I would
very much like to know in which specific Security
Council resolution the term "no-fly" zone is actually
used. In what specific resolution does it say that force
from the air can be used over 60 per cent of the Iraqi
territory? I would be very interested in having the
Secretariat give us a comprehensive legal analysis of
what is happening around Iraq, because each time we
meet here to extend the oil-for-food programme, we
call for the need to reach consensus and to have the
Security Council be united. The same is true when we
hear reports from the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIK),
and the United Nations Special Commission, before it.
In recent years, we have stressed the need to get to a
comprehensive understanding of the entire Iraqi
situation. Unfortunately, all colleagues agree with you
when talk with them informally; but when it is
proposed that a comprehensive analysis be carried out
officially, well, silence ensues. I wish to repeat the
point that I do not wish to provoke any kind of
confrontation today. Ijust want to stress that we cannot
just continue to pretend each time that there is a
humanitarian programme and that there is
UNMOVIK - which has a life of its own - while at
the same time there are these "no-fly" zones, non-
governmental organizations working in northern Iraq
and diplomats crossing Iraq's borders without visas.

If we were to find out about all this and do
nothing to collate all these facts, the Security Council
would not be doing its job, which is to resolve
problems relating directly to the maintenance of peace
and security.

That was my essential point. I believe that the
United Nations Secretariat has enough authority under
the Charter to draw our attention to the fact that the
problem of Iraq is not being resolved by the Security
Council. We are trying to alleviate the symptoms of the
disease, but we are not addressing the heart of the
problem.

I do not offer any concrete proposals because, as I
said earlier, there are Security Council resolutions and
there is reality. I hope that the reality will change some
day, but I do not believe it will happen now as we
approach midnight. I do hope, however, that it will
occur at some point.

