Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in French): I would first like to thank the French
delegation for convening this debate on the cross-
cutting threats posed by drugs, transnational crime and
terrorism.

Since those threats are real and pose genuine and
serious threats and challenges to international peace

and security, they call for a global response. Because
they spare no geographical area or country, those
threats must be addressed and countered collectively.
From that standpoint, exchanging information and
sharing experiences, as well as assistance at the
international level, remain essential.

Because these threats attack all strata of society
of our States, promote corruption and contribute to
destabilizing democracies, in particular emerging ones;
and because they hinder development efforts and
exacerbate crises and tensions in areas that have
already been weakened by severe challenges to
security and development, they require us to strengthen
the existing international and national legal arsenals.
Since some countries more than others have unique
weaknesses owing to various factors that promote the
vicious circle of lawlessness and underdevelopment,
we call for increased assistance in the capacity-
building of those countries in order to enable them to
better fight such threats and to better participate in the
global effort in that regard.

We therefore welcome the establishment of a
partnership among the United Nations African Institute
for the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of
Offenders, its member States and the international
crime prevention network in order to offer an effective
response to the various ills created by transnational
crime. That is why, given the challenges that the
Institute must address on the continent ~ including the
increasingly complex operations of transnational
criminal groups and the illicit circulation of
firearms- we underscore the need to provide the
African Institute with the necessary financial means by
increasing the subsidies granted to it by the United
Nations.

Once again, my delegation would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for having convened this debate,
while affirming its support for the draft presidential
statement that you kindly presented to us.

