Ms. Philips (United Kingdom): Ithank Mr. Shearer,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
South Sudan and Head of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan, and Ms. Jial for their briefings.

Today, on International Women's Day, I would like
to focus on the devastating impact that the conflict in
South Sudan has had on women and girls. In five years
of fighting, the conflict has claimed nearly 400,000
lives and driven 4.3 million people from their homes
and 1.4 million to the edge of famine. As we have heard
from Ms. Jial, it is often women and girls who have
borne the brunt of the violence. Women, including
those in their sixties, and girls as young as eight have
been subjected to brutal acts of rape and sexual assault.
Yet, despite the depth of the horror, time and again
perpetrators are not held to account. That impunity
drives the cycle of violence.

Despite the signing in September of the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan and the welcome reduction in
political violence, there has been a concerning uptick
in intercommunal Violence and sexual violence. We are
particularly concerned about the recent United Nations
reports warning of the normalization and persistence
of conflict-related sexual violence perpetrated by
fighters on all sides, including armed militia groups
that have been mobilized and used by the parties in
recent offensives and frequently, directly or indirectly,
encouraged by commanders.

Despite calls for the Government of South Sudan to
take action to identify those responsible and hold them
to account, that has not happened. Instead, in some
instances, the organizations that provide support to the
victims have come under attack by the Government.
We cannot accept such brutal acts committed against
mothers, sisters and daughters. We cannot allow
impunity to persist.

On this day above all, and on each and every day, in
order to support lasting peace, we call for an end to the
pernicious use of sexual violence and to the culture of
impunity in South Sudan. We call on the Government
to uphold its responsibility to protect civilians and to
thoroughly investigate all instances of sexual Violence
and bring those responsible for those crimes to justice.
We must all support organizations to help survivors, as
Ms. Jial has suggested, and continue to exert pressure
for accountability whether through national courts, the
hybrid court for South Sudan or international sanctions.

ButI do not want to focusjust on the disproportionate
impact of the conflict on women and girls. It is also
important to focus on the crucial role women have
to play in delivering sustainable peace. The United
Kingdom has consistently pressed for the greater
inclusion of women in political and peace processes,
and we welcome the contributions of brave civil society
actors, including those present today. We welcome the
commitments made in the September peace agreement
to at least 35 per cent executive representation, but
that has not yet translated into action and we call on
the parties to deliver on their promises, not for some
abstract concept of quotas, but because we know
that when women meaningfully participate in peace
processes, the resulting agreement is more likely to last.

We are grateful that Ms. Jial has been able to join
us today. Civil society has played a vital role in the
peace process by representing the views and voices of
the people of South Sudan, and we support her call for
greater engagement with South Sudanese communities.
We are therefore concerned that the space for civil
society continues to shrink and we encourage all
parties to engage in open dialogue with civil society
organizations, particularly those representing women.

Finally, it is important to register that the Secretary-
General's report (S/2019/191) is the last 90-day
report before the May transition date envisage in the
September peace agreement. We welcome the progress
made to date and reductions in overall violence, as
set out by Special Representative Shearer. The United
Kingdom remains committed to supporting those
working for peace, but like the Special Representative
we are concerned about the lack of progress on some
of the most difficult issues, alongside increases in
intercommunal and sexual violence.

Conflict is the main driver of South Sudan's man-
made humanitarian and protection crisis. Peace is the
only solution. It is vital that the Security Council, the
region and the parties to the conflict do not allow this
loss of momentum to persist and to destroy the hope of
progress that September's agreement brought. We urge
all parties to bring renewed momentum to ensuring that
the deal is implemented in full. We must work together
or risk failing to deliver a future free of violence for the
people, including the women and girls of South Sudan.

