Ms. Drobic (Slovenia): Let me first thank the
Swedish presidency for convening this open debate on
confict prevention and sustaining peace.

Slovenia aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union and
with the statement delivered on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Mediation. In addition, I would like to make
a few remarks from my national point of view.

The global security environment has changed
significantly in recent years. Multidimensional issues,
such as terrorism, violent extremism and irregular
migration, still represent challenges to the international
community and its universal values and principles.
To be able to tackle those and future challenges the
emphasis must be on doing more collectively, effectively
and in a timely manner. We need to overcome political
divisions and show that the Security Council is able
to respond when dire, protracted human suffering,
injustice and breaches of international humanitarian
law are happening.

People-centred and development-oriented
approaches are important. All Governments have
the responsibility to protect their own people and to
sustain peace. All other entities of the international

community - the United Nations, but also regional
organizations, non-governmental organizations and
civil society actors - could, however, do more to

support the most vulnerable and fragile countries, in
particular by enhancing their societal resilience and
security architecture.

One of the imperatives for the success of conflict
prevention and for the maintenance of peace and security
in and among States is full respect for international
law and the rule of law. Their promotion at all levels
is crucial for the realization of sustained economic
growth, the eradication of poverty and hunger and the
protection of human rights. Justice and reconciliation
must be among the main focuses for all preventive and
post-conflict activities. Attaining them by peaceful
means, as stipulated in Chapter VI of the Charter of the
United Nations, including through international courts
and tribunals, must be our common endeavour.

We welcome the engagement in conflict prevention
issues at the United Nations and commend the efforts
in different parts of the United Nations system to
significantly strengthen the Organization's capacities.
We are glad to hear that the surge in diplomacy for
peace will be one of the key priorities of the Secretary-
General's mandate, and we appreciate today's
presentation of his vision on how to achieve that goal.

In the future we need to be careful not to depart
from multilateralism. We need to foster it, especially
in preventive action. Cooperation and credible
information-sharing on early warning and situational
assessments among international actors must be stepped
up, in particular with a comprehensive approach that
encompasses humanitarian and development assistance,
human rights and rule-of-law promotion, peacebuilding
and other areas.

Slovenia is a traditional advocate of preventive
diplomacy and preventive post-conflict mediation. In
past years, we dedicated most of our efforts in this field
to enhancing mediation in the Mediterranean region,
especially by highlighting the priorities of actively
engaging women and young people and respect for
international law and the rule of law. We intend to
continue pursuing those in the future.
