Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): My delegation is
particularly grateful for and would like to express its
satisfaction with the recent positive developments in
the Somali peace process since the establishment of the
transitional federal parliament and the election of the
transitional President. We welcome this opportunity to
hear directly from the leaders of Somalia, in particular
from the President of the Republic, as we meet here in
Nairobi.

The Security Council's meeting in Nairobi is very
timely. We are meeting at the right moment, as clearly
demonstrated by the presidential statement that we will
adopt later, as proposed by China. This meeting also
represents a boost to the Somali process and to the
countries of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), whose cohesion has been
pivotal to the results achieved thus far.

The people of Somalia now face the most
challenging part of their long path to peace and
stability, which is the implementation of the agreement
in good faith. A number of speakers have stressed the
need for adequate support for the process. We would
like to join those speakers who indicated such a need.

In his report submitted to the Council last month
(5/2004/804), the Secretary-General underlined the
need for an expanded United Nations peace-building
role and presence to assist the process. President
Museveni also presented his view yesterday, of which
we took due note. There is, therefore, a clear
convergence of views on the need to support the
Somali peace process. This calls for coordination
between the African Union, IGAD, the United Nations
and the League of Arab States, taking into account the
responsibilities of each body. Furthermore, it can be
successful only if Somalis are themselves fully
involved. Particular attention should therefore be paid
to the planning efforts underway involving the
international community and the Somali people in
formulating a peace-building framework for a rapid
assistance package, as recommended by the Security
Council.

The development aspect of the process is also
fundamental for a long-lasting peace in Somalia. We
therefore welcome the operational activities in support
of peace being carried out by the United Nations,
which are the basis for the work to be performed by an
enhanced United Nations presence in that country. The
national reconciliation and unity of Somalia should
remain the backbone of these efforts.

