Mr. Ileka (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): Allow me, first of all, to express my
pleasure at seeing you, Mr. President, preside over the
Security Council for the month of January, as well as to
thank you for convening this important meeting of the
Council devoted to the European Union-led force
(EUFOR) in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I
should also like to take this opportunity to welcome the
presence among us of Mr. Javier Solana, High
Representative for the Common Foreign and Security
Policy of the European Union, as well as to express my
gratitude for his very thorough briefing. I have also
listened closely to the statement made by the
representatives of Germany on behalf of the European
Union, and those of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Political Affairs.

EUFOR was the second military intervention of
the European Union in my country. Operation Artemis
in 2003, which included the deployment of the Interim
Emergency Multinational Force, managed at the time
to stabilize the security and humanitarian situation in
Bunia, making it possible to implement the Global and
All-Inclusive Agreement on the Transition in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. As others who
have spoken before me have pointed out, EUFOR was
a military force authorized by the Security Council
under resolution 1761 (2006), of 25 April 2006, and
deployed by the European Union to support the
electoral process on behalf of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC).

We can say with confidence that EUFOR's record
has been largely positive. Elections have been held
successfully and the Congolese people have expressed
their will in complete freedom, voting in massive
numbers in the legislative elections and the two rounds
of presidential elections. The transitional period in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo came to an end with
the inauguration of His Excellency Mr. Joseph Kabila
Kabange, the first Congolese President elected through
direct universal suffrage. A Prime Minister has been
designated, who is preparing to form the future
Government. The National Assembly is being
established as we meet, and existing provincial
assemblies are preparing to begin their work. Elections
for governors and senators are somewhat behind
schedule, but they will occur before the end of the
month. Other local elections will take place later this
year. The structure of the Third Republic is therefore
slowly being established. With the success of this
undertaking, the United Nations and the European
Union have made it possible to establish a truly
democratic arena in my country.

The efforts of the European Union are not limited
to EUFOR. The European Union is also playing a role
through EUSEC, the European Union mission to
provide advice and assistance for security sector
reform in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
EUPOL, the European Union Police Mission in
Kinshasa. With regard to the organization and holding
of elections, we should also acknowledge that the
European Union is the main supporter of the
Independent Electoral Commission. We should also
bear in mind that many members of the European
Union and its associated States are also providing
assistance to the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
many areas on the bilateral level, in close cooperation
with the United Nations and the European Union. I
would like those countries and our international,
continental and regional partners to know how very
grateful the Congolese people are for their assistance.

However, the human, material and financial
resources devoted to my country by the European
Union and the United Nations could be for naught as
long as there are dictatorial regimes in the Great Lakes
region that have little respect for human rights. For its
part, the Democratic Republic of the Congo would like
to solemnly renew its commitment to participate in the
establishment of peace and security for its own people
and for those of neighbouring States. The Democratic
Republic intends to fully play its role as a central and
pivotal State in international efforts aimed at
stabilizing the entire Great Lakes region in particular,
and Africa in general.

With the establishment of new institutions, the
Congolese people rely on the ongoing support of the
international community to continue policies aimed at
national reconciliation, economic and social recovery
and the rebuilding of the country. The future Congolese
Government will soon begin discussions with the
United Nations as regards the future of their
partnership.

Overall, I can assure the Council that the
President of the Republic and the Congolese people
want the international community to continue its
commitment in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We call on the international community - as the High
Representative of the European Union and my African
colleagues on the Council have done - to continue to
provide assistance, including in support of the new
institutions, the reform of the national army and police
as part of security sector reform, the continuation of
disarmament programmes - both the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and rehabilitation and the
disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement
and reintegration programmes, including those
pertaining to child soldiers - judicial sector reform,
including human rights, good governance and
development, so as to make it possible for the
Congolese people to fully benefit from the dividends
produced by peace. I am both encouraged and
reassured by the renewed commitment of the European
Union in that regard.

The international community should also
continue to help our country to address factors of
instability such as the illegal exploitation of natural
resources and other forms of wealth of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and illicit arms trafficking in
the region.

Before I conclude, I would like to pay well-
deserved tribute to the personnel of EUFOR for their
professionalism. Through their remarkable work, they
have made possible secure elections while at the same
time demonstrating full impartiality. EUFOR has also
made it possible to return to peace, calm and stability.
EUFOR's military personnel returned home on the
scheduled date, with the certainty of having
accomplished their mission.

I would also like to thank the Governments of the
Gabonese Republic and the sisterly Government of
Congo-Brazzaville for the steps they took to facilitate
the operations of EUFOR.

With the establishment of new democratically
elected republican institutions, our country is today
beginning a new phase. However, many challenges
remain, and they are enormous. It is important that the
support of the international community not let up. We
have that opportunity. I would also like to reiterate
what was said by Mr. Gue'henno that we have an
opportunity and a duty not to repeat certain errors of
the past, including through a hasty withdrawal by the
international community. Rather we should strengthen
the partnership that has been established with my
country in order to build the momentum with a View to
contemplating with much more serenity the future of a
Congo that is truly democratic, a spearhead of the
African renaissance, where more peace, security,
justice and prosperity will prevail.

