Mr. Czaputowicz (Poland): Poland welcomes
the opportunity to participate in today's briefing and
discussion on cooperation between the Security Council
and the League of Arab States. I would like to express
my gratitude to His Excellency Sheikh Sabah Khalid Al
Hamad Al Sabah, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
State of Kuwait, for his valuable initiative. I would also
like to express my appreciation for today's substantial
briefings by Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and
Secretary-General of the League ofArab States Ahmed
Aboul Gheit.

Recently, I visited the secretariat of the League
of Arab States in Cairo. It gave me the opportunity to
have a more comprehensive understanding of regional
attitudes to developments in the region, including
the organization's role and relevance in offering
constructive solutions. Poland sees added value in
closer and more operational cooperation between these
two important organizations. We are also active in
enhancing bilateral contacts with Arab countries and
contributing to the efforts aimed at addressing regional
challenges. That is why we find this debate timely and
attach great importance to its outcomes.

At the present time, the Arab world is facing
many challenges. The situation in the Middle East
and the North African region does not make us feel
optimistic. The protracted internal conflicts in Syria,
Yemen and Libya have negative consequences for those
countries' neighbours. Terrorism, radicalization, illegal
mass migration and climate change exacerbate the
negative impacts of unresolved conflicts. The region
is experiencing multiple humanitarian challenges.
Millions of people in Syria, Yemen, Libya and Palestine
face deprivation and problems with access to food,
medical care and education, while many of them are
stranded in the middle of military conflicts.

It is our duty as the international community to do
our utmost to end these peoples' suffering and bring
peace and stability back to the region. We cannot
overlook the tension in relations between Iran and Arab
countries or the need to de-escalate it in the wider region,
particularly in the Gulf. Further, the Middle East peace
process cannot effectively move forward as long as the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict remains without a solution.
Indeed, the need to maximize the cooperation among
regional and subregional organizations is pressing if the
activities undertaken by the United Nations, the League
of Arab States, the African Union, the European Union
and other important contributors, in particular the
United States of America, are to achieve some degree
of synergy.
In recent years, we have witnessed an increase in
the use ofmediation as a crisis management tool to work
towards the peaceful resolution of conflicts. However,
for it to be effective, a strong commitment by relevant
regional, subregional and universal organizations
is required. Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations provides a solid basis for this kind of
cooperation, which was underscored by the Secretary-
General in his report on this very issue (S/2018/592).
Only by working together can we enhance our capacity
to prevent and resolve conflicts and other crises that
threaten humankind.

Obviously, success is never guaranteed, but we
are making progress in this area. Today's meeting is
further evidence of that fact. We have to remember,
however, that in order to achieve milestones in working
together, we need to learn how to identify mutual
benefits and avoid destructive competition. There is
no other way to attain that objective than to regularly
assess the cooperation between the United Nations and
the League of Arab States. In my opinion, it would also
be useful to draw from experience and the examples
of best practices developed by the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, particularly with
regard to confidence-building measures. I think that
this practice should be taken into serious consideration
by the League of Arab States.

Let me reiterate that it is not possible to resolve
political and strategic differences without coming to
a compromise between key actors at the regional and
global levels. Resolving peace and security challenges
in the Arab world requires external mediation and
support. Although national and international actors
are engaged on the ground, their policies are somewhat
uncoordinated, if not at times contradictory. Finding
viable solutions to existing challenges requires the
development of a broader front among those engaged. A
coherent vision rather than a zero-sum-game approach
is needed. That vision would require some level of
coherence among such major actors as the United
States, the European Union, China, Russia and others.

With that in mind, Poland, together with the United
States, hosted a conference in Warsaw in February
on security in the Middle East. The meeting was an
occasion to start a process that we hope will help to
tackle the concrete security problems of the Middle East
and bring greater stability and confidence to the region.
At the meeting, foreign missions, senior officials and
ministers from more than 60 countries, including Arab
States, Israel and the countries of the Middle East, the
28 countries of the European Union and the United
States discussed how to solve the security problems
of the region. We agreed that we should continue the
process through engagement in working groups. We
hope for the widespread participation of representatives
of States in the search for concrete solutions for the
Middle East on such issues as the combat against
terrorism, the proliferation of weapons, cybersecurity,
maritime and aviation security, energy, human rights
and humanitarian assistance.

The United Nations and the League of Arab States
must join forces and develop closer cooperation so
as to find a way to strengthen peace and stability in
the Middle East. We would all benefit from bringing
cooperation between the United Nations and the League
of Arab States to a new level. We welcome the opening
of the United Nations Liaison Office to the League of
Arab States in Cairo just announced by the Secretary-
General. This and other measures mentioned by the
briefers will help to enhance the cooperation between
the two organizations.

