Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate the Arab Republic
of Egypt on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month, and for its especially
transparent efforts in organizing the Council's work. I
would also like to thank you personally, Mr. President.
And I thank the People's Republic of China for
its leadership of the Council last month. I am also
grateful to Mr. Jan Kubis, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), for his briefing,
and commend him and his teams in both Baghdad and
New York for the outstanding service they are providing
to Iraq at a difficult time.

The three leaderships - the presidency, the Speaker
of Parliament and the Prime Minister - are working
with the major political blocs elected by the people to
implement the Prime Minister's reform programme
and enact legislation in the House of Representatives,
including on Government reform, the provision of
public services and the return of internally displaced
persons (IDPs) to liberated towns, with the assistance
of the United Nations and donor States, which I would
like to thank.
I would like to stress that 2016 is a crucial year for
Iraq, with regard to combating terrorism and recovering
all the territory that has been taken over by the terrorist
gangs ofthe Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).
Iraq urges the international coalition to build on the
victories that have been achieved to date in military
operations and to take advantage of the weakening of
the ISIL groups in order to liberate Mosul. Operations to
regain control of Mosul under joint military command
are in their early stages, beginning with efforts to take
over surrounding villages. My Government commends
the Iraqi army for the successes in Ramadi that have
enabled us to retake Ramadi and Hit and continue
working to clean up remaining pockets in Anbar,
paving the way for IDPs to return.

Our forces are working hard to regain the cities and
towns occupied by ISIL's terrorist gangs in Iraq and to
reopen the road between Baghdad and Amman. In that
regard, we welcome the fact that United States Secretary
of State John Kerry has said that he considers ISIL's
actions in Iraq to be acts of genocide and crimes against
humanity, particularly those against minorities such as
Yazidis, Christians and Shiite Muslims. We urge the
Security Council to set up a specific international legal
mechanism for investigating and bringing to justice
the criminals of ISIL. We urge all States to implement
the provisions of resolutions 2170 (2014), 2178 (2014),
2199 (2015) and 2253 (2015), in particular the those
pertaining to stopping the flow of foreign terrorist
fighters from more than 100 States Members of the
United Nations. We also urge them to eliminate the
sources of financing and put an end to the smuggling of
Iraqi oil and archaeological artefacts across the Turkish
border.

The war against terrorism must be based on the
principle ofrespect for all States, especially neighbouring
States, and respect for the independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Iraq and the non-intervention
in its internal affairs. We stress the Security Council's
responsibility to demand that Turkey withdraw its
forces, which have penetrated 110 kilometres into
Iraqi territory without prior authorization from the
central Iraqi Government. We consider that a flagrant
violation of Iraqi sovereignty. It is also a violation
of the principle of good neighbourliness and other
principles of international law, as well as the Charter
of the United Nations. It undermines confidence in the
Security Council's role in safeguarding the principles
of the Charter. Furthermore, Iraq calls on the Turkish
Government to urgently withdraw its forces from Iraqi
territory. We urge it to respect international law and not
to base its actions on utterly unfounded pretexts.

Iraq values the positions taken by the international
coalition and its participation in the efforts to regain
stability and rebuild the areas recovered by Iraqi forces
from the ISIL terrorist gangs. The objective is to lessen
the humanitarian crisis of IDPs. It requires overcoming
the dangers posed by the remnants of explosives and
mines left behind by those gangs. It also requires the
provision of fundamental services that are essential for
the return of IDPs to those towns and regions. I would
underline the effective participation by the coalition to
rebuild recovered areas and to ensure that locals are
able to fight and hold territory.

We thank all States participating in the international
coalition, in particular the United States of America
and the member States of the European Union, as well
as other States outside the coalition, for their efforts
in confronting terrorism and for their military and
logistical assistance to Iraqi security forces, all while
respecting be sovereignty and sanctity of the Iraqi
territory and coordinating with our security forces.
We call for further support and cooperation and
coordination at the operational level. We also call for
air support, the building of better capacities and the
provision of military equipment required by Iraq, in
particular for de-mining. We call for the exchange of
information, for intelligence support and for help to
develop the military capacities of our security forces.

Iraq has always been, and will remain, an important
fundamental partner of the international coalition
until the terrorist gangs are thrown out by Iraq and
eliminated. We recognize the threat of terrorism, the
need to work and coordinate and cooperate to combat
such gangs in all places. We will not forget the role
of friendly countries that have stood alongside us in
our time of need and in our war against international
terrorism.

With regard to the efforts of the Iraqi Government
to promote the efforts aimed at national reconciliation,
the Government has adopted a series of legislation in
implementation of its national programmes, including
the law on accountability and justice and the adoption of
the draft law on general amnesty. The Government has
also approved the national guard law, providing for the
absorption of the fighters of the popular mobilization
forces and the tribal members outside the Ministries
of the Interior and Defence who all participated in
defending Iraq and combating the terrorist ISIL gangs.
The aim is to reintegrate them into the national guard
in accordance with the matrix of the Iraqi armed forces.
The Iraqi Government is working to complete
military and logistical requirements to retake the city
of Fallujah from ISIL by opening safe corridors for the
people of Fallujah towards Amiriyat, Habbaniyah and
Subaihat. In order to shelter civilians who have been
able to leave the city, camps have been set up with
food, medical supplies and humanitarian assistance.
However, ISIL is preventing people from leaving the
city in order to use them as humans shields, just as they
did when we retook Ramadi. Let me tell the Council
that our security forces have, and continue to, allow the
entry of foodstuffs and medication to Fallujah. We have
never prevented that.

With regard to the Mosul dam, the Iraqi Government
has taken major precautionary measures by lowering
the water level in the reservoir behind the dam to 307
metres. We have called on our citizens to exercise
great caution and to remain a safe distance from the
dam in case it collapses. We have contracted the Italian
company Trevi to repair one of the floodgates and to
train Iraqi personnel to use modern technologies. Our
engineers are currently undertaking that work. In that
regard, Iraq appreciates the efforts of the United States
of America and Italy, which are both working hard with
Iraq to find a lasting and final to the problem of the
dam.

Iraq is making continuing efforts to strengthen its
relations with Arab other States of the region. Allow
me to mention in particular Kuwait, Jordan, Iran and
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, as well as our constant
contacts with the Syrian Government. It is essential to
find a speedy solution to the Syrian question. We must
put an end to the humanitarian crisis in order to avoid
its escalation and to find a political settlement that is
satisfactory to all parties and serves to safeguard the
unity and territorial integrity of the Syrian State and
its international borders. That includes guarantees of
non-intervention by neighbouring States and stopping
the flow of terrorist fighters through Syrian borders.
We appeal to the Security Council to sanction States
that allow the mobilization of terrorist fighters on their
land and who direct them to other States in a dirty war
against humankind, stability and development. Iraq
supports the United Nations and international efforts
in finding a political solution that includes all Syrians,
including Syria's Kurds.

The Government of Iraq is committed to making
exceptional efforts aimed at achieving progress with
regard to the issue of missing Kuwaiti nationals and
to the national archives. The joint national committees
are meeting witnesses in connection with the missing
Kuwaiti and third-country nationals. On 21 March,
they interviewed a witness with regard to suspected
burial sites holding the remains of a number of missing
Kuwaiti nationals in the Al-Jahrah and Al-Khamisiyah
regions. The operation to collect and document all
information is ongoing.

Let me stress how deep the relationship between
Iraq and Kuwait runs. We value the support of the State
of Kuwait, its Prince, its Amir and its people in our
war against terrorism and in providing humanitarian
assistance to Iraqi internally displaced persons. Today
we enjoy exceptional bilateral relations. There are
joint visits and meetings of joint committees, and we
welcome the increasing number of Kuwaiti tourists
to holy sites in Iraq. We are also working to increase
investments between our countries.

Iraq is committed to providing protection to those
in temporary transit camps. We urge States to repatriate
their citizens from those camps. We would like to thank
Ms. Lute for her efforts at finding durable solutions.

In conclusion, let me express our thanks and
appreciation to Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Kubis and his team in providing advice to the
Iraqi Government and for the daily efforts carried out
daily by UNAMI, aimed at ensuring Iraq's unity and
stability and that it is free of terrorism. We condemn
the recent killing of a UNAMI staff member. In that
connection, Iraqi authorities are carrying out an
investigation in order to find those responsible for that
murder and to bring them to justice.

