Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): We are grateful to China for organizing this meeting on an extremely important topic, and we very much welcome today's adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2020/5. We are pleased in particular that it recognizes the importance of a holistic approach, regional strategies and action plans, as well as the importance of human rights, the use of sexual violence as a tactic of terrorism and tackling that, and the importance of building inclusive and meaningful partnerships to counter- terrorism, bring perpetrators to justice and prevent violent extremism. It is relevant not only to Africa, but beyond. I also thank our briefers for their very rich and informative presentations. As we have heard previously in this Chamber, the terrorist threat in Africa is rapidly evolving, and the threat of foreign terrorist fighters and returnees highlights the risks posed by Da'esh and Al-Qaida affiliates, including groups in Mali, the Niger and Burkina Faso, among others. We are very pleased that the United Nations has listed the Islamic State West Africa Province and the Islamic State in the Greater Sahara under the sanctions regime of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999). But we also know that the threat of terrorism does not follow boundaries. The United Kingdom therefore stresses the value of international and regional cooperation to identify threats, strengthen responses and ensure that those responses align with international norms and standards. Having the right mechanisms and partnerships in place is key to ensuring that we can exchange information about plots and ensure that the perpetrators can be arrested, investigated and prosecuted, in accordance with national and international legal obligations. Too often, information-sharing, even within Governments, is inadequate, let alone between countries. But there is a simple equation: the greater the information-sharing and cooperation, the worst terrorists do. I am afraid that the inverse is also true. Relations between countries can be complex, but terrorism should always be a common cause. The Security Council has developed a robust counter-terrorism framework. Member States must continue to implement relevant resolutions. We stress the important role of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) in working with States to strengthen compliance with counter-terrorism obligations and identify technical assistance needs. We encourage the Office of Counter-Terrorism, the United Nations Development Programme and others to follow up on CTED's recommendations and help Member States to strengthen their capacities. We believe that the United Nations should continue to work to enhance capacity-building efforts in Africa, which also complement bilateral support given by members of the Council and other States Members of the United Nations. For our part, the United Kingdom supports counter-terrorism capacity-building projects through bilateral programmes in countries throughout Africa, which tackle different dimensions of counter-terrorism and the prevention of violent extremism, including through development, police, military and _ other forms of security cooperation. A few examples, if I might, are as follow. In East Africa, we have been working with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to construct detention facilities in Somalia, in line with international standards, while in Kenya, we are collaborating to strengthen crisis response and crime-scene management. In West Africa, we are working with prosecutors in Nigeria on counter- terrorism cases at the pretrial stage, with the aim of a higher conviction rate, and we have collaborated on aviation security. I would also say, if I may, as the Foreign Office's National Security Director, I took control of the Government's response to the attacks in Tunis and Sousse, where over 30 British nationals were killed. We have worked tirelessly since with our Tunisian friends to build capacity and support their - and I stress the word "their" - security priorities. Elsewhere, we are also working with local law enforcement and criminal justice officials across different African countries to build robust cases based on evidence to process those terrorist cases through the court system to hopefully achieve conviction and imprisonment and develop rule-of-law-based operational responses. As highlighted by the presidential statement we adopted today, tackling terrorism is not simply a matter of security. Of course, security is vital, and, in all our countries, it is crucial that we provide a proportionate security response to stopping attacks and arresting known terrorists. But it is not of itself sufficient. An issue we face in many countries is the provision of essential services by terrorist groups in particular areas. Our approach must therefore be security-led, while providing services and ensuring a positive impact in communities. What about those whom our security forces have not been able to individually identify as terrorists or as conducting terrorist attacks? That is where the prevention agenda comes into play to prevent people from becoming or supporting terrorists or violent extremists. I want to stress Rosemary DiCarlo's point here: there cannot be a one-size-fits-all solution. Prevention needs to be, above all, a local endeavour, taking account of local factors and developed with local communities and local authorities. What works in London will not necessarily work in Manchester. What is needed in Eastleigh will not necessarily be what is needed in Mombasa. Earlier I talked about counter-terrorism being a common cause, even when relations between countries are difficult. I can say, as the Foreign Office's National Security Director, that I also had the honour to visit Moscow, and I have regularly discussed this issue with my Russian colleagues. I feel that it is important to keep dialogue open and work together on counter- terrorism issues. We have enough arguments with our Russian friends here, and I do not see any need to do so on this issue. I am therefore not going to respond to the Russian representative's political points. But I do want to say that, when I listen to the concerns that he expressed, I want to reassure our Russian friends that the prevention of violent extremism - the prevention agenda - can never be an externally driven approach. It can work only in cooperation with States, whether at the national level or the local level, and it is not a dichotomy between the two. State involvement and community involvement should not be thought of as exclusive. I hope that provides some reassurance as to the United Kingdom's view on the approach that we are trying to take. Let me draw to an end by saying that the nature of the threat today calls for not just a whole-of- Government but also a whole-of-society approach, based on strong partnerships among Governments, communities and international and regional actors. But we also know that measures that infringe upon human rights and put citizens at odds with their own Government can exacerbate tensions and fuel radicalization and recruitment by terrorist groups. While States have legitimate concerns about terrorism, we must stress that all responses must be proportionate. As we so often reiterate in the Council's resolutions, measures must not foster association between terrorism and any religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic group. That is not just what is the right thing to do, but it is the most effective approach. Mass stigmatization or repression of a minority or a religion is only likely to fuel grievances and create a narrative that can further radicalize individuals, locally and globally. Let me conclude by saying that the threat picture is changing in Africa, and terrorists everywhere continue to adapt their techniques and operations. We see a fast-evolving situation on the continent, with violent extremism spreading outside of terrorist- affected countries and incipient groups forming in new locations. That will have major long-term implications, not just for the continent but also for security and prosperity more widely. The United Kingdom stands by our African partners and friends in this fight. It is one that we must win.
