Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to express my congratulations to
the People's Republic of China on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
also pay tribute to the Permanent Mission of Chile for
its skilful presidency of the Council last month. And
I thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his important and
comprehensive briefing.

The Government and the people of Iraq express
their appreciation to the Russian Federation, China,
the United Kingdom, the United States and all the
other members of the Council for adopting resolution
2199 (2015) under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, with the aim of drying up the financial
resources of terrorist gangs.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/82)
positively and objectively places the spotlight on
developments in Iraq and on the achievements of the
Government of Prime Minister Haider Al Abadi since
the vote of confidence last August, which illustrates the
commitment of the Government of Iraq to make progress
on the programmes agreed for the first six months,
in spite of the security, humanitarian and economic
challenges facing Iraq, so as to ensure equality and the
rule of law, fight corruption and improve relations with
all States of the region and the world - with combating
the terrorist group Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) at the top of its priorities.

In the context of promoting internal political
stability, the Council of Representatives approved the
2015 federal budget bill. This is a fundamental step in
revitalizing Iraq's economy. It is also a manifestation
of political agreements that reflect the Iraqi polity's
acknowledgment of the responsibility it bears at the
current critical stage in Iraq.
The Government of Iraq continues to promote
national reconciliation on a number of fronts. The
Government has held intensive contacts with political
leaders, clans and religious authorities of all sects
with a view to reconciliation, renewing national bonds
and sending out a message of unity to the effect that
the national interest is paramount. Everyone believes
that cooperation among the Iraqi armed forces, the
Peshmerga, the Popular Movement and the clans in the
combat against ISIL is important and essential.

The Government has completed the drafting of a
law creating the national guard and has submitted it to
Parliament. It represents an opportunity for the members
of the clans and the national movements to defend their
cities in all governorates. Furthermore, during the same
period, an important political agreement was reached
between the central Government and the Government
of the Kurdistan region pertaining to the distribution
of natural resources in Iraq to all the Iraqi people in a
just manner, which is a fundamental step in the right
direction. It is a commitment made with Kurdistan as a
fundamental partner in the homeland, which will pave
the way to a long-term agreement.

In the context of promoting the rule of law and
combatting corruption, the Government has taken
administrative, legislative and judicial reform measures
aimed at uniting ranks and spreading a spirit of equality
and justice to all citizens. The Government is now
reviewing all Governmental sectors in order to pinpoint
corruption and undertake necessary reforms, including
the prosecution of some military leaders, in order to
create an atmosphere that would bring in foreign
investment to develop commercial opportunities in
the country and help in reconstruction. Furthermore,
the law on accountability and justice was reviewed
and referred to Parliament in order to reintegrate
many Government officials who had not committed
any crimes against the Iraqi people. This is, again, an
attempt at creating a united front.

A law has been signed that commits the security
forces and the justice ministry to protecting the human
rights of detainees in Iraqi prisons, including a central
register of all detainees, together with the reason
for their detention and a time frame for prosecution.
Paragraph 51 of the report of the Secretary-General
refers to reports of some incidents related to breaches
by some armed units, and the Prime Minister has
adopted an executive order to set up an investigative
committee on these events.

We stress once again the importance of the
commitment of all Member States to the implementation
of resolutions 2170 (2014), 2178 (2014) and 2199 (2014)
on combatting terrorism and drying up its sources
of financing. There is no alternative to international
cooperation to combat terrorism, and many occasions
have proven that no State is safe from the threat of
terrorism. We look forward to seeing the role being
played more effectively, particularly by neighbouring
countries, in terms of cooperation, intelligence sharing
and border control, because these terrorist groups have
desecrated all human values. They have committed the
most heinous criminal terrorist acts against the Iraqi
people, whether Shiite, Sunni, Christian, Turkmen,
Shabak or Yazidi.

Those acts are in fact crimes ofgenocide committed
against humankind whose perpetrators must be held
accountable before international justice, without even
mentioning the trafficking in human organs and the theft
of and trafficking in archeological items and oil. The
Iraqi armed forces and the Kurdish Peshmerga forces,
in cooperation with the popular forces, in coordination
with the clans and with an international support, will
undertake combatting terrorism. However, we require
still more assistance if we are to overcome ISIL.

The protection of civilians is a fundamental
responsibility of the Iraqi Government. Terrorism
has displaced 2 million people from their homes, in
addition to the Syrian refugees being hosted by Iraq,
who number about 250,000. Therefore, the Government,
in cooperation with the United Nations and other
organizations working in the field, is providing for
humanitarian needs to lessen the suffering of those
internally displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees and
facilitate their return to their homes after their liberation
from the terrorism of ISIL. The Government has set
aside $1 billion for 2014 and $1 billion in the federal
budget for 2015 to help IDPs. Iraq continues to require
the support of the international community to take on
the humanitarian crisis raised by the ISIL terrorist
entity and to help Iraq confront humanitarian needs,
particularly in the winter with very low temperatures
and very harsh living conditions.

This year 2015 will be critical to the Iraqi
Government's effort to liberate all the areas under
ISIL's control, with the assistance of the international
coalition which is fighting side by side with us against
ISIL. Iraq continues to require assistance to reconstruct
liberated areas that have been gravely degraded by
terrorists and to assist IDPs in returning and creating
livelihoods. Therefore, Iraq has frequently raised the
possibility of creating a fund to reconstruct areas in
northern and western Iraq.
With respect to relations with countries of the
region, Iraq is continuing to promote relations with
all its neighbours in order to coordinate efforts to
combat terrorism more effectively. The Prime Minister
lately visited the State of Kuwait, Iran, the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia,
Turkey and the United Arab Emirates, and the President
has visited both Saudi Arabia and Qatar. These visits
led to agreements to strengthen security cooperation
and intelligence sharing in order to defeat the ISIL
terrorist entity and review plans to promote cooperation
in the areas of economy, oil, investments, trade and
the defence of our common borders. Furthermore, the
Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister were present at
the conferences on counter-terrorism held in Brussels,
London and Berlin.

Iraq looks forward to developing relations with the
State ofKuwait. We value Kuwait's positions in support
of Iraq. We thank the State of Kuwait for understanding
the very difficult economic conditions prevailing in
Iraq because of the war against the terrorist entity ISIL.
We value its cooperation to restitute 5 per cent of Iraqi
oil export revenues for 2015. Iraq is keen to continue
making strong efforts to find and identify the remains

of disappeared Kuwaiti persons and the national
Kuwaiti archives.

My Government is making every effort to go forward
on the democratic path to protect the achievements of
democracy under the Constitution, whether through
reforming the Government, national reconciliation,
combatting ISIL and freeing areas under its control and
strengthening relations with neighbouring countries.
We value the role of the international coalition led by
the United States and permanent Member States of
the Security Council, as well as Arab States. We also
value the efforts of the United Nations and UNAMI to
provide advice and support to the Iraqi Government.
We pay tribute to them for their courage in continuing
to provide humanitarian assistance even under the
difficult conditions prevailing in my country. We
cannot fail to renew our thanks and appreciation to
Mr. Mladenov for his commitment and his strong
efforts to assist Iraq during his mandate as the head of
UNAMI. Allow me to express our best wishes for him
in his future fuctions.

