The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Rwanda.

I thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, for his informative
and insightful briefing on the current situation in
the Middle East. I also thank Mr. Riyad Mansour,
Permanent Observer of the Observer State of Palestine
to the United Nations, and Mr. Ron Prosor, Permanent
Representative of Israel to the United Nations, for
joining us today.

In the Security Council, we hold an open debate
every quarter to examine the progress made and the
bottlenecks in moving forward, and to keep track of the
Middle East peace process. We last gathered here on
23 January (see S/PV.6906) to examine the stalemate
in the Middle East peace process, and specifically in
the implementation of the two-State solution. Today, we
have come here to review what we have achieved or not,
and the way forward.

A sustainable solution for the Middle East peace
process must be our collective strategic objective.
All Member States should play their role in complete
commitment to those objectives and throw their full
moral, diplomatic, political and economic support
behind its early realization. Our role in the Council
is to make sure that deliberations and decisions are
translated into action.

On 20 March, President Obama visited Israel and
Palestine. That was a positive step in the revival of
the Middle East peace process. It is on that note that
we express our appreciation to the Government of the
United States for that initiative, and we hope that the
effort will bear concrete results. We further commend
President Obama's efforts for the reconciliation of
Turkey and Israel. Israeli/Turkish reconciliation could
improve regional coordination in the Middle East peace
process and prevent the crisis of the Syrian civil war
from spreading.

Rwanda, like the African Union, is of the view that
a two-State solution is the only viable resolution for
both nations. That involves the creation of a Palestinian
State that is independent and sovereign, living side
by side in peace and security with the State of Israel.
We therefore encourage both sides to support and
implement confidence-building measures that will
allow the peace process to move forward. Any action
that may undermine the two-State solution should be
avoided. We reiterate our view that Israel should be
fully recognized by its regional partners and should
live in security within its borders. At the same time,
the Palestinians' aspiration to have their own State that
is political independent and economically viable must
be fulfilled.

We urge all parties to consolidate the ceasefire
in Gaza that was brokered by the Egyptian President,
Mohamed Morsy. Rwanda expresses its concern over
the deteriorating security in the West Bank. We call on
all sides to avoid public statements that could further
fuel the tensions.

We continue to support the Quartet in its mediation
efforts, but deplore the current diplomatic impasse. We
therefore call on the Quartet and those countries that
have influence on both parties to redouble their efforts
to bring to the table new initiatives for peace in the
Middle East.

Turning to Syria, let me clearly state that the
situation is unbearable. The humanitarian situation is
worsening day by day with the deaths of thousands
of people, with refugee numbers reaching over
1 million and with over 3 million internally displaced
persons. This is a stain on the world's conscience. The
international community has the duty to address the
situation. Mr. Brahimi reminded the Council that it is
the last court of appeal when international peace is at
risk, and it is time to translate our deliberations and
decisions into actions.

Based on the recent report of the independent
international commission of inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic, violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law and mass destruction
have been committed. There are reported accounts
of murder, arbitrary detentions, sexual violence and
torture committed by the parties involved, and now we
have heard allegations of the possible use of chemical
weapons.

As a member of the Security Council, Rwanda will
work with our colleagues to encourage a strong and
unified response to bring about a process of political
transition in Syria. Military intervention in Syria will
only continue to exacerbate the killing and violence and
the emergence of Al-Qaida. In that context, we continue
to support the work of the Joint Special Representative
of the United Nations and the League of Arab States,
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, in his efforts to bring a political
solution to the conflict. And we believe that the Arab
League should indeed assume a role in that solution.

In seeking to prevent the escalation of the Syrian
conflict into neighbouring countries, we hope that
Lebanon will soon be able to control its borders in
order to avert clashes between the Syrian rebels and
the Hizbullah militants, which put civilians' lives at
risk in border areas. We also call upon the Lebanese
Government to take action against Hizbullah's
aggressions and to do everything within its means to
ensure the safety of civilians on the Lebanese-Syrian
border.

In conclusion, the stalemate in the Middle East is
not impossible to resolve, but we need realistic solutions
based on international principles and norms. That will
require all influential stakeholders to display strong
political will by considering and reinforcing the needs
of the peoples and nations of the region. It goes without
saying that the Security Council must play its intended
role by fulfilling its mandate to seek and enforce a
sustainable solution to the conflicts in the Middle East
as far as returning credibility. We therefore call on
everyone to take responsibility.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

There are still a number of speakers remaining
inscribed on my list for this meeting. I intend, with the
concurrence of the members of the Council, to suspend
the meeting until 3 pm.

The meeting was suspended at 1.25 pm.
