The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Albania, Luxembourg and Serbia
and Montenegro, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Nebojsa Covie,
President of the Coordination Centre of Serbia and
Montenegro and of the Republic of Serbia for Kosovo
and Metohija.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Covie
(Serbia and Montenegro) took a seat at the
Council table; the representatives of the other
aforementioned countries took the seats reserved
for them at the side ofthe Council Chamber

The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Saren Jessen-
Petersen, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Jessen-Petersen to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, document
8/2005/88.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Saren lessen-Petersen, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo. I now give him the floor.


