Mr. Barros Melet (spoke in Spanish): I have the
honour to brief the members of the Security Council
in my capacity as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015), concerning South Sudan, and to highlight the
main findings of the interim report of the Panel of
Experts (see S/2015/656), based on the Coordinator's
presentation of the report and the Committee's
deliberations on 20 August, as well as the work of the
Committee and Panel since my previous briefing in the
Chamber, on 14 May (see S/PV.7444).

On 31 July, the Panel of Experts conveyed its
interim report to members of the Committee. In its
report, the Panel observed that, since the adoption of
resolution 2206 (2015), the situation in South Sudan
had deteriorated precipitously, posing a significant
threat not only to the country's citizens but also to the
peace and security of the entire region. In the light of
such severe deterioration, the Panel recommended that,
in order to achieve the objectives set forth in resolution
2206 (2015) and alter the expectations of the warring
parties, designations undertaken by the Committee
must include those decision-makers with the ability to
either perpetuate or end the war, as well as those who
benefit economically and politically from conflict and
others who are responsible for serious crimes under
international humanitarian law and human rights law.

The Panel also observed that the supply of arms
and ammunition to all parties in the conflict had
contributed to prolonging and escalating the war. In
that connection, it recommended that the Security
Council impose a complete and general arms embargo
on South Sudan. The Panel reported on the procurement
of heavy weaponry by the Government - particularly
the acquisition of greater air, riverine and land mobility
capacity - which would allow Government forces to
overcome the logistical challenges of the rainy season
and continue fighting in the coming months, thereby
substantially impacting the dynamics on the ground.
The Panel noted that the humanitarian situation
in South Sudan was one of only four level-3 system-
wide emergencies in the world, and the only one in
Africa. The Panel also reported that the obstruction
of humanitarian assistance and of peacekeeping
operations had escalated since the adoption of resolution
2206 (2015); that humanitarian workers and United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) personnel,
alike, were regularly attacked, assaulted, harassed,
detained, intimidated and threatened; and that, in May,
humanitarian actors had reported the same number of
access-related incidents as the preceding two months
combined.

The Panel reported that all parties to the conflict
had been targeting civilians as part of their military
tactics, thereby contravening applicable international
humanitarian law, as referenced to in resolution 2206
(2015). The Panel asserted that, since the offensive
in the greater Upper Nile region began in April, the
intensity and brutality of the violence aimed at civilians
were hitherto unseen, even in what had already been,
without a doubt, an exceedingly violent conflict. The
Panel further reported that scores of civilians had
been killed, maimed, tortured, burned alive inside
their homes, displaced, raped and abducted, and that
children had been recruited and used as part of the war
effort. The Panel indicated that it was investigating the
chain of command pertaining to those serious crimes.

In that regard, the Panel recommended that,
following its presidential statement of 24 March
(S/PRST/2015/9), the Security Council urge the African
Union to publicly release the report of its commission
of inquiry on South Sudan without further delay and
independent of the outcome of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development process, as that would
provide insight regarding those responsible for the
violations.

During the Committee meeting on 20 August, the
Coordinator of the Panel noted that, by every measure,
the situation in South Sudan had deteriorated further
since the Panel submitted its interim report to the
Committee. He reported that no area of South Sudan
remained unaffected by conflict and that the war
continued to metastasize and manifest beyond the areas
of most intense fighting between Government and
Opposition forces in the states of the Greater Upper Nile
region. The Coordinator also stated that developments
in recent days, including President's Kiir's dismissal of
the Governors of Central and Eastern Equatoria states
and the arrest and detention of the latter, had exacerbated
an already volatile situation, further fuelling a brewing
insurgency in those areas.

On the humanitarian situation, the Coordinator
stated that over 70 per cent of the country's 12 million
people now required humanitarian assistance according
to the latest United Nations figures. Food insecurity
remains at emergency levels - the second most-severe
level just short of famine - in widespread areas of the
Greater Upper Nile region. The Coordinator reported
that just under 200,000 internally displaced persons
were now sheltering in United Nations protection-of-
civilian sites, up nearly 40,000 since mid-July - that is
a one third increase injust over a month.

The Coordinator also noted that the deterioration
in the economic situation was commensurate with that
of the security and humanitarian situation, and that the
Panel had begun investigating the financing channels
used by individuals in both the Government and the
Opposition, with a View to prosecuting war crimes and
the individuals and entities that were profiting from the
continuation of the conflict.

The Coordinator observed that the Panel had taken
note of the fact that the outcome of 17 August was only
the most recent of at least a dozen times since early

2014 that one or both parties had failed to adhere to an
internationally endorsed deadline for progress towards
ending the war. He expressed the View of the Panel of
Experts that, should all the parties sign an agreement, the
prevailing issue would be not only the implementation
of that agreement and an end to the violence, but
also the promotion of national reconciliation and a
durable and inclusive political settlement for South
Sudan, which would include ensuring accountability
for serious crimes committed throughout the war. In
the opinion of the Coordinator, the role envisioned for
sanctions in resolution 2206 (2015) in order to achieve
an inclusive and sustainable peace in South Sudan will
be just as critical, if not more so, during that period
than it is today.

The Coordinator also underscored the Panel of
Experts' recommendation that, in so far as resolution
2206 (2015) reiterates that there is no military
solution to the conflict and the reported acquisitions
and attempts to change the balance of power on the
ground decrease the incentives for a solution to the
violence * incentives that are necessary not only for
an agreement but for adherence and implementation
thereof, including adherence to a ceasefire - makes it
necessary for the Council to impose an arms embargo
on South Sudan.

In their deliberations concerning the Panel of
Experts' interim report on South Sudan, most delegations
welcomed the report and its recommendations. Some
delegations did not support the recommendation
concerning the report ofthe African Union' commission
of inquiry on South Sudan. One delegation stressed
the need to further study the recommendation on the
imposition of an arms embargo, and did not support the
recommendation on options for criminal accountability
and transitional justice in South Sudan.

The Committee took note of the only
recommendation of the Secretariat, namely, that it
consider the possibility of additional designations of
individuals and - given the severe deterioration on
the ground and the threat that the war in South Sudan
poses to international peace and security and to achieve
the objectives established by the Council in resolution
2206 (2215), namely, inclusive and sustainable peace
in South Sudan - that such designations include those
decision-makers who have the capability either to
perpetuate or end the war, but who reap the economic
and political benefits of the conflict, and/or others, who
are responsible for serious crimes under international
humanitarian law and human rights law.

Since my previous briefing in the Chamber on
14 May, the Committee held an exchange of views on
22 May with the Panel of Experts regarding its work
plan and methodology. On 19 June, the Committee
held its second formal meeting with the representatives
of South Sudan, the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia, Kenya, the
Sudan and Uganda on the implementation of resolution
2206 (2015). In their remarks, the participating States
of the region highlighted a number of challenges in
implementing the sanctions measures, such as porous
borders, and expressed concern with regard to the
deteriorating humanitarian and security situation in
South Sudan.

On 26 June, the Panel of Experts submitted its first
monthly report pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015).
Committee members look forward to receiving the
next monthly report, at the end of this month, and to
maintaining close, continuous engagement with the
Panel over the course of its mandate. On 1 July, the
Committee approved the inclusion of six individuals on
the list making them subject to the travel ban and assets
freeze set out respectively in paragraphs 9 and 12 of
resolution 2206 (2015).

As I mentioned under the item "Other matters"
during the Committee's consultations on 20 August,
I plan to visit South Sudan during the month of
November, and will inform members of the Committee
of the details of my planned visit in due course.
In conclusion, I would like to assure members of
the Council that, as Chair of the Committee, I will
do my utmost to ensure that the Committee makes a
significant contribution to the efforts of the Council,
UNMlSS and other international partners to bring an
end to the ongoing Violence that threatens South Sudan
and to set the country on a path of reconciliation,
durable peace and sustainable development.

