Mr. Argiiello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Conflict prevention is a core responsibility of the
United Nations. The Security Council has a central role
in conflict prevention and in acting to resolve conflicts
that could not be avoided. Asking ourselves in this
forum if we are doing enough to address such a serious
and complex matter is a most important undertaking,
for it provides us with the opportunity to improve the
effectiveness of our action. In this regard, I thank and
congratulate the Congolese presidency for proposing
this debate, which will certainly add value to our
thinking and action.

Argentina has followed the subject with particular
interest, especially over the last two years, as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council. In line
with that responsibility, it has constructively and

actively participated in debates and discussions relating
to the prevention of armed conflict. The commitment
of Argentina to the establishment and maintenance of
peace, especially in Africa, is given concrete
expression in its current participation in four
peacebuilding missions. Our contribution to the present
debate is thus rooted in a deep sense that we are further
fulfilling that commitment.

Resolution 1625 (2005) aims at strengthening the
effectiveness of the role of the Security Council in the
prevention of armed conflicts, particularly in Africa, by
means of a wide range of actions. Coordinating these
actions with the work of the Secretariat and the
Economic and Social Council is the key to its
operationalization.

The Secretary-General, in his progress report on
the prevention of armed conflict (A/60/891), proposes
a culture of prevention based on three vectors or
dimensions and renders a clear and forceful evaluation
of the capabilities of the United Nations and its family
of organizations in the realm of conflict prevention. In
addition, the culture of prevention is also consolidated
as a shared value among Member States starting with
the 2005 World Summit.

In order to achieve prevention on any of these
three fronts, there is a need for a shared vision and
close coordination between the central players that
through their respective competencies work together in
each case. The Secretary-General therefore proposes a
methodology based on six categories of action that
require the coordinated work of the Security Council,
the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council, the different organizations of the United
Nations family and the regional organizations.

Similarly, the United Nations needs support in
order to elaborate a strategic vision of what the
Organization as a whole can achieve in preventing
conflict, and it is here that the African Union, which
acts on behalf of the United Nations and offers the
valuable resource of its proximity to and understanding
of the conflicts, plays a central role in prevention. The
Economic and Social Council, likewise, through its
analysis, contributes to an understanding of the context
and the assessment of the crisis risk. Both actors
constitute early warning and action resources for the
prevention of conflicts.

It is appropriate to ask ourselves whether or not
articulation of thought and action among so many
valuable actors and the Security Council is effective
enough to guarantee the maximum possible degree of
prevention.

The centre of gravity in this debate must be the
institutionalization of the best relationship possible
between the Security Council and all entities
participating in prevention of armed conflict. This
institutionalization, we believe, must be oriented
towards defining roles, formalizing functions and
designing working methods - in short, aligning
resources for the most effective prevention.

We must set up processes for learning from the
valuable experiences that have come from the
establishment by the Security Council of the Integrated
Offices of the United Nations in Sierra Leone and
Burundi. We also look forward to the development of
the work of the Secretariat's Mediation Support Unit
and the role of the Peacebuilding Commission. The
lessons learned must be transformed into agreements,
methods and programmes that lead to a formalization
of this model of action in order to disseminate it to
other countries and regions.

The Security Council, meanwhile, should renew
its vision of prevention and functionally transform
itself into the central node of an early warning and
action network for the prevention of armed conflict.
Relationships and functions must be specified, tried
and improved.
07-49195

We must blend a vision with activities and avoid
duplication of effort or loss of effectiveness due to a
lack of method or poor agreement in details. In this
sense, the African Union, as a central and close actor,
not only needs to be sure that it will have the financial
resources it needs for its preventive action, but also
that it will get the institutional resources, information
and uniform procedures for early warning and the
prevention of armed conflicts. Such resources must be
designed by this Council as the centre of the prevention
network.

This debate will allow us to identify the
weaknesses and strengths of the Security Council on
the issue of prevention of armed conflict. Each
improvement achieved at this level will have a
multiplying effect in the network. It is the start of a
path we need to follow in order to align all available
resources towards the objective of preventing armed
conflict. It is a shared task and a tough challenge, but it
is also a valuable opportunity to be more effective in
the fulfilment of one of the essential responsibilities of
the United Nations.

