Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I would like to express
Ukraine's sincere appreciation to the Spanish President
personally for convening such an important meeting,
as well as for initiating resolution 2322 (2016), which
Ukraine sponsored.

I would also like to join other delegations in
expressing our solidarity and condolences to Egypt,
Turkey and other countries that recently suffered
violent terrorist attacks.

Of course, I also thank the briefers for their
important contributions to today's meeting.

There is no doubt that today, when the growing
terrorist threat transcends national borders,
international legal cooperation in matters pertaining
to counter-terrorism is of paramount importance. No
single State, no matter how technologically advanced
or militarily powerful, can effectively combat this
problem on its own. Numerous international treaties
and United Nations decisions in the counter-terrorism
field have already established mechanisms to facilitate
mutual legal assistance, apprehend fugitives and, when
appropriate, extradite wrongdoers. Yet they often lack
cohesion and efficiency because of complicated and
time-consuming procedures for processing foreign
requests in investigations and prosecutions against
those suspected of involvement in terrorist activities.
In that connection, I would like to highlight several
points on improving practical cooperation and reducing
delays in rendering mutual legal assistance and
information-sharing.

To ensure a faster response, especially in
circumstances demanding the prioritization of handling
terrorist-related cases, there is a persistent need to
create effective central authorities for mutual legal
assistance and extradition, with adequate resources
and experienced staff. Such authorities can also serve
as the main points of contact within the framework of
international and regional cooperation platforms.

To rapidly seek and provide assistance, States may
consider using simplified electronic request forms for
mutual legal assistance. To facilitate those endeavours,
international institutions, primarily the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and INTERPOL, could
conduct training for competent national authorities.
Furthermore, developing and introducing a universal
electronic system for submitting, managing and
responding to mutual legal assistance requests
in terrorism-related cases can be another major
undertaking. Competent authorities can also benefit
from using different ways of direct communication,
such as email or Video teleconferencing, in order
to overcome challenges that may arise in satisfying
such requests.

To avoid conflicts overjurisdiction in cases that are
subject to prosecution in more than one country, States
can devise and apply universal jurisdiction mechanisms
for the prosecution of terrorists in the interest of
justice - for instance, tribunals, special courts or
even inter-State hybrid courts. In such instances, the
transfer of criminal proceedings can be one possible
solution. Implementing such possible steps may require
a revision of the relevant bilateral and multilateral
treaties on international cooperation in criminal matters
related to terrorism, or the conclusion of supplemental
agreements to incorporate those additional provisions.

While processing mutual legal assistance requests
may take some time, there is a growing need to provide
the basis for timely sharing of imperative intelligence
information when investigating terrorist activities and
securing criminal evidence, apprehending suspects and
preventing terrorists acts from being carried out. That
is where the Latin saying periculum in mora takes on a
special significance.

Therefore,establishingamechanismforcross-border
collaboration between judicial and law enforcement
agencies, including by appointing liaison officers and
conducting joint investigations in terrorism cases,
facilitating the wider use of investigative international
databases and providing access to them for competent
national authorities, and facilitating inter-agency
collaboration are all of paramount importance. In
that vein, we also support the establishment of direct
global communication platforms for competent
authorities, such as the recently introduced point-of-
contact network set out in the Additional Protocol to
the Council of Europe Convention on the Prevention of
Terrorism, or the INTERPOL I-24/7 police information
exchange system.

In the world's history, humankind has suffered
from various disasters, wars, epidemics and other
challenges. Still, we have always managed to overcome
them. By being united, therefore, we will eliminate the
terrorism threat once and for all. Frankly speaking,
mutual legal assistance reform in counter-terrorism-
related cases will not be easy, but there is an urgent
need to make inter-State cooperation more agile and
efficient. That is why we considered your initiative,
Mr. President, and this discussion particularly topical
and timely. We are confident that today's resolution
will help us to achieve that goal.

