Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me, in turn, to thank Mr. Eliasson and Mr. Guehenno
for their briefings. They have both emphasized the
tireless efforts of the Secretariat and the African Union,
which my delegation would like to welcome, but they
have also shown that there is still a long way to go to
achieve peace in Darfur and particularly to re-establish
security conditions that will make it possible for the
people to return to their villages and to their lands.
That is our ultimate objective.

Our first concern is the security of the population.
Now more than ever, we are concerned by the
continued Violence against civilians and attacks against
the humanitarian workers who are endeavouring to
assist them. While the humanitarian situation has
continued to deteriorate, deliberate restrictions on
humanitarian access on the ground have remained in
place since last year. To date, those restrictions have
seriously affected hundreds of thousands of individuals
deprived of all assistance. France condemns in the
strongest possible terms the attacks against
humanitarian personnel, which increased by 150 per
cent in 2007, and appeals to all parties to genuinely
cease hostilities and ensure humanitarian access to
those who need assistance.
In that connection, we note with satisfaction the
extension by the Government of the Sudan of the
moratorium on humanitarian access restrictions, and
we urge the authorities in Khartoum to ensure its full
implementation to facilitate the effective delivery of
humanitarian assistance.
The situation's overall insecurity should
encourage us to redouble our efforts to ensure the rapid
deployment of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). We are aware
that the Secretary-General and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations are doing all they can, in
conjunction with the African Union, rapidly to
assemble a credible - that is, robust - force that truly
is in a position to protect the population and thus to
renew the population's confidence in it, which is so
essential, as Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno stated earlier.

We call on the Sudanese authorities to support the
United Nations and the African Union, as they have
committed to doing on several occasions, and to keep
their word, rather than increasing the number of
conditions - sometimes contrary to United Nations
principles and rules - that delay the Operation's
deployment and compromise its effectiveness. The
proposals made by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations seem to be realistic, and we feel that the
Council should support them clearly.

That same concern for the security of the
population leads us to call for the rapid deployment of
the European Union force and of the United Nations
Mission in eastern Chad and north-eastern Central
African Republic. UNAMID, on the one hand, and the
European Union force and the United Nations Mission
in the Central African Republic and Chad
(MINURCAT), on the other, are designed to meet the
same humanitarian crisis, which has not stopped at the
border of the Sudan. Sudanese refugees in Chad and
the displaced persons and other vulnerable populations
on both sides of the border and in the Central African
Republic all deserve to be protected and to receive
assistance.

The recent crisis in Chad, caused by an attempt
by rebel groups to take power by force and condemned
by the African Union and the Security Council, has
delayed the deployment. That was, indeed, probably
one of the objectives of the rebels and of their
protectors. It remains an urgent situation, and we
therefore welcome the intention of the European Union
to resume its operations in the coming days, as soon as
the security conditions allow. We also welcome the
appeal recently launched by President Idriss Deby Itno
for the continuation of the humanitarian operation in
eastern Chad.

Clearly, Darfur will not achieve lasting stability
without the conclusion of the political process being
conducted by Mr. Eliasson and Mr. Salim Ahmed
Salim. We call on all parties to face up to their
responsibilities. Each side states that it is acting in
Darfur's interest; they must now prove it. Those who
continue to engage in violence must lay down their
weapons immediately, in keeping with their successive
public commitments. Those who have stayed away
from the negotiating table should join it while there is
still time. France, for its part, is working to that end, as
requested by Mr. Eliasson and Mr. Salim.

My delegation would like to reiterate its support
for the approach taken by the two mediators to bring
civil society into the discussion. We strongly support
the idea that the political process involves not only the
warring parties, but also representatives of the victims
of the violence and who are the very reason for our
commitment to resolving the crisis. In particular, the
voices of those hundreds of thousands who have been
displaced must be heard.

Lastly, my delegation ardently hopes that the
crimes committed in Darfur will not go unpunished.
The International Criminal Court should pursue its
activities with regard to the most serious crimes, some
of the perpetrators of which are unfortunately still
being protected by the Sudanese authorities.

Before concluding, and on a happier note, allow
me to join others in wishing our colleague and friend,
the Ambassador of Croatia, every success in her future
work at the United Nations in defending our principles
and the values of human rights and human dignity.

