Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The conflict that
has ravaged Syria has lasted for more than six years. For
the people of Syria, that must feel like an eternity. Here
in this Chamber, we get only so many moments to act,
only so many moments to show them that hope is not
dead, chances for the world to unite in condemnation
of war crimes. Today was one of those moments. What
happened in Khan Shaykhun last week was the worst
of human acts. United Kingdom scientists have now
analysed samples obtained from Khan Shaykhun, and
they have tested positive for the nerve agent sarin or a
sarin-like substance. We therefore share the assessment
of the United States that it is highly likely that the regime
was responsible for a sarin attack on Khan Shaykhun.

We recognize the need for a thorough, swift,
independent investigation. This afternoon, Russia's
Foreign Minister also called for such an investigation,
yet Russia has vetoed a draft resolution that would
support that investigation. Russia's messages are
mixed, and its aims confused. The Fact-finding
Mission in Syria of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the Syrian people
need our political support, something that we as the
Security Council should have been able to give. The
United Kingdom will continue to give that support
and, regardless of today's vote, the work of the OPCW
will continue.

We have once again encountered a Russian
veto - the eighth time that Russia has used its veto to
protect the Syrian regime. Today's veto is even more
regrettable given that Russia was the architect of the
2013 agreement to dismantle Syria's chemical-weapon
programme, an initiative that has demonstrably failed.
Russia cannot now possibly claim that it opposes the
use of chemical weapons. Russia has seen the same
pictures that we all saw just days ago in this Chamber.
How could anyone look at the faces of lifeless children
and choose to veto a draft resolution condemning
those deaths?

It is indefensible that Russia has chosen to protect
the perpetrators of those attacks rather than work with
the rest of the international community to condemn
them. When those images and videos were broadcast
across screens around the world, my team received a
message from another child - Bana Alabed, a 7-year-
old Syrian girl from Aleppo who, with the help of her
mother, has given the world a window into the conflict
through Twitter. The message she sent was simple. It
was that we can make a difference. We must demand
justice for the children. She is one voice, but one that
echoes the Views of millions of Syrians. Demandjustice
for the children.

The heartbreaking truth is that a little girl's plea will
not be heard in this Chamber. Not today. But regardless
of the veto today, we should trust those words. We
will hold the regime to account. We will continue to
work with our international partners to put an end to
any use of chemical weapons and to seek justice for
all the Victims of these heinous chemical attacks. We
will gather at the OPCW in The Hague tomorrow to
discuss how best to support a credible international
investigation that establishes who was responsible and
paves the way to hold the culprits to account.

The catastrophe in Syria is not the way things have
to be. Yesterday, Foreign Ministers from the Group of
Seven (G-7) and key regional countries came together
in Italy to discuss how to move forward from last
week's tragedy. They gave strong support to Secretary
Tillerson's visit to Moscow today to discuss how Russia
could work with the international community to end
the tragedy of the war in Syria. Russia has the sort of
influence over the regime that could bring its use of
chemical weapons and barrel bombs to an end, and
could lead to a real ceasefire that would then lead to the
resumption ofserious political negotiations on apolitical
transition. Those Foreign Ministers indicated that if
Russia took those steps, the international community
would be ready to work with it to bring peace to Syria,
defeat Da'esh and terrorism and reconstruct Syria. That
is the choice that Moscow has in front of it. The world
now waits to see if Russia will respond to the G-7 and
assume its responsibilities as a permanent member of
the Security Council to help put a stop to the Al-Assad
regime's use of chemical weapons and to work with
the international community to bring this tragedy to
an end.

