Mr. Lambertini (Italy): My country aligns itself
with the statement to be made by the observer of the
European Union, and supports the statement to be
made by the representative of the Netherlands as part
of our cooperation related to the upcoming split term
in the Security Council. We are currently defining our
cooperation around shared goals and values in the firm
belief that this agreement sends a positive political
message of cooperation to tackle common challenges,
of which the situation in Afghanistan is one.

I would like to begin by thanking the Secretary-
General for his thorough report on the situation in
Afghanistan (S/2016/768) and by expressing our
appreciation for the action of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan in this complex
scenario. We offer a warm welcome to the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.

The challenges Afghanistan is facing remain
daunting. On the security front, the persistent increase
in the number of civilian victims of the conflict is
cause for great concern, and the data on children who
have died or been injured is particularly alarming. The
already serious humanitarian situation has further
deteriorated due to the increase in the number of
internally displaced persons. We condemn most firmly
the terrorist attacks that continue to plague the country,
such as those in Kabul in recent weeks. In the face of
such unjustifiable and indiscriminate acts of violence,
Italy reiterates its full support for and recognition
of the efforts of the Afghan Government to combat
terrorism and the actions of violent armed groups and
to ensure peace and stability for the country. Against
that background, on the occasion of the NATO Summit
held in Warsaw in July, together with its partners in the
Alliance, Italy decided to continue its active engagement
in the Resolute Support Mission as a framework nation,
assisting the Afghan National Defence and Security
Forces to enhance their capabilities.

The past months have not seen encouraging
developments towards a possible peace process, which
nonetheless remains the main objective to bring an
end to the violence in the country. Efforts to establish
the conditions that could lead to an Afghan-led peace
process must therefore be renewed. To that end, close
and constructive cooperation among the countries of
the region is essential. We hope that such cooperation
will be based on the understanding that fighting
terrorism and those who aim to violently to destabilize
Afghanistan is in the common interests, as a peaceful
and stable Afghanistan is essential for the stability of
the entire region.

Another basic challenge for Afghanistan is that
of strengthening its institutions and consolidating
economic and social development. The upcoming
Brussels Conference will be a key moment in the
country's journey to self-sufficiency; to lower its
dependency on international aid; to expand the
progress achieved in the past 15 years in consolidating
democracy, social development, access to health care
and the promotion of the rights of women and girls; and
to address the underlying causes of Afghan migration
flows, in particular towards Europe, while helping to
improve security conditions. We are aware that, in
order to achieve those ambitious goals, the financial
support of the international community is decisive.
Likewise, the achievement of the goals requires the
utmost determination on the part of Afghanistan in
pursuing the domestic reforms already initiated in that
direction.

We appreciate the commitment of the Afghan
authorities in that regard, as well as the programmes
of action that relate to the Afghan National Peace
and Development Framework and the updated goals
of the Self Reliance through Mutual Accountability
Framework, which will be presented in Brussels. In
the spirit of the principles of mutual commitment and
mutual accountability, which support the partnership
between Afghanistan and the international community,
it is important that those reform plans be implemented
concretely and effectively. That is what the donor
countries are asking in order to confirm their assistance,
but it is above all also what the Afghan people are
asking for.

In the wake of the positive results achieved so far,
it is essential that further concrete and measurable
progress be reached in crucial sectors, such as the fight
against corruption, human rights, the promotion of the
rights of women and their full empowerment throughout
society. To that end, close internal cohesion within
the Government and effective teamwork are absolute
prerequisites. We therefore hope that the differences
that have recently emerged within the Government will
be overcome, whilre renewing the spirit of national
unity at its foundation in the greater interests of the
country and its people.

