The President: I will now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Lithuania.

I am pleased to welcome High Representative
Valentin Inzko back to the Council, and to thank him
for his report (S/2015/300, annex), his briefing and all
the work he does on the ground.

Lithuania aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union (EU).

This year is the twentieth since the end of a
three-and-a-half-year war and an immense human
tragedy. It also marks the 20th anniversary of the
Srebrenica massacre, which has been described as
true scenes from hell, written on the darkest pages of
human history. The progress achieved since the signing
of the Dayton Peace Agreement has been remarkable.
The past two decades are proof of the international
community's commitment to building a safer and more
stable region. The sustained engagement of the EU
has provided an essential framework and incentive for
change. There are challenges ahead, but a great deal of
progress has been achieved in the region, and Bosnia
and Herzegovina is no exception. Significant steps
have been taken in realizing the Vision of a prosperous,
united, multi-ethnic nation. Our commitment to Bosnia
and Herzegovina's integrity as a sovereign and united
country remains strong.

The latest developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina
are a clear demonstration of its people's choice of
Europe and the country's firm determination to move
forward on the path of EU integration. The renewed EU
approach has generated momentum. With their written
commitment to undertake further reforms signed by
the leaders of the political parties and endorsed by
the Parliamentary Assembly, the authorities of Bosnia
and Herzegovina made a remarkable decision. It was a
defining moment in relations between the EU and Bosnia
and Herzegovina and a solid step towards realizing the
country's European perspective, enabling the entry into
force of the Stabilization and Association Agreement
as of next month. Further steps must be taken to carry
on the reform agenda supporting necessary economic
and social change, including measures provided by the
Compact for Growth initiative, as well as close dialogue
between the EU and Bosnia and Herzegovina.

While we have seen the resilience the economy has
displayed in the context ofthe floods that affected Bosnia
and Herzegovina and other countries in the region last
spring, tackling social and economic issues, as the High
Representative's report notes, requires urgent attention.
The high unemployment rate, especially among the
young, is a matter of concern. Continuous reform
should translate into real opportunities for the benefit
of all citizens, including the youth and the unemployed.
We are encouraged by the intentions of newly elected
leaders to focus on their reform efforts.

We call on the authorities to capitalize on the
opportunities that the renewed EU approach presents.
Their full realization requires determination and unity
among the political elites. The divisive nationalistic
and separatist rhetoric is threatening the very
foundations of the State, is counterproductive and
should be discarded. As mentioned, Lithuania firmly
supports the independence, unity and sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Further
reconciliation and strengthening of the rule of law and
administrative capacities at all levels would require
overcoming the political differences and uniting for
the common goal. Good-neighbourly relations and
regional cooperation are essential for ensuring security
and prosperity in the Western Balkans. Joint efforts on
connectivity and other areas are important unifying
factors. We encourage the newly elected authorities to
further promote regional cooperation and strengthen
ties with the neighbouring countries.

Regional cooperation initiatives also contribute to
addressing security threats. While the overall security
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina remains stable,
the recent incident in the city of Zvornik, where a
police station was attacked and a policeman was killed
underlines the need to scale up efforts by the authorities
aimed at ensuring public order, safety and security.
The European Union and Lithuania, as its member,
will continue to provide, through the European
Union-led peacekeeping force, support to Bosnia and
Herzegovina's efforts to maintain a safe and secure
environment under the United Nations mandate.
In conclusion, we encourage Bosnia and
Herzegovina's leadership to demonstrate clear, strategic
political will and determination and use the momentum
for all citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina to benefit
from the real progress in economic and social reforms.
This is essential in realizing the Vision of a united and
prosperous country that is strong in its diversity.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

