Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): It is
10 days since the start of the Israeli military aggression
against the Gaza Strip. It is 10 days since the start of an
operation of killing and methodical destruction by
Israel against the people of Gaza. It is 10 days, and
Israel is telling us daily that it is about to achieve its
military objectives, while the media are showing us
daily, nay hourly, horrific scenes of the bodies of
children laid next to each other, families that have been
completely decimated and innocent civilians who have
been crushed by the Israeli military machine - almost
600 to date and 3,000 thousand wounded, and the
Council is still silent.

We cannot imagine what the Council needs to
assume its responsibility to stop that aggression. Does
it need more Palestinians killed and wounded before it
takes a decision that would commit Israel to stop its
military action? Perhaps it requires another solution
that would give the occupying Power some political
gains as another way of crowning its military
aggression. In this respect, the Council stalling has
undermined its credibility and the confidence of our
peoples in the Council and in its neutrality and
objectivity in dealing with the Palestinian question.

As members know very well, Egypt is in a unique
situation as far as the current events are concerned, as
the immediately adjacent neighbour of the Gaza Strip,
where the Israeli aggression is taking place, and
because its central role in having helped the Israelis
and Palestinians attain a period of calm that lasted six
months until just one week before the aggression and
despite violations by both sides. Furthermore, Egypt is
in a well-known position in View of its role in
sponsoring the Palestinian national reconciliation.

I should like to explain our view of a way out of
this situation. Let me quote from the statement made
this evening by President Mubarak in a joint press
conference with President Sarkozy:

"The situation in Gaza continues to
deteriorate for a second week, with continual
destructive and deadly Israeli attacks targeting
innocent civilians, causing tensions to escalate
and undermining regional stability.

"Egypt, which opened the door to peace in
the Middle East and has supported the Palestinian
cause for 60 years, cannot accept a continuation
of the current situation, with the Palestinian and
Israeli sides clinging to their positions and the
Security Council delaying the fulfilment of its
responsibilities.

"Egypt has been pursuing active efforts
since the first day of the hostilities, and today I
am putting forward an initiative specifically
designed to contain the situation, based on the
following elements.

"First, Israel and the Palestinian factions
shall agree to an immediate ceasefire for a
specified period to allow the opening of corridors
for aid to the inhabitants of the Strip and to allow
Egypt to pursue efforts towards a complete and
permanent ceasefire.
"Secondly, Egypt calls on Israel and the
Palestinian sides to meet immediately to conclude
arrangements and guarantees to prevent a
repetition of the present escalation. The causes of

that escalation, including the question of securing
the borders, should be addressed to allow for the
reopening of border crossings and the lifting of
the blockade. Egypt is prepared to take part in
these discussions along with the Palestinian and
Israeli sides, and with the European Union and
the other members of the Quartet.

"Thirdly, Egypt renews its call on the
Palestinian National Authority and all Palestinian
factions to respond to Egyptian efforts to bring
about Palestinian reconciliation, which is
indispensable for overcoming the challenges
facing the Palestinian people and the Palestinian
cause both in the current critical situation and in
the future.

"Egypt is carrying out its responsibility in
putting forward this initiative and expects the
Israeli and Palestinian sides, as well as other
regional and international parties, to fulfil their
responsibilities in order to stop the bloodshed and
renew hopes for peace."

I would also like to reaffirm a crucial point: the
Gaza Strip is an integral part of the Palestinian territory
that was occupied by Israel in 1967 - which also
includes the West Bank and East Jerusalem. Therefore,
the occupying Power has responsibilities towards the
population of the land that it occupies. This
responsibility is well-known and must be recognized.

Since the beginning of the Israeli aggression, on
27 December, Egypt has made extensive efforts to
provide humanitarian assistance to the affected
population in the Gaza Strip. In this respect, Egypt has
since the first day used the Rafah crossing to enable
individuals to deliver some assistance in the form of
small shipments. The Egyptian Red Crescent, in
cooperation with the Palestinian side, has been able to
deliver some 120 tons of medicines and other medical
supplies through the crossing, in addition to some 300
additional tones of foodstuffs through the Karam Abu
Salem crossing. Egyptian hospitals have so far
received 120 injured persons and we are making
preparations to receive more wounded as the
Palestinian side is able and willing to transfer them
outside the Strip. Moreover, since yesterday, we have
sent approximately 500 tons of foodstuffs via Al-Aouja
through Karam Abu Salem crossing and onwards to the
Strip.

Here I would like to express our thanks to all the
sisterly Arab and Islamic countries which offered their
services, especially medical services, to relieve the
suffering of the Palestinians in Gaza through Egypt.
Egypt has adequate capacity and will to deal with the
situation, and we will continue our extensive efforts to
deliver all the assistance from our brothers to the Gaza
Strip despite the current difficulties.

We have come here as an Arab ministerial
delegation to demonstrate the utmost importance
attached by all Arab countries to ending this aggression
immediately and to ridding the Palestinians of the
horrors of the Israeli military machine. But this does
not prevent us from calling upon the Council not to
turn a blind eye to the current events or to overlook the
fact that the main tragedy lies in the continued Israeli
occupation of Palestinian land. The effort that truly
must be made is the effort to end the occupation as
soon as possible and establish an independent
Palestinian State, with full and intensified international
support and encouragement for the negotiations that
are necessary to achieve our aim, as provided for in
Council resolution 1850 (2008).

I am certain that this is the real objective and that
it should not be overlooked by the Council. This
requires extensive efforts and follow-up by the
Council, as provided for in the resolution to which I
have just referred.

