Mr. Malok (South Sudan): Allow me to congratulate
you, Mr. President, for your leadership of the Security
Council this month and to acknowledge the role of
your predecessor in leading the Council last month. I
would also like to thank Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
and Ambassador Ismail Wais, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) Special Envoy for
South Sudan, for their briefings.

The Transitional Government of National Unity
takes note of the special report of the Secretary-
General (S/2018/143)on the renewal of the mandate of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
and would like to thank Mr. Kevin Kennedy and the
entire UNMISS review team for their time and efforts.

I would be remiss if I did not thank Mr. David
Shearer, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, the troop-contributing countries and all the
men and women ofthe UNMISS in the civilian, military
and police components for their tireless and courageous
efforts in executing their mandate.

The Transitional Government of National Unity
acknowledges that its primary responsibility is to
protect its own population. However, it cannot exercise
that responsibility while being constrained by voices
calling for an armed embargo and sanctions and
denying external support to the country.

The report acknowledges that South Sudan
came into being with extremely limited institutional
capacity in all areas of governance and Government
services. The situation in South Sudan is not black
and white. Development is achieved in a country over
time - something that South Sudan did not have
because it fell into conflict less than three years into its
statehood. Instead of equating South Sudan with other
countries whose development evolved over decades,
we call upon the international community to view
the Transitional Government of National Unity as its
partner in order to facilitate meaningful development.

The protection-of-civilians sites approach was
never designed as a long-term endeavour. It is therefore
paramount that a way forward be found. Certain
areas enjoy relative calm and stability, and we would
therefore encourage the voluntary repatriation of the
internally displaced to such areas. We welcome the
readiness of UNMISS to explore lessons learned from
the closure of the Melut site and hope that such lessons
will soon be applied in the other protection-of-civilian
sites. The sites have long been a source of friction
between the Government and UNMISS. We therefore
welcome UNMISS measures to ensure that sites are
weapon-free, among other things, and encourage much
more to be done in that respect.

The Transitional Government of National Unity
stands ready to fully cooperate with UNMISS and
various humanitarian actors, through the Ministry of
Humanitarian Affairs and all relevant Government
institutions or organs, to ensure that people in need
receive the attention they so deserve. We also encourage
UNMISS and various humanitarian actors to work in a
more coherent manner in order to avoid duplication of
effort and to maximize the resources at their disposal.

The Transitional Government of National Unity
is working to build confidence among the civilian
population through initiatives such as a national
dialogue, so that people feel safe enough to return to
their homes. We should also be mindful of those in
protection-of-civilians sites who do not seek shelter
because of insecurity, but rather to advance their own
political and economic agendas.

The Transitional Government of National Unity
is deeply concerned and alarmed about the allegations
of sexual misconduct perpetrated by UNMISS police
in Wau and hopes they are just isolated cases. It is
unfortunate that UNMISS police took advantage of
women in a vulnerable situation who were under their
protection. We welcome the steps taken by the leadership
of UNMISS to withdraw the accused contingent and
launch an investigation into the matter. We hope that
the investigation will be credible so as to protect the
long-standing good reputation of the Blue Helmets.

I would like to point out that the Government
decided not to sign the declaration of principles during
the second phase of the High-level Revitalization
Forum, because it was optional.

With regard to the constraints faced by UNMISS
when patrolling certain areas, the Government would
like to suggest joint patrols and assistance in building
the capacity of local security personnel, while helping
to maintain peace and security in patrol areas. The
Government has always called for the reinstatement of
capacity-building in the UNMISS mandate. We note that
the report recommends some form of it, but we disagree
with the notion that capacity-building may contribute to
the conflict. On the contrary, strengthening institutions
such as the police, army and the judiciary by building
their capacity in international law, humanitarian law
and all other relevant law would help to promote and
professionalize the rule of law.

In connection with the calls for an adjustment of
some elements of the current Regional Protection force
mandate, and in the light of the improved security
situation in Juba, the Transitional Government of
National Unity would like to suggest the deployment
of the Regional Protection Force in other areas that are
currently experiencing instability.
The Transitional Government of National Unity
approached the High-level Revitalization Forum
in good faith and with the willingness to reach an
amicable agreement with all the parties. However, the
unrealistic demands made by opposition groups in the
previous session of the Forum are unhelpful and seek
to push us further from the quest for a sustainable
peace agreement.

The Transitional Government of National Unity

strongly reaffirms its commitment to the peace process
and to working with UNMISS and the international
community as a whole. South Sudan continues to deeply
appreciate the support that the international community
provided for our liberation struggle, as well as the
goodwill continuously demonstrated by many friendly
nations and by the United Nations. We also appreciate
the efforts under the auspices of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, which culminated in the
signing of the 2015 Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan and the recent
High-level Revitalization Forum initiative.

In conclusion, we hope and trust that there will
be greater improvement towards a more effective and
constructive dialogue with the Security Council in
shaping the vital UNMISS mandate, and with UNMISS
in its implementation thereafter.

