Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, for her excellent briefing and
more generally for her exemplary commitment to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I also thank
the President of the Conference episcopale nationale
du Congo, Monseigneur Marcel Utembi, whose
involvement is essential to the success of the electoral
process, for his extremely clear briefing. Lastly, I thank
Ms. Solange Lwashiga Furaha, spokesperson for Rien
Sans Les Femmes, for her role in fighting for women
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and their
participation in the political and electoral processes.

The 23 December elections will be a historic
moment for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in that they will ensure a peaceful transfer of power
for the first time in the country's history. For the
country, it offers a unique opportunity to make a
lasting commitment to achieving peace and stability.
Those elections belong to the Congolese people. France
reaffirms its full respect for the sovereignty of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and encourages the
Government to take all measures necessary to ensure
a smooth electoral process and the holding of free,
inclusive and transparent elections, in accordance with
the set timetable and the Constitution. The success
of that crucial step in the political history of the
country is the shared responsibility and commitment
of all. It is therefore up to all stakeholders to maintain
the spirit of dialogue and consensus resulting from
the 31 December 2016 agreement. I will emphasize
two essential conditions on which the success of the
electoral process depends.

The first concerns the fact that it must take place
in an environment of trust. The opening of political and
democratic space, as well as respect for fundamental
freedoms - beginning with the freedom of expression
and demonstration i are essential. France calls on
the Congolese Government to lift the general ban on
demonstrations and to release political prisoners as
soon as possible, in accordance with the de-escalation
measures provided for in the New Year's Eve agreement,
as Monseigneur Utembi recalled earlier. In that regard,
respect for human rights and the commitments made by
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the Human
Rights Council in Geneva are of the utmost importance.
France also encourages the Congolese authorities to
ensure the participation of women in the political
process, from which they continue to be excluded
too often, as the statistics cited by Ms. Zerrougui
earlier highlight.

Respect for the electoral calendar is essential. The
trust of the Congolese people depends largely on that
factor. Elections must be held on the scheduled date in
accordance with the commitment of all parties. France
welcomes the legislative and technical progress reflected
in the publication of the provisional list of candidates by
the Independent National Electoral Commission on the
evening of 24 August. Furthermore, we welcome once
again President Kabila's decision not to run again in
accordance with the Constitution. In order to maintain
this positive dynamic, any consideration of altering the
electoral calendar must be avoided at all costs.

The next step will be for the Constitutional
Court to consider appeals concerning candidatures
invalidated by the Independent National Electoral
Commission, which must be submitted in the coming
days before the publication of the definitive list on
19 September. The decisions of the Court must allow
an environment of trust in the electoral process to be
preserved, while inclusiveness will be an important
factor in the success of the elections. Moreover, France
fully respects the sovereign decision of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to assume the responsibility
of financing and logistical support for the holding of
elections. It nevertheless recalls that the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) is ready to
provide the Democratic Republic of the Congo with
logistical support if needed. To that end, it is essential
that the competent authorities provide MONUSCO
with the information it needs to provide timely support
as appropriate.
Technical issues have yet to be resolved. France
calls once again on the Independent National Electoral
Commission to establish a wider consensus on the use
of voting machines by helping all citizens to access and
grow comfortable with them. Moreover, we encourage
the Independent National Electoral Commission
to implement the recommendations made by the
International Organization of la Francophonie in its
June audit, beginning with the publication of the voter
register, on which 6.6 million people are registered
without finger prints. Far from being anecdotal, that
technical point raises an issue relating to the credibility
of the entire process.

The second condition concerns the fact that elections
must take place within a peaceful environment. France
remains concerned about the security and humanitarian
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In
some regions, the situation is likely to call into question
the electoral process. Tensions in the Kasai have claimed
many lives, while experts commissioned by the Human
Rights Council have reported allegations of war crimes
and crimes against humanity. The situation in the east
of the country, particularly in North and South Kivu,
remains extremely worrying and all the more sensitive
since the new Ebola epidemic, which was declared
on 1 August in the Beni area. In that connection,
France welcomes MONUSCO deployments in areas of
violence, especially in the eastern part of the country.
It is essential to continue to reconfigure MONUSCO
so as to strengthen the protection of civilians. Securing
future elections and providing logistical support for
them, if the authorities so desire, must be MONUSCO's
short-term priority.

France stands shoulder to shoulder with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. With its partners
in the Security Council, the African Union and in
the region as a whole, it will remain committed to
ensuring that the electoral process leads to the holding
of elections that are free, credible, transparent and
inclusive. Beyond the deadlines in December, it is the
very future of the country that is at stake in the months
to come - a future, we hope, of stability, development
and peace.

