Mr. Graf zu Rantzau (Germany): My Government is
very pleased that we have this occasion to discuss in the
Security Council the United Nations Operation in
Mozambique (ONUMOZ) a few days before it successfully
completes its mission. I especially welcome the Minister of
Foreign Affairs of Mozambique, His Excellency
Mr. Leonardo Santos Simao, on this occasion. I listened
attentively to the very impressive statement he made before
the Council.

Only two years after the General Peace Agreement
was signed on 4 October 1992, its main goals have been
achieved: a cease-fire, the dissolution and disarmament of
the Government and RENAMO troops, the establishment of
a joint defence force, the repatriation and reintegration of
approximately 5 million refugees and internally displaced
persons, and the holding of the first general presidential and
parliamentary elections.

Even if the original time-frame turned out to be too
ambitious and had to be changed, in the end a number of
factors were decisive for the success of ONUMOZ. The
most important prerequisite for the success of the peace
process was the desire for peace on both sides. A
continuation of the civil war, which could not have been
won by military efforts, would have further devastated an
already exhausted country. Both parties to the conflict
realized this.

Even the most favourable circumstances, however,
cannot prevent the development of crisis situations that
threaten to derail the peace process. Tribute is due the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Aldo
Ajello, for his tireless efforts to find creative solutions to
the various unexpected difficulties along the way.

We would further like to mention the Supervisory
and Monitoring Commission, whose task was to guarantee
the implementation of the Peace Agreement and
compliance with the timetable and with the cease-fire.
The active role played in the Commission by its
international members, jointly with the representative of
the United Nations, has turned it into an effective
instrument to further the peace process. We should think
about including similar mechanisms in future peace-
keeping missions as well.

An important prerequisite for the implementation of
the Rome Agreement was the establishment of the United
Nations Trust Fund to provide logistical support. Its
significance cannot be overestimated, since it enabled the
opposition to participate in the peace process on an equal
economic footing.
Even a success story may include some lessons to be
learned. I want to mention just a few.

Peace-keeping operations will be even more
successful when they embrace the principle of lean
management. This holds true not only for Headquarters
but also for the individual operations on site. Efficient
management includes transparency and cost-effectiveness
in the handling of tender offers.

The Mozambican experience demonstrates the
importance of guaranteeing freedom of movement in the
country for civilians and returnees from the very start of
the mission. In order to ensure this, the mission should be
capable of executing police tasks from the outset. The
verification of the disarmament of conflicting parties
should be concluded by the end of the mandate of a
peace-keeping operation.

After almost 20 years of turmoil and suffering, the
people of Mozambique now have the chance to build a
better future for themselves. No one expects the road
ahead to be easy. The weapons arsenals of both former
conflicting parties, arsenals that still exist in Mozambique,

 

remain a cause for concern. The reconstruction of
democratic institutions will continue to require political and
material support from the international community.

Considering all that has been achieved in the last two
years, however, we feel that we have reason to be
optimistic about the future of Mozambique. I would
therefore request Minister Simao to assure his people of our
continued solidarity.

Finally, I want to associate myself fully with what will
be said by the Permanent Representative of France on
behalf of the European Union.

