Uruguay expresses its gratitude to the Federal Republic of Germany, in its capacity as President of the Security Council, for convening this timely high-level open debate via video-teleconference on "United Nations peacekeeping operations: Peace operations and human rights", as it is an issue of critical importance for the Organization, particularly in these challenging times of global crisis caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). In that connection, Uruguay welcomes the unanimous adoption by the Council, on | July, of resolution 2532 (2020), backing the Secretary-General's call for a worldwide ceasefire to combat the COVID-19 pandemic - an initiative that Uruguay endorsed in a timely manner. In addition, while expressing its appreciation for the valuable statements delivered by the Federal Minister of Defence of Germany, the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Special Representative of the Secretary- General for South Sudan and the representative of civil society, Uruguay would like to contribute to the debate with the following statement. Human rights are intrinsically linked to peace and security. Moreover, human rights violations can be both a cause and a consequence of conflicts. It is crucial to emphasize the importance of all States and other relevant actors respecting and observing their obligations under the Charter of the United Nations and other international law, including international human rights law, international refugee law and international humanitarian law. It should be recalled that the primary responsibility for the protection of civilians, as well as for the protection and promotion of human rights, rests with each State, and that the role of peace operations is to cooperate with national authorities in support of their efforts. The appreciation of the relevance of human rights to peacekeeping developed gradually. From the establishment of the first human rights component in 1991 - under the United Nations Observer Mission in El Salvador - until today, we can affirm that human rights now constitute a core function of peace operations. Indeed, over half of the peace operations currently under way perform tasks related to human rights. Those tasks include, among many others, promoting and protecting human rights through monitoring and investigation; analysis and reporting; capacity- building for State institutions, including national human rights institutions and civil society; early warnings; protection of civilians; and support to Governments in combating impunity. Ultimately, the human rights-related tasks that peace operations can perform can contribute to the broader efforts of the United Nations and the international community to support political processes, build sustainable peace and prevent, deter and mitigate human rights violations. Another clear illustration of the relevance of human rights in peace operations is the quantity of United Nations documents, both those resulting from intergovernmental processes and those by the Secretariat, which cover the issue substantially. The Action for Peacekeeping Declaration of Shared Commitments, the report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Peace Operations policy on the protection of civilians are just a few of the most recent examples. Uruguay believes that there is still plenty of scope for peace operations to contribute to the promotion and protection of human rights more effectively and, in that regard, will share some of the areas in which, in its view, improvements can be made. The Security Council has a key role to play as it is the organ that bears the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security through the appropriate use of all the tools at its disposal, including peace operations. It is necessary to have realistic and achievable mandates, where the human rights- related tasks are clearly articulated and their scope is understood equally by Security Council members, a mission's leadership, peace personnel in the field and the national authorities of the host country. The training of peacekeepers in human rights, based on clear standards defined by the United Nations, is another key aspect to be considered if the impact of peace operations in the promotion and protection of human rights is to be increased, as is achieving greater participation, both quantitative and qualitative, of women in peace operations. Moreover, nothing of this can be sustained if peace operations do not have the necessary human and financial resources and equipment to implement their mandated tasks, including those related to human rights. In the context of the Organization's financial crisis, human rights tasks must not be among the first victims of budget cuts. As a third and last point, Uruguay would like to share its experience as a troop-contributing country whose peacekeeping personnel has a long-standing history of implementing mandates on the protection of civilians and human rights through some examples that could be considered as good practices, as well as some challenges that have to be faced on a daily basis. The importance Uruguay attaches to respect for, and the promotion of, human rights, both at the national and international levels, is reflected in the performance of its peacekeeping personnel in the various missions they are deployed in, which, in many cases, include specific mandates on the protection of civilians and human rights. Uruguay's National Peacekeeping Training Centre (ENOPU) is the national institution responsible for providing the necessary predeployment training to peacekeepers on a wide range of topics, of which human rights are one of the pillars. In addition, ENOPU works closely with the United Nations to provide international courses to other troop- and police-contributing countries. A recent example is the training-of-trainers course on the protection of civilians that was held in Montevideo, with the support of the Department of Peace Operations. Furthermore, in support of Department of Peace Operations training efforts, Uruguay, with support from the United States, translated into Spanish core training materials, including on the protection of civilians, that are now available to all Member States. Uruguay believes that the tasks related to the protection of civilians and human rights are interlinked. We are always seeking to increase our capacity to protect those communities most affected by conflict. For a large portion of last year, Uruguay worked together with UNICEF to develop a national policy on child protection for peacekeepers that is now in force and has given Uruguayan peacekeepers extra tools for more effective child protection. Uruguay has also increased its contribution of female personnel to peace operations and continues to work on this issue through various platforms, such as the Elsie Initiative Fund. In addition, Uruguay has continuously contributed peacekeepers to the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) since its inception, 20 years ago, when it was still called MONUC, and continues to contribute with the same engagement and desire for stability and lasting peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Throughout all those years, Uruguayan peacekeepers have gained vast experience in carrying out tasks related to the protection of civilians and human rights, which in turn has led to the training of new troops in order to continue to do what has been done well and to improve in those areas where things could have been done better. Another salient point of Uruguay's experience in MONUSCO is the relevance of the integration and teamwork among the military, civilian and police component and the collaboration with other relevant agents in the field, such as humanitarian agencies, non-governmental organizations and civil society. A concrete example worth highlighting is the excellent relationship of the Uruguayan contingent with the United Nations Joint Human Rights Office in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which has led to tangible results in terms of mandate implementation, particularly in the areas of the protection of civilians and respect for, and the promotion of, human rights. Similarly, another crucial element of implementing protection-related tasks more effectively is the information gathering and analysis capacity of peace operations. In the case of the Uruguayan contingent in MONUSCO, the use of intelligence tools in North Kivu has proven beneficial to prevent human rights violations because, among other things, it allows for better situational awareness and early-warning mechanisms. Uruguay's experience in peace operations has also enabled it to identify some challenges that can negatively affect a mission's capacity to conduct human rights tasks; some of those challenges include the following. Cases of sexual exploitation and abuse committed by United Nations peacekeepers, which Uruguay strongly condemns, constitute a violation of the most basic rights of victims and are the opposite of what is expected of a Blue Helmet. The cuts to the budgets of peace operations have, in many cases, hindered the ability of missions to implement protection-related tasks, including those related to human rights. Likewise, delays in reimbursements to troop-contributing countries have a similar negative impact. Lastly, the current global crisis due to COVID-19 poses an additional challenge, as it exacerbates the extreme vulnerability of millions of persons who are already suffering the consequences of conflict. It also poses challenges to United Nations peace operations, which must continue to implement their mandates but with additional limitations and restrictions. In conclusion, as acountry with a long-standing commitment to multilateralism and to respect for, and the promotion of, international law, as well as with a long record of contributing peacekeepers to the United Nations, Uruguay has taken on with dedication and pride the task of protecting civilians in different parts of the world. We assure the Organization and its Member States of our intention to continue, and even increase, our contribution of Blue Helmets, particularly in these extremely challenging operational circumstances where civilians may be more vulnerable. Similarly, at the political level at the United Nations, Uruguay will continue its hard work through every relevant platform - the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, the Fifth Committee, the Action for Peacekeeping initiative - to encourage and strengthen the contribution of peace operations to the promotion and protection of human rights.
