Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, we would like to thank the sisterly State of
Kuwait for convening this meeting. We also wish its
brotherly delegation success in assuming the Security
Council presidency in June. We also commend the
dedication and efforts made by His Excellency the
Ambassador and the entire delegation of Kuwait.

In addition, we thank the briefers, Ms. Karin
Landgren, Executive Director of Security Council
Report, and Mr. James Cockayne, Director ofthe Centre
for Policy Research at the United Nations University.

We appreciate the convening of this open debate,
which is aimed at giving an opportunity to all Member
States to take stock of the latest developments in
improving the working methods of the Council since
the issuance of the revised note 507 (S/2017/507, annex). It also gives an opportunity to identify the gaps
and provide additional practical proposals that can
enhance the efficiency of the working methods of the
Council, which will enable the Council to assume its
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security in an efficient and effective manner.

In that context, we would like to raise the points
that could lead to improving the working methods
of the Council, in addition to promoting more
objective and interactive consultations, the increased
participation of non-member States in the Council's
work, as appropriate, enhanced accountability of
the Council to the members, increased transparency,
more detailed agenda items and the convening of more
public meetings.

We stress the importance of regularly holding open
debates on the working methods of the Council, as
continued discussion of this issue is of interest to all
Member States that seek to see the Council working
in the best possible way. The working methods should
be commensurate with the continued changes and the
progress made should be reviewed in order to identify the
shortcomings and hear a variety of ideas on addressing
them. In that regard, we commend the efforts of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions to increase the transparency in
its work.

We emphasize the content of the note by the
President contained in document S/2016/619, which
covers the work of the chairs of the subsidiary organs.
The note also states that the chairs of the Council's
subsidiary organs, including those of Sanctions
Committees, should provide all non-member States
with informal periodic briefings on their activities, as
appropriate, and indicate the time and venue of these
meetings in good time since Member States are the ones
to implement the recommendations of the committees
and to coordinate the implementation of the content of
binding Security Council resolutions. The committees
should therefore have a high-profile presence in the
Security Council's meetings.

Increased coordination, cooperation and interaction
among the main organs of the United Nations, in
particular the Security Council, the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council and the Secretariat,
as well as with other relevant bodies, including main
committees, is extremely important. We welcome
the fact that your delegation, Mr. President, will hold
a public meeting on this topic next week. We stress
the importance of coordination among the Council
and regional and subregional organizations, pursuant
to Chapter VIII of the Charter, in order to maintain
international peace and security. Those organizations
are crucial in achieving stability in the regions where
conflicts are taking place due to many factors, including
their geographical and political proximity, as well as
cultural links.

We also stress that enhancing the Council's
approach to conflict prevention is important, including
through negotiation, enquiry, mediation, conciliation,
arbitration and other peaceful means set out in Chapter
VI of the Charter. It is important that the Council
support the good offices of the Secretariat, regional
organizations and Member States in order to achieve
peace and stability and preserve human rights.

In conclusion, the Kingdom of Bahrain recognizes
the importance of continuing this debate on improving
the working methods of the Council. We look forward
to further meetings on this issue in order to achieve
total harmony among the organs of the Organization
and encourage the achievement of changes necessary to
ensure the success of the Council in assuming its tasks
in the best way.

