Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I am
grateful for the invitation to participate in this open
debate, and I congratulate the Spanish presidency on
its outstanding leadership as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) over the
past two years.

Peru reiterates its commitment to and full support
for the hard work of the Security Council to promote
dialogue and cooperation to confront the threat posed
by the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs) and their delivery systems. The adoption
of resolution 1540 (2004) was a historic milestone in
addressing the new threat to international peace and
security in the context of the proliferation of nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons among non-State
actors, in particular terrorist groups. In keeping with its
long-standing traditional approach, Peru co-sponsored
that resolution because it believes that we must act
urgently towards promoting the universalization and
comprehensive implementation of multilateral treaties
aimed at preventing the proliferation of WMDs and
ensuring that States implement effective national
legislation allowing them to check the unlawful transfer
of that category of weapons, their related components
and delivery systems.

More than ever, States need to strengthen measures
to prevent the financing of prohibited activities related
to weapons of mass destruction, their delivery systems
and related materials, as well as maintain an account
of the quantity and physical protection of components
related to weapons of mass destruction, thereby
ensuring security with regard to their production, use,
storage and transport.

My country has fulfilled its commitments
concerning nuclear security, radiological security and
the physical protection of nuclear materials and has
adopted a number of administrative and penal measures
aimed at the effective implementation of the measures
contained in resolution 1540 (2004). It has also
initiated a technical assistance project with the United
Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and
Development in Latin America and the Caribbean,
headquartered in Lima, to implement resolution 1540
(2004). In that vein, Peru has rigorously adapted
its internal legislation to the standards established
in resolution 1540 (2004), as we have shown in the
submitted reports on our level of compliance with
the resolution.

We note with concern the existence of non-State
actors attempting to develop, obtain, manufacture,
possess, transport, transfer or use nuclear, chemical
or biological weapons and their delivery systems to
advance their interests. We welcome the fact that
the comprehensive review of resolution 1540 (2004)
has created a dynamic of cooperation and prevention
among States, primarily identifying ways for greater
and better scientific cooperation and technology
transfer, and specifying in particular the role of civil
society, the scientific and academic communities,
private enterprise and non-governmental organizations
in the areas of capacity-building and delegation of the
obligations assumed by States in the framework of
resolution 1540 (2004).

Finally, my delegation emphasizes that the
maintenance of international peace and security is a
task that requires the participation of the international
community, in general. I reaffirm Peru's strong and
constant commitment to preventing the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction.

