Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to thank Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert
for her valuable and comprehensive briefing. The State
of Kuwait appreciates and supports the work of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
in accordance with its mandate and pursuant to the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

We have reviewed the Secretary-General's report
(S/20l9/632) on the progress made in fulfilling
the mandate of UNAMI, including developments
related to the missing Kuwaiti and third-country
nationals and missing Kuwaiti property, including the
national archives,

Kuwait's bilateral relations with the Republic
of Iraq have seen continued positive developments.
Steps have been taken by the leaderships of both
countries that reflect the concepts of fraternity and
neighbourliness. The bilateral visits at the highest level
that have taken place, including a visit by the Amir of
the country, His Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad
Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, in June, as well as meetings ofjoint
bilateral committees, are an important indicator of the
promotion of such cooperation and the closing of an old
painful chapter and the opening a new one of productive
partnership, which will translate into the resolution of
outstanding issues.
Since the fall of Saddam Hussein regime, the
State of Kuwait has provided all kinds of support and
assistance to the brotherly Iraqi people, in spite of the
circumstances that hindered us from doing so in the
past and while realizing our deep-rooted interests. We
look forward to promoting them by seizing promising
opportunities to elevate our relations so as to bring
about the progress and prosperity that our friendly
peoples aspire to.

In that regard, we commend Iraq's commitment
to implementing all of its remaining outstanding
international obligations towards the State of Kuwait
in accordance with the relevant Council resolutions.
We stand ready to provide support and assistance to
accelerate the implementation of such obligations, in
particular with regard to humanitarian commitments
related to the remaining missing Kuwaiti and third-
country nationals since the liberation of the State of
Kuwait in 1991. Two hundred and thirty-six of the 605
missing persons have been identified.

The suffering of the families of missing hostages
continues, but we hope that the fates of those remaining
missing persons will soon be resolved, given the latest
developments in the exhumation and analysis of the
remains of missing Kuwaiti nationals. We hope that
more potential burial sites will be identified so as to
eventually be able to bring closure to this humanitarian
issue. Kuwait, for its part, has spared no effort to
lend support to the efforts made. We believe that it is
possible to make progress if we intensify actions and
implement the agreed programmes and plans. We urge
Iraq to continue its constructive cooperation with the
Tripartite Commission and its technical subcommittee
under the leadership of the International Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC). We appreciate and commend the
important role of the ICRC in that respect.

With regard to missing Kuwaiti property, in
particular the national archives - the whereabouts of
which are still unknown - progress is still limited.
We welcome the efforts of the Iraqi authorities, which
handed over 42,000 books to the State of Kuwait this
morning, of the nearly 120,000 books that were owned
by the National Library and the University of the
State of Kuwait, under the supervision of the United
Nations. We hope that cooperation continues in order to
restore the property seized during the Iraqi occupation,
especially the national archives.

We have also followed developments in Iraq with
great interest. There has been significant progress
recently at the security, political and economic stability
levels, despite the challenges that Iraq has been facing.
We witnessed that progress at first-hand during the
visit to Iraq co-chaired by Kuwait and the United States
of America at the end of June. We are cognizant that
the coming period is important for Iraq to surmount the
challenges it is facing. However, we are confident that
Iraq is moving with steady steps towards meeting its
aspirations in order to avoid relapsing into the turmoil
of the past.

We reaffirm our support for the Iraqi Government
in implementing its reform programmes. That requires
collective efforts to promote national reconciliation
among Iraqis of all backgrounds in order to prioritize
the public interest, address corruption, improve the
quality of public services and enforce security with a
view to restoring Iraq to its well-deserved position at
the regional and international levels. We welcome the
role of UNAMI in supporting those efforts in line with
its mandate.

In conclusion, the State of Kuwait stands ready
to continue working in cooperation with Iraq during
this stage in order to support efforts at rebuilding and
reconstruction, as well as offsetting the destruction
in Iraq pursuant to the outcomes of the International
ConferencefortheReconstructionofIraq,whichwashe1d
in Kuwait. We encourage all countries that participated
in the Conference to honour their commitments. We
look forward to cooperating and coordinating with the
Iraqi Government towards establishing a mechanism to
follow up on the implementation of those commitments
so as to meet the aspirations of the Iraqi people.

