Mr. Skoog (Sweden): Sweden has repeatedly
expresseditsoutrageovertheabhorrentandunacceptable,
reported chemical attacks in Khan Shaykhun. The use
of chemical weapons is not only a clear violation of
international law, but also a threat to international peace
and security. We, as members of the Security Council,
have a responsibility to take action in response. That
should not be a polarizing issue. It is a core duty of the

Security Council.

As an elected member, Sweden has worked
tirelessly in order to ensure the urgent adoption of a
strong resolution that would condemn the reported
attack, support a prompt and thorough investigation
and hold those responsible to account. All efforts
to that end were exhausted over the past few days.
The Council had the chance to speak with one voice
against the illegal use of chemical weapons. Unity in
the Council would have strengthened the hand of the
ongoing investigations and sent a clear message about
this Council's rejection of chemical weapons. We are
therefore deeply disappointed that it was not possible
to find such unity on an issue where there should be
common ground. We regret that the draft resolution
was not adopted because ofa Russian veto. The Council
must come together so that those responsible for this
horrendous attack will be held to account. We will
continue our efforts in that regard.

We trust that the mechanisms in place will ensure
a rapid, full and impartial investigation to establish all
facts. We urge all parties and especially the Government
of Syria to cooperate fully in accordance with
resolution 2118 (2013). When the reports by the Fact-
finding Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-
United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism on the
attack in Khan Shaykhun are available, this Council
must act unitedly upon those findings.

As was discussed this morning, we must, now
more than ever, intensify our efforts to reinvigorate the
political process led by the United Nations, revitalise
the ceasefire and ensure humanitarian access. The
only way to end the suffering in Syria is through a
transitional political process in line with resolution
2254 (2015).

