Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): In
resolution 1866 (2009), which we adopted and
co-sponsored unanimously, we expressed our intention
to decide on the future of the United Nations presence
on the basis of the Secretary-General's report. That
report, entitled "Report pursuant to Security Council
resolutions l808 (2008), 1839 (2008) and 1866 (2009)"
(S/2009/254), received broad support within the
Council when it was presented. On that basis,
therefore, intensive talks and negotiations took place in
the Group of Friends of Georgia.

Several draft resolutions were discussed. On
Friday, the Group met for more than six hours. On
Saturday, we met again. Many gestures were agreed
with regard to the security regime. We were not far
from an agreement. It is true that, throughout, Russia
tried to use that process to get Council members to
change their minds on Georgia's territorial integrity
and sovereignty. That is why all the Russian proposals
included references to "the Republic of Abkhazia" and
its borders - provocative terms obviously
unacceptable to a majority of the Council members.

Strangely, Russia also refused any reference to a
conflict and, what is of even greater concern, any
reference to a political process. However, progress was
made. We felt that those negotiations should be given
every chance of success. That is why France, in a
constructive spirit, together with Germany, Austria,
Croatia, the United States, the United Kingdom and
Turkey, yesterday put into blue the draft resolution
(S/2009/3lO) that we have just voted on. That text
proposed a technical rollover for the mandate of the
United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia
(UNOMIG) in order to give some oxygen to the
negotiations.

The text was in line with the previous UNOMIG
technical rollover resolutions, 1838 (2008) and 1866
(2009). Both those resolutions came into effect after
the August conflict and after Russia recognized the
separatist entities. And, as Council members will
remember, Russia voted for both those resolutions, in
unanimity with the Council. Russia even co-sponsored
resolution 1866 (2009). One of the key elements that
made it possible to adopt these resolutions and for
them to be accepted by the host country, Georgia, was
the reference to resolution 1808 (2008). That reference
did not prevent Russia from voting for them.

Russia asked us to remove that reference in the
current draft. That proposal was unacceptable to us and
to a majority of the members of the Security Council
for several reasons: first, because France, like the
European Union, is fundamentally attached to the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Georgia within its internationally recognized borders;
then, because nothing has happened since the vote on
resolution 1866 (2009) in February that would justify
the Council changing its position; and finally, because
removing that reference would clearly have prejudged
the outcome of future negotiations, rather than
reorienting the current order in order to enable those
negotiations to take place. Under those conditions, it is
inexplicable to us that Russia has put an end to this
Mission because of a reference to resolution 1808
(2008).

Russia assumed a heavy burden by imposing its
veto on the draft text. The draft resolution would have
been adopted by a wide majority without that veto, and
with good reason. Russia has put an end to 15 years of
the stabilizing presence of the United Nations in the
area. The local population, which must be assured of
security and external monitoring to prevent
provocation and arbitrary acts, will be the first victim
of that decision. The veto also leaves a situation on the
ground that remains very fragile and unstable, with
unresolved hatred, artificial barriers and no peace
process underway. The Security Council cannot
distance itself from that situation.

Once again, France deeply regrets the Russian
veto. The most important thing now is peace and
stability in the region. France calls on all parties with
forces in the area to strictly respect the August and
September 2008 agreements. Finally, we reiterate our
unreserved support for sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Georgia within its internationally
recognized borders.

