Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
wish to thank Romania for having once again taken the
initiative to convene a debate on the subject we are
considering today. Given the growing needs in the area
of peacekeeping, regional organizations have an
essential role to play in both taking over from and
supporting United Nations activities.

I fully associate myself with the statement made
earlier by Ambassador Jones Parry on behalf of the
European Union. I wish only to make a few
supplementary remarks.

Regional organizations have recently made
significant progress in giving full effect to the
provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter. I believe it is
accurate to say that today, such organizations are often
able to make a major contribution to peacekeeping at
every stage and in all its dimensions, from conflict
prevention to the rebuilding of a country emerging
from crisis. We can see that clearly in our daily work in
the Council: they intervene, sometimes, proactively,
sometimes by taking over, and sometimes by
supplementing United Nations activities. We also note
that the capacities of various organizations are not
identical and that progress is still needed. But major
efforts are being undertaken everywhere, and they must
be recognized and continued.

As Ambassador Jones Parry underlined, the
European Union is actively strengthening its ability to
support the crisis management activities of the United
Nations. We can see the evidence of that in the
Balkans. The European Union's actions now take place
in the framework of the 24 September 2003 joint
declaration of the United Nations and the European
Union on cooperation in crisis management. The EU is
also involved in strengthening the capacities of African
regional and subregional organizations through the
Peace Facility, which finances operations conducted by
regional actors on the continent.

In that regard, I pay tribute to the initiatives that
African countries have taken. Our Council, which
devotes more than 50 per cent of its time to the
management or the prevention of crises in Africa, is
well aware of them. The African Union has been able
to make a vital contribution to the transition process in
Burundi, among other actions, while the Economic
Community of West African States has taken action in
Sierra Leone, Guinea-Bissau and Cote d'Ivoire.

It has often been seen that subregional
organizations work in good harmony and cooperation
with regional organizations and the Security Council
and that we all arrive together - or at least try to - to
make our actions complementary. Quite often, the
actions of regional organizations have ensured a
presence on the ground on occasions when the United
Nations was not yet prepared to deploy a peacekeeping
force. That is, in fact, what happened in Burundi. The
Organization of American States has taken action in
Haiti, and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe is continuing its work on the
Eurasian continent.

We now regularly study the relations between the
Security Council and regional organizations. I think
that at each stage, we have to consider the nature of the
value added by cooperation between regional
organizations and the United Nations. With respect to
the difficult area of crisis and conflict prevention, I
think that we are all aware that an effective regional

organization often - more often than the United
Nations - has the means to play an early-warning
role.

That is what countries of the region are doing. We
increasingly see that they tend to work through
regional organizations or get them involved directly.
That is a good thing, because it facilitates information
and communication. I think it is necessary to have
good information and communication going back and
forth between the United Nations and regional
organizations. My delegation welcomes the fact that
progress has been made in that regard, but I think that
we can do even better, as Article 54 of the Charter
invites us to do.

I would add that a concrete step that prevention
effort would be for the mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping operations to take into account the
instruments created by regional structures for marking
and tracing small arms.

Beyond crisis prevention and management,
regional organizations have a role to play in the stages
of the political and economic reconstruction of a
country emerging from a major crisis. In our work to
establish a Peacebuilding Commission, I think it is
right to give regional organizations a place in the
Commission's consideration of a given situation. I
think that the contributions of regional organizations
on a case-by-case basis will be one of the conditions
for the success of the Peacebuilding Commission and
the new, ambitious vision it embodies of joint action
among all actors seeking the resolution of a conflict.

We are working for, and are increasingly seeing,
complementarity among the actions of regional
organizations as they contribute on the ground through
their presence in peacekeeping activities. We see more
and more that regional organizations constitute one of
the options for peacekeeping capacities that the
international community should have at its disposal in
coming years. Some operations will be classic United
Nations peacekeeping operations, and others might be
regional actions authorized by the Security Council.
Some, as was the case in Burundi, might precede a
United Nations operation. Some will allow for a
substantial, long-term deployment, while others might
be emergency operations. For its part, the European
Union is actively developing tactical units to fulfil
such emergency operations functions.

We look forward to the observations in the report
of the Secretary-General on consultations related to the
conclusion of agreements establishing a framework for
cooperation between the peacekeeping operations of
the United Nations and regional organizations,
including the contribution of the regional
organizations. I believe that it would be very useful for
the draft resolution to be adopted to refer to that in the
paragraph concerning the report of the Secretary-
General.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm France's
support for all those efforts, which should enable the
Council, to which the Charter assigns the primary
responsibility for international peace and security, to
better involve regional actors in its mission, but also to
thus strengthen the effectiveness of the peace efforts
that are the foundation of the Organization and that
bring us together today.

I simply wish to add that this effort for
cooperation and coordination should take place
especially in the field. Earlier I described situations
where the United Nations took action on the ground
alongside regional organizations and where they are
able to take action in the same country. That
coordination is not easy or automatic. I believe it
requires an effort on the part of both the United
Nations and regional organizations in order for that
developing coordination on the ground to go as well as
possible.

