The President: As this is the first formal meeting
of the Council for the month of March, I should like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute, on our collective
behalf, to Volodymyr Yelchenko and his excellent
team for their service in the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of February. I speak for all of
us, I am sure, in expressing our deep appreciation to
Volodymyr and his delegation for the great diplomatic
skill with which they conducted the Council's business
last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Security Council mission

Briefing by Security Council mission to the
Lake Chad basin region (2 to 7 March 2017)

The President: On behalf of the members of the
Security Council, I should like to pay a particularly
warm welcome to the Deputy Secretary-General,
Ms. Amina Mohammed, who is taking part in our
formal meeting today for the first time in her new
capacity. She is very, very welcome.

Also, as this is the first public meeting of our
presidency, I should like to remind Council members
and briefers that we will be using the red flashing
light system to encourage all speakers to keep to time.
When the light flashes, that is a sign to stop, not an
encouragement to keep going. For all Member States,
the light will begin to flash after five minutes, and for
today's briefers, the light will flash after 10 minutes.
For each meeting, we intend that the total amount of
briefing time should not exceed 30 minutes.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

At this meeting, the Security Council will
hear briefings by the three co-leads of the Security
Council mission to the countries of the Lake
Chad basin - Cameroon, Chad, the Niger and
Nigeria - namely, France, Senegal and the United
Kingdom. The Deputy Secretary-General will then
brief us on the actions that the United Nations is taking
to address the security, humanitarian and development
crises in the region.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United Kingdom on the Council's
visit.

As co-lead for the Council's visit to the Lake Chad
basin, I would like to focus my remarks this morning
on the security situation, and my colleagues the other
co-leads will tackle the other two big themes of our
visit, which is the humanitarian and the longer-term
development and root causes. But before I do so, I would
like to thank, on behalf of all of us, the Governments of
Cameroon, Chad, the Niger and Nigeria, as well as the
United Nations, for having made this visit possible. I
wish also to thank all Council members for making the
most of the visit and an ambitious programme and for
keeping up with it.

IfI had been talking to the Council about security
in the Lake Chad basin a week ago, I would have spoken
about the statistics - the numbers: 20,000 people
killed and 2.3 million currently displaced. What I could
not have done was tell Council members their stories,
the lives behind these numbers, the human cost of the
fragile security situation.

Last Friday, in Maroua, in northern Cameroon, with
my colleagues, I saw that cost in the eyes of a 15-year-
old boy whose village had been attacked by Boko
Haram. He hid for days before being interrogated and
imprisoned by the authorities for two years on suspicion
of being a member of Boko Haram. Most of his friends
had already been killed. I saw that cost in the eyes of
a woman crying with her baby in her arms. I saw it in
others who spoke of the murder of their husbands or
sons, the kidnapping of their daughters, the burning of
their homes. We heard from civil society how women
were selling their bodies for sex just to eat.

All these people brought home the horrifying
consequences of the chaos and insecurity wrought by
Boko Haram. I hope that together we brought some
much-needed focus to the suffering, which been
neglected for too long.

But amid the horror, we also heard of the bravery
and commitment of the people of the region as they try
to bring stability and security back to the Lake Chad
basin. We heard chapters from a success story on its
way to completion, and stories from the Multinational
Joint Task Force of liberating 20,000 hostages and
successfully winning back territory that will act as future
homes for the people of the region. But the story is not
over. Security is not yet entrenched; it is fragile in too

many places. Force commanders and generals outlined
continued attacks. Suicide bombings and improvised
explosive devices are still far too common. And Boko
Haram's tactics are getting more barbaric - mothers
turned into suicide bombers with infants strapped to
them in addition to their bombs. Boko Haram are down
but not out, but make no mistake - their cruelty knows
no bounds.

It was clear that international support remains
vital to this fight. We visited Operation Barkhane
headquarters in D'Jamena, where we met French
troops and were joined by members of the British and
American military. Together, they are supporting the
Multinational Joint Task Force, as well as the Nigerian
military, through capacity-building, training and
intelligence-sharing. We heard how further support
was needed to enable better mobility and logistics in
the fight.

Women's participation and protection were a
constant theme throughout the visit, and it was clear
that women must be more involved in efforts to
tackle Boko Haram, counter violent extremism and
build peace. We also heard of the hundreds of Boko
Haram defectors, including women and children. We
made clear the need for compliance with international
human rights and humanitarian law by all actors in
tackling the scourge of Boko Haram. That is essential
to preventing mistreatment, including of detainees, as
well as to building confidence among communities and
counter radicalization.

Let me close with this final reflection. Only
yesterday, here in New York, I met three inspirational
young women from Chibok who were attending an
International Women's Day event at the United Nations.
Far from being victims and far from being survivors,
those women are now campaigners for education for
women and girls in poverty. Despite everything they
had endured and despite being caught up in the hell
unleashed by Boko Haram, they are determined to
look to the future. They showed what lies ahead. They
showed a future that may be possible when the fighting
ends. To achieve that reality, it is clear that there can
be no military solution; only a comprehensive approach
will bring stability and peace. And so let me reiterate
that the United Kingdom will stand side by side with
the region, with the four Governments that we visited
and with the affected people in this effort.

I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of Senegal
to focus on the root causes and longer-term development.


