Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate you, Madam President, on the assumption
of the presidency of the Council for the month of
May and to thank you for convening this important
meeting to discuss a topic that is of great concern to the
international community.

Today, the international community clearly
views the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons (SALW) as a challenge that continues to
sustain conflict and to fuel terrorism, extremism and
illegal non-State armed groups, and to aid in human
trafficking and the trafficking of drugs. In that regard,
I take this opportunity to highlight the multiple dangers
associated with the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons to terrorist and extremist groups, especially
those operating in the Middle East and Africa.

We have all seen the gruesome effects of the
groups' activities in our region. In Egypt, we are
engaged in large-scale counter-terrorism operations in
the northern Sinai peninsula against terrorist groups
associated with Daesh, Al-Qaida and others. In Syria,
extremist and terrorist groups have taken large swathes
of the country, and the same has occurred in Iraq
and Libya. In Yemen, non-State actors, in defiance
of the international community, have obstructed the
political transition there by taking over cities and State
institutions. In Africa, we have seen increasingly bloody
and gruesome attacks by groups such as Boko Haram in
Nigeria and Al-Shabaab in Kenya and Somalia.

While the illicit trade in SALW is not the only
reason behind those terrorist activities, there is no doubt
that illicit trade has also been a massive enabling factor
contributing to the intensity of terrorist activities, to
the human and security costs to the affected countries,
and to the many destabilizing effects on international
peace and security. It is vital that the international
community undertake robust efforts to deal with the
threat of terrorism and the illicit proliferation of SALW
through, inter alia, the following measures.

First, there must be strict implementation of all
relevant Security Council sanctions aimed at combating
terrorism and preventing extremist and terrorist groups
and non-State actors from acquiring arms, including
SALW. In that regard, I emphasize the particular
importance of the implementation of resolutions 2214
(2015) regarding Libya and 2216 (2015) regarding
Yemen.

Secondly, attention should be given to the
implementation of the United Nations Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat, and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in SALW in All Its Aspects. Egypt is fully
committed to the effective implementation of the
Programme of Action, which we believe is the only
universal reference in that regard. Egypt has consistently
played an active role in furthering the full and effective
implementation of the Programme of Action, including
through assuming the role of facilitator for the review,
in two cycles, of the implementation of the International
Tracing Instrument.

Thirdly, we must consider increasing international
support to the States most affected by both terrorism
and the illicit trade of SALW. In that regard, it is
important to highlight that development efforts and
combatting the illicit proliferation of SALW go hand
in hand. Investment in development, post-conflict
rehabilitation, capacity-building and the establishment
of strong State institutions are all vital factors in
combating the spread of illicit SALW. Furthermore,
we believe that disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes should be an important
element in United Nations peacekeeping operations and
special political missions, especially in post-conflict
environments. That is vital to ensuring that SALW in
those areas do not contribute to conflict relapse, and
to preventing their transfer to other States, potentially
fuelling conflict elsewhere. Such assistance should
include the transfer of technology and the provision of
equipment under preferential and concessional terms
as an effective means to enhance the capability of
developing countries in combating the illicit trade in
SALW. The upcoming meetings of the Group of Experts
of the Programme next month, in June, will provide an
exceptional opportunity to develop concrete proposals
in support of developing countries.

Fourthly, we must provide support to Governments
engaged in the fight against terrorism and the illicit
trade in SALW. Governments remain the first line
of defence against those two closely related threats.
Hence, the international community must never allow
the Government ofa State facing those severe threats to
be in a position of disadvantage vis-a-vis terrorist and
criminal adversaries.

In conclusion, the threat posed by the illicit transfer
of SALW requires concerted action by the international
community, building on existing frameworks, such
as the relevant Security Council resolutions and the
Programme of Action, consistent with international law
and in accordance with our common responsibility to
combat terrorism, extremism and criminal activities in
all their shapes and forms.

