Mr. Mubari-Muita (Kenya): Thank you for
giving me the floor, Mr. President, and for convening
this important open debate on the agenda item on small
arms. We also welcome the report of the Secretary-
General containing his analysis, observations and
recommendations.

My delegation notes with great concern that the
ready availability and easy handling of small arms
continue to fuel conflicts and undermine development,
human rights and security in the world, particularly in
Africa. In the African continent small arms could be
said to be weapons of mass destruction, judging by the
number of deaths that they are directly and indirectly
responsible for.

The circulation of and trafficking in small arms
and light weapons in the Great Lakes region, the Horn
of Africa and all the neighbouring States have played a
significant role in undermining peace, intensifying
violence and crime and fuelling regional wars.
Consequently, all those factors have had harmful socio-
economic effects, especially given that security and
development are inextricably interlinked. Indeed, at
this rate it is little wonder that the African continent
may not achieve the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs), due in part to the challenges posed by the
problems associated with small arms.

As part of the programme to combat the menace
of small arms, the countries of the Great Lakes and the
Horn of Africa region issued the Nairobi Declaration in
the year 2000, thereby establishing the Secretariat on
Small Arms as a regional platform for containing the
problem of proliferation of small arms and light
weapons. In June 2005 the Third Ministerial Review
Conference of the Nairobi Declaration adopted an
agreement transforming the Secretariat into the
Regional Centre on Small Arms and Light Weapons
(RECSA).

RECSA has done considerable work in
coordinating and in assisting member States to
implement the United Nations Programme of Action on
Small Arms and Light Weapons and relevant
resolutions and instruments related to small arms and
light weapons. It has also been successful in
coordinating interaction with national focal points,
regional and international agencies, civil society and
research institutions, as well as in capacity-building
and information sharing. The political will, ownership
and partnership among member States have ensured
concrete and practical achievements towards the
Centre's noble objectives.

At the national level, the Kenya National Focal
Point on Small Arms and Light Weapons, which brings
together government and civil society, is operational,
with the assistance of RECSA. Its Secretariat has in the
last five years improved its capacity and expanded its
mandate to include peacebuilding, conflict
management and implementation of the Conflict Early
Warning Mechanism of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, well as promotion of
community-based policing.

At the global level, the international community
must agree on practical measures to control the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons, which
continue to cause the death and destabilization of
hundreds of thousands of civilians. As part of concrete
measures to combat the proliferation of small arms,
Kenya, with other like-minded countries, has been at
the forefront in supporting the resolution on the arms
trade treaty. We deem important that the international
community put in place a mechanism for responsible
trade in these weapons through a legally binding
instrument establishing international standards for the
import, export and transfer of small arms. Kenya is
convinced that an arms trade treaty is feasible and
timely. It is a matter of survival for the communities in
our part of the world, and thus I implore other Member
States to join in this noble cause.

Further, Kenya reaffirms its support for the
United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All its Aspects. In this
connection, we support the work of the Governmental
Group of Experts in their efforts to enhance
international cooperation in preventing, combating and
eradicating illicit brokering in small arms and light
weapons. Kenya urges other Member States to remain
actively engaged in efforts to combat the proliferation
of small arms and light weapons.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that in order to
address successfully the challenges posed by small
arms, a coordinated response at the global, regional,
national and local levels is required, and that all
delegations need to work together in a spirit of
cooperation. This is not an affront to international trade
in arms, but a question of being responsible traders and
consumers. The safety of communities in regions
awash with small arms is crucial, as is, ultimately, the
achievement of the internationally agreed objectives,
including the MDGs. Time is not on our side.
