Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): It is a great
honour for my delegation to take part in this open
debate. We express our deep appreciation for the
briefings on the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) and the Committees established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) and 1540 (2004).

Viet Nam denounces all acts of terrorism and
holds that the proliferation of nuclear, chemical,
biological and other weapons of mass destruction, as
well as their means of delivery, constitutes a severe
threat to international peace and security. We have, on
various occasions, highlighted the significance of
Security Council resolutions mandating the
establishment and operationalization of these
committees.

We commend the concerted efforts made by the
Committees in discharging their responsibilities, and
we acknowledge the fact that Member States and the
United Nations system continue to face the enormous
task of finding more effective and creative measures to
implement all Council resolutions relating to the fight
against international terrorism and the proliferation of
WMD.

My delegation takes note of the efforts made by
the 1267 Committee in completing, in February this
year, the revision of the guidelines for the conduct of
its work, which, hopefully, will provide the Committee
with a better tool in coordinating the implementation of
related Council resolutions. We encourage the CTC and
the 1540 Committee to engage in greater dialogue with
the donor community so as to find further ways and
means to assist Member States, especially the
developing countries, to fulfil their obligations under
the relevant Security Council resolutions.

As all the Committees undertake their assessment
and evaluation of implementation by Member States,
they should intensify dialogue with, and carry out more
on-site visits to, Member States, so as to reach shared
understandings on measuring standards as well as on
the requirements and the necessary steps to enhance
implementation.

In that context, my delegation wishes to inform
the Council of some of the recent efforts made by Viet
Nam to implement Security Council resolutions on
counter-terrorism.

Viet Nam is currently proceeding with domestic
legal procedures to accede to the 1979 International
Convention against the Taking of Hostages and the
1997 International Convention for the Suppression of
Terrorist Bombings. Accession to those two
conventions will make Viet Nam party to a total of 10
international treaties on counter-terrorism. In January
this year, Viet Nam joined other member States of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) in
signing the ASEAN Convention on Counter-Terrorism.
The ASEAN Convention inherits many characteristics
of other international and regional treaties on counter-
terrorism and imports some of the measures provided
under resolution 1373 (2001).

This week in Hanoi, the Government of Viet Nam
and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) are jointly organizing a national seminar on
strengthening national legislation on counter-terrorism.
The seminar will assess Viet Nam's present legal
framework for fighting terrorism, look into the
legislative experiences and practices of other countries
in the area of counter-terrorism, and come up with
recommendations to improve Vietnamese legislation in
that regard.

Following the five reports Viet Nam has submitted
to the CTC, the report submitted to the 1540 Committee
and the report submitted to the 1267 Committee on the
implementation of resolution 1455 (2003), our
Government will very soon submit its report on the
national implementation of resolution 1624 (2005). We
wish to avail ourselves of this opportunity to inform the
Council that we are now in close coordination with the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED)
concerning its scheduled visit to Viet Nam in late August.
We appreciate the CTED's coordination with experts from
other agencies in preparing for the visit.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Viet
Nam's strong commitment to cooperating with other
United Nations Member States, bodies and agencies in

the fight against terrorism. We wish to encourage the
Committees represented here today to continue their
good work.

