Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian delegation abstained in the voting
on resolution 2428 (2018), on extending the sanctions
on South Sudan. We are not trying to whitewash the
situation in the country. We know that various parties
continue to violate the ceasefire regime there and that
the humanitarian situation is still serious. However, it is
also clear that there has been some positive movement in
the settlement process. Besides the meetings that have
already taken place between the South Sudanese leaders
Salva Kiir Mayardit and Rick Machar, it includes the
signing on 27 June of the Khartoum Declaration and the
plans made for holding the long-awaited negotiations in
Nairobi in the very near future. In less than a month,
thanks entirely to the efforts of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), the format set up
for contact between South Sudan's politicians has been
transformed into a full-on negotiation platform before
our eyes. We agree with our Ethiopian colleague when
he said, "If that is not progress, then what is?" Can
those who genuinely care about seeing peace come to
this long-suffering country really believe otherwise?

In the circumstances, it would make sense to support
the approach of the African Union - the importance of
strengthening our partnership with which we will be
discussing in the Security Council next week - as well
as to express our solidarity with the mediation efforts
of IGAD, whose members, as we know, have declared
unequivocally that expanding the sanctions pressure
on South Sudan is highly inopportune. We regret
that today our Council has taken this disappointing
approach. Instead of listening to the regional position,
our colleagues mindlessly brandished the sanctions
stick. We believe firmly that imposing sanctions on
active participants in the political process or members
of the Government is counterproductive. Nor will an
arms embargo have a positive effect on the political
settlement process. To hear our American colleagues,
one might conclude that the embargo is a panacea for
almost all ills.

We all know perfectly well that South Sudan is
indeed flooded with weapons, but attempts to restrict
the supply should not be directed only at Government
forces. The experience of the neighbouring countries
in the region shows that it is not embargoes that bring
about an end to armed violence but systematic efforts
to reform security structures, the implementation of
weapons-collection programmes from the people, and
the disarming and demobilizing of combatants.

Lastly, I should not omit to say that we have
increasing questions about the working methods of the
penholders, thanks to whose efforts the deep split in
the Council over the South Sudan dossier continues.
Such actions can hardly contribute to strengthening
the authority of the Council or of the United Nations
generally, a subject that those who supported today's
resolution claim to care so much about. As we can see,
their actions prove the opposite. As for Russia, we did
not support and will not support a policy of imposing
decisions on independent countries and regions that suit
forces outside the region for domestic political or other
reasons. It is to be hoped that despite today's destructive
step, the fragile process of establishing a constructive
dialogue between the parties in South Sudan will not
be undermined, and that IGAD's mediation efforts
will continue.

