The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make a statement in my capacity as representative of the Russian Federation. We thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix and Special Envoy Parfait Onanga-Anyanga for their detailed briefings. We are pleased that the gradual improvement in bilateral relations between Khartoum and Juba. The mediation efforts of the South Sudanese authorities, specifically those of President Salva Kiir, in the conduct of negotiations between the Government of the Sudan and opposition groups led to the signing, on 3 October, of peace accords. This stands as a further testament to the effectiveness of the formula "African solutions to African problems". We hope that, in resolving the Abyei question, the parties will be guided by that very same principle. We welcome the gestures made by both capitals to signal their readiness to generate new momentum in contacts between their Governments, including on Abyei. We hope that the African Union High-level Implementation Panel will continue working with the Sudanese sides. We value the efforts of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) in the establishment of constructive relations with local communities. At the same time, it is worth bearing in mind that for a number of years already there has been considerable friction between the communities. Our hope is that the Blue Helmets will pursue their efforts towards the advancement of national reconciliation. We believe that the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism (JBVMM) is an integral component of the mechanism for the prevention of incidents between the parties; support for the JBVMM by UNISFA plays an important role in terms of the entire subregional security architecture. We have taken note of what the Secretary- General set out in his most recent report (S/2020/1019) with respect to the reasons for a certain degree of inertia in the mediation efforts of UNISFA and the implementation of the JBVMM benchmarks, which have been linked largely to the coronavirus disease restrictions. We appreciate those difficulties and are confident that the efforts will be revitalized as soon as the situation allows. In that connection, we support the recommendation of the Secretary-General to extend the mandate of UNISFA, including support for the JBVMM, for a period of six months. At the same time, we trust that consideration of the proposal of the Secretariat on the civilian component of the mission should be done in a way that reflects the opinions of Khartoum and Juba, as stipulated in the core principles of peacekeeping. I now resume my functions as President of the Security Council. I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.
