Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful for the convening of this meeting, and we thank
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix for the important information
he has provided. We also welcome Ambassador Issa
Konfourou, Permanent Representative of Mali.

We would like, through him, to congratulate the
people and Government of Mali on the holding of their
presidential elections in a peaceful manner, despite the
complicated security situation. We think it is important
for it to be able to lead to greater stability and dialogue
between the political parties in order to more effectively
address the serious challenges facing the country.

We also wish to highlight the support of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and the work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
as well as the role played by the African Union, the
Economic Community of West African States and other
international actors, such as France. In this new phase,
we wish to renew our support for the full implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.

In particular, we underline the importance of the
progress made in the appointment of interim authorities
in the north of the country, the adoption of the national
security sector reform strategy, and the gradual
operationalization of mixed units of the Operational
Coordination Mechanism in Kidal and Timbuktu. We
also highlight the recent signing of the pact for peace,
in accordance with resolution 2423 (2018). We hope that
it will help revitalize and accelerate the implementation
ofthe peace agreement and contribute to the stability of
the country.

We note with concern the continuing deterioration
of the humanitarian and security situation in Mali,
particularly in the centre of the country, as well as
the alarming number of cases of murder, kidnapping,
intimidation and sexual and gender-based violence.
Greater State presence must be projected throughout
the territory in order to promote the rule of law, combat
terrorist groups and put an end to clashes between
armed groups. In that connection, we highlight three
items to prioritize in order to achieve sustainable peace
in Mali.

First, the signatory parties to the peace agreement
must work to reconstitute and redeploy Mali's defence
and security forces and territorial police. That is urgent
in order to lay the foundation for stability and civilian
protection in the country.

Secondly, there is a need to combat impunity
and ensure accountability for serious human rights
violations committed by armed groups and by Malian
law enforcement and security forces. It is essential that
the judicial system be able to investigate and process
complaints in a comprehensive and timely manner.

Thirdly, the root causes ofconflict mustbe addressed
in order to build a peaceful and inclusive society, in line
with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
The economic growth of recent years is important, but
it is also crucial to increase the budget for education
and employment opportunities, particularly for young
people, and to ensure the full participation of women.
In that regard, we highlight the efforts of the Malian
Government in preparing a new strategic framework
for economic recovery and sustainable development.

In conclusion, we wish to acknowledge the work
of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
to strengthen the regional response to scourges such
as terrorism and transnational organized crime, as
well as the key role of MINUSMA in a particularly
complex environment.

