Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium): I
would first like to thank Special Representative
Leila Zerrougui, Mr. Nangaa Yobeluo, representing
the Commission electorale nationale independante,
Ms. Mohammed, the Permanent Observer of the
African Union (AU), Mr. Malanji, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Zambia, representing the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) and Monseigneur
Utembi, representing the Conference episcopale
nationale du Congo (CENCO).

I would like to focus my statement this morning on
three key points.

First, Belgium is and will remain a staunch partner
of the Congolese people, in a spirit of solidarity with
them. Since November 2016 and the signing of the
Saint-Sylvestre agreement of 31 December 2016, the
entire Congolese people, from the Atlantic coast to
Virunga, from Gbadolite to Lubumbashi, had been
awaiting the holding of inclusive, transparent, credible
and peaceful elections. The holding of such elections
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo was crucial,
as this represents an important stage in the process
of peacebuilding and promoting security and lasting,
inclusive development not only in the country, but also
in the broader region. The elections promised to be a
historic opportunity for the peaceful handover of power
for the first time in the country's history.

Despite the many shortcomings that marred the
inclusive, equitable and transparent character of the
presidential, legislative and provincial elections of
30 December 2018, the high rate of turnout of the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the
elections reflected their unshakeable determination
to ensure that their voice was heard. They sometimes
used creative means to that end, including in Beni and
Butembo, where the elections were postponed. We hail
this democratic commitment on the part of the people
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, who voted in
an atmosphere of calm. The voice of an entire people
must be heard and respected.

Secondly, we have taken note of the provisional
outcomes announced by the Commission electorale
nationale independante on 10 January. Together with
our international partners, we are awaiting clarification
on questions that have been raised by some segments
of the opposition and civil society concerning the vote
count. Electoral transparency is therefore vital.

A milestone was reached with the announcement of
the provisional outcome. It now falls to stakeholders in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in the region,
who have followed the elections closely, to speak up
and to indicate whether the results reported reflect
what was observed and if the count was done correctly.

We commend the work done by the observation
missions dispatched by regional organizations, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, the
Southern African Development Community (SADC),
the African Union (AU) and Congolese civil society.
Belgium has already echoed the various appeals made,
particularly that of the AU electoral observation mission
and the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
calling for official results to accord with the votes cast
by the Congolese people.

Against that backdrop, we have taken note of the
statement issued on 10 January by the Conference
episcopale nationale du Congo (CENCO), which
monitored the electoral process through a mass
deployment of observers across the country, to the
effect that the data collected by its observation
mission at polling stations and counting offices did not
correspond with the data compiled by the Independent
National Election Commission. This morning we heard
Monseigneur Utembi reiterate this observation.

This message is of importance. In order to
guarantee that the democratic choice of the people of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is respected,
a discussion based on facts and figures is crucial.
Transparency could provide answers to the questions
that have been raised from certain quarters and at the
same time set minds at ease and forestall any violence.

We thus encourage CENCO to share its findings
and figures. The Commission should publish the
results, disaggregated by polling station, as well as the
minutes of each local counting centre, and, ideally, also
provide neutral observers access to the central server,
in keeping with the electoral law. Mr. Nangaa Yobeluo
spoke of a climate of total mistrust, and I think that,
against that backdrop, it is all the more important to
ensure the maximum degree of transparency.

The parties also have the option of requesting a
recount. We would suggest that national observation
missions as well as those of the AU and SADC continue
with their work during this crucial stage.

We deplore also the fact that the elections took place
in an atmosphere in which public space was clamped
down on, which does not promote transparency. During
the campaign we heard appeals for greater openness;
it is regrettable that they have not yet been heeded.
We therefore remain deeply concerned by the repeated
interruptions of Internet capabilities and other means
of communication, as well as by the decision of the
Congolese authorities to withdraw the reporting permit
previously granted to Radio France Internationale.

The Security Council must remain attentive to the
remarkable people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, who, calmly but with determination, continue
to insist that their voice be heard so as to claim their
right to vote and to a better future. We must remain
attentive also to civil-society organizations and to those
that have since the very outset supported the electoral
process, such as CENCO - a key player in the context
of the 2016 Saint-Sylvestre agreement, which created
the framework within which the long-awaited elections
were finally able to take place.

Let us also remain attentive to the countries of the
region, which, through their political commitment,
have expressed their determination to uphold regional
peace and stability, and which might need our support
in the days and weeks to come.
The current situation is tense, and there is a
palpable atmosphere of confrontation. Belgium joins
the call of the Secretary-General and the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission on the main players
to refrain from acts of violence and to resolve any
electoral dispute through the institutional mechanisms
established under the Constitution of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in line with the relevant
electoral legislation.

Thirdly, today's briefings should not obscure the
other ongoing challenges facing the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, most of which are
listed in the most recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/6). They include the fight against armed groups,
myriad humanitarian challenges, the fight against
impunity, health challenges such as Ebola and cholera,
and the fight against the illegal exploitation of natural
resources. The challenges are many, and Belgium will
remain committed to helping the Congolese people
overcome them.

The United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) is mandated to ensure the protection
of civilians and to support the implementation of the
31 December 2016 agreement and the electoral process.
We encourage MONUSCO to fully play that role in
the evolving context in the country. Given the very
high level of political tension and the increase in the
activities of armed groups, we must all be alive to our
responsibility, as members of the Security Council, to
ensure that MONUSCO can fully play the role conferred
upon it.

