Mr. Djani (Indonesia): We would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate on
a very important topic. We also would like to thank the
Secretary-General and the Commissioner for Peace and
Security of the African Union for their briefings.

Indonesia associates itself with the statement to be
made by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement.

Indonesia has been with Africa since the beginning.
Since the Asian-African Conference in Bandung held
over six decades ago in 1955, Indonesia and Africa have
been together to achieve equality among all nations
and spur independence. With a strong sense of global
morality and ethics, Indonesia and Africa have worked
hard to establish higher ideals within their countries,
as well as to strengthen historic bonds between them.

As a follow-up, with South Africa, Indonesia
initiated the New Asian-African Strategic Partnership
in 2005 to accelerate cooperation in politics, the
economy and socio-culture. This cooperation was
reinforced in 2015, and it is being implemented through
many multi-faceted bilateral support projects in both
Indonesia and Africa. At the same time, we are also
undertaking South-South and triangular cooperation
as platforms to promote cooperation particularly in the
area of capacity-building and technical cooperation.

We are clear that African development must take
place without causing any harm to Africa. Guided
by that, Indonesia will focus even more on Africa to
realize mutually beneficial outcomes in economic
development. Nationally, as well as through the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations, we are ready
to play a greater role to help sustain peace efforts in
Africa. This is in addition to our contribution to United
Nations peacekeeping in Africa, where almost 2,000
Indonesian peacekeeping troops and police are already
participating in eight United Nations peacekeeping
operations there.

Indeed, many African countries confront serious
peace, security and governance issues. We commend
the increasingly important role of the African Union
as a strong and principled force for dialogue, peaceful
conflict resolution and cordial relations among African
countries. Indonesia fully supports the AU Agenda
2063 with its key pillars of a conflict-free Africa, as
well as the five thematic priorities of the African Union
road map (2016-2020). The commitment by African
leaders to finance 25 per cent of the cost of AU peace
support operations is another concrete sign of their
determination to build sustainable peace.

Yet the challenges - ranging from counter-
terrorism, peacebuilding, sustaining peace and political
processes to poverty, climate change, capacity-building
and governance - cannot all be met properly without
adequate and predictable financing, hence the need for
international cooperation. Today's question of how to
enhance peace and security capacities of Africa cannot
be answered without spelling out how the needed
financial and political support will be provided.

Indonesia is therefore pleased that resolution 2320
(2016) and the subsequent report of the Secretary-
General (S/2017/454) on options for authorization
and support for AU peace support operations have
underlined, among others, adequate and predictable
finances. Responding to the proposals by the High
Representative for the AU Peace Fund, the report
of the Secretary-General points to five financing
models and various decision-making options to
support AU-initiated peace support operations. The
report also recognizes rightly that each situation may
warrant its own particular solution. It is important
now that the report be examined by the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, along with
the Fifth Committee and the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, so that the
General Assembly can offer a comprehensive response.

Indonesia stands fully behind the Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security, which was signed
in April. It is vital that all United Nations entities,
along with Member States, play their role to help
make it a success. Just as ownership, collaboration
and cooperation by all national and relevant external
stakeholders are essential for the success of sustaining
peace in a country, all United Nations and relevant
non-United Nations actors must develop synergies
around the three United Nations pillars in order to keep
the promise to Africa.

For its part, Indonesia will continue to work actively
in all United Nations and non-United Nations forums
to ensure that robust support is extended to Africa.
As an example of that work, in the recent Group of 20
forum in Hamburg, Germany, President Widodo stated
that Indonesia will host the Indonesia-Africa Forum in
2018 as a platform to promote equal partnership and
greater cooperation with Africa. Indonesia's President's
statement is clear: "Africa, you will never walk alone
and we shall move forward with Africa".

