Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan): At the outset, I
would like to express our gratitude to you,
Mr. President, for convening this important debate on
the agenda item entitled "Children and armed conflict".
Today's consideration of this issue is not especially
new, but it confirms the readiness of all Member States
to continue work in that direction in accordance with
resolution 1612 (2005) and the Secretary-General's
report (S/2007/757).

We would also like to commend Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
and her Office, as well as UNICEF, for their efforts to
overcome this modern challenge to humankind. Our
delegation fully shares the view that the protection of
children in armed conflict should be considered as a
significant aspect of the strategy to prevent and resolve
armed conflict.

The report of the Secretary-General highlights the
progress made in the implementation of resolution
2

1612 (2005) and its monitoring and reporting
mechanism, including compliance with regard to
ending the recruitment and use of children by armed
groups in a number of countries. In that context, it
seems encouraging to note that since the last report the
number of child soldiers has decreased from 300,000 to
250,000. However, as duly mentioned in the Secretary-
General's report, much work remains to be done by the
international community. In particular, the recruitment
and use of children in armed conflicts is still
continuing in 13 countries. Children are forced to take
part in combat operations and in killing people. Often,
they are themselves also sexually abused, kidnapped or
killed.

It is appalling to realize that for decades in
conflict zones children have been involved in
confrontations between different militant groups,
lacking access to all the elements of normal life that
most children around the world enjoy. Whole
generations of such children have faced nothing but
violence, hostility, abuse, poverty and illiteracy.

In order to put an end to the suffering and the
abuse of children, we have to focus our attention on
minimizing the negative consequences of being a child
in a zone of conflict, including by countering the six
grave violations identified by the Security Council. We
believe that the crucial task for all Member States
should be to take effective measures to bring to
account those who perpetrate grave violations against
children. To achieve those goals, there is a real legal
basis for further action in the form of criminal
prosecution and punishment. An effective mechanism
should be established to ensure compliance with the
main provisions of the conventions and protocols
pertaining to the child.

I would like to emphasize that Kazakhstan
ratified the relevant Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child five years ago.
In doing so, we reaffirmed our strong commitment to
international efforts to protect the rights of children
affected by armed conflict worldwide.

We entirely support the proposal to adopt targeted
measures against groups and persons who involve
children in armed conflicts. We also support the
Security Council's referral of such cases to the
International Criminal Court for investigation and
prosecution. In that connection, we believe that further
toughening punishment measures and increasing
08-23756
awareness about particular cases at the local, regional
and global levels would have a significant effect.

Due to the vulnerability of children and the
possibility that they will be re-recruited in the
aftermath of conflicts, more support is also needed as
regards the reintegration and rehabilitation of children
who have been associated with armed groups and
involved in war zones.

We also believe that a great deal must be done to
avoid setting the precedent of prosecuting children for
crimes committed as soldiers, as they must be
considered to be victims of the actions of adults and
must be provided with social protection in the
framework of juvenile justice.

The future of our children who are involved in
armed conflicts against their will cannot be ignored; it
mostly depends on how we react and address these
challenges today. The issue of protecting children in
armed conflicts should be one of the main priorities on
the agenda of the Security Council, and we are
confident that the current discussions will greatly
contribute to that process. Let us truly move from
words to effective actions.

