Mr. Chambas: I am honoured to be here today
to introduce the Secretary-General's latest report
(8/2018/1175) on the activities of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS).

Since my last briefing (see S/PV.8313), further
progress has been made in democratic consolidation in
West Africa and the Sahel, despite persisting security
challenges. In the Lake Chad basin, Boko Haram
attacks over the past months, notably against military
installations, have increased. During the last week of
December alone, Boko Haram launched three separate
attacks on army bases in Borno and Yobe states of
Nigeria, killing numerous soldiers, police personnel
and civilians, and seizing equipment and weapons.
Violent clashes between farmers and herders are also
continuing, although on a lesser scale, thankfully, than
in the first half of 2018.

The security situation also remains volatile in
the Sahel. In Burkina Faso, a state of emergency has
been declared in 7 of the country's 13 regions in the
north, west and east, against a backdrop ofa significant
rise in security incidents. Despite mass mobilization,
defence and security forces in the Niger continue to
face challenges in the west and south. Increased attacks
and kidnappings by extremist groups are heightening
security risks in the Niger, Benin and Togo. Rising
insecurity has placed a heavy burden on Governments
of the region against the backdrop of high population
growth and worsening youth unemployment. Economic
austerity measures, including the elimination of
subsidies on basic items in some countries have also
heightened social tensions.

In its efforts to advance the long-term stabilization
goals of the region, UNOWAS continues to work
closely with regional partners, including the Economic
Community of West African States, the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-S Sahel) and the Lake Chad Basin
Commission (LCBC), including within the framework
of the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.

Laudable progress has been made in the
implementation of resolution 2349 (2017) to support a
regional response to the crisis in the Lake Chad basin.
On 30 August, the LCBC Council of Ministers adopted
a regional strategy for the stabilization, recovery and
resilience ofthe Boko Haram-affected areas ofthe Lake
Chad basin region. The meeting took place before the
high-level conference on the Lake Chad region, which
was held on 3 and 4 September in Berlin, during which
partners pledged over $2 billion to help meet the needs
of the more than 17 million people affected by the crisis.

However, more support is needed to advance
the stabilization efforts in the Sahel, and I commend
partners for the commitment to providing $2.4 billion
to finance the Priority Investment Programme of
the G-5 Sahel, which was presented on 6 December
in Nouakchott. I urge Governments and partners to
ensure the rapid implementation of those much-needed
medium- and long-term stabilization measures, as
well as the speedy disbursement of funds to respond
to the urgent needs on the ground, thereby fostering
stabilization, recovery and development.

I also commend the holding of the joint summit
of Heads of State of the Economic Community of
Central African States and the Economic Community
of West African States, on 30 July 2018 in Lorne, as
an important step towards addressing cross-border
threats facing West and Central Africa. As one of
the key outcomes of the summit, Heads of State and
Government affirmed their readiness to enhance
interregional collaboration to jointly address threats to
peace and security, including from Violent extremism.
They also committed to holding regular meetings to
identify measures for the prevention and peaceful
management of farmer-herder conflicts.

In the past six months, presidential elections
were successfully organized in Mali; regional and
parliamentary elections in Mauritania and Togo,
respectively; and local elections in Cote d'Ivoire.
However, despite appreciable progress in democratic
consolidation in the region, there is a need for continuous
efforts to address contentious issues around elections in
order to prevent and mitigate election-related violence,
as well as to support inclusive dialogue as a key attribute
of inclusive societies. This is even more important as,
over the next six months, the region will see several
high-stake elections in Nigeria, Senegal, Mauritania
and Benin.

In Nigeria, tensions are high ahead of the
presidential and parliamentary elections of 16 February
and the gubernatorial and state assembly elections
of 2 March. However, the prospects for peaceful and
credible elections have increased following the signing
of the national peace accord in Abuja on 11 December.
Over the coming weeks, I will continue to engage
actively with all stakeholders in Nigeria, in particular
the National Peace Committee, including through the
organization of peace forums in a number of key states,
such as Benue, Rivers, Kaduna and Kano. Indeed, a few
more may be included.

Several countries of the region also continue to
struggle withjustice and human rights challenges. I am
particularly concerned about the allegations of human
rights violations by security forces, as well as the
increasing re-emergence of self-defence groups, Whose
actions have been fuelling intercommunal tensions
in some countries. While security operations must
be carried out in full compliance with international
humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law,
non-State actors also need to be held accountable for
any crimes committed.

As reaffirmed in the recently concludedjoint United
Nations-World Bank study entitled Pathways for Peace:
Inclusive Approaches to Preventing Violent Conflict,
women's marginalization continues to be a cause and
consequence of instability and conflict. During the
annual review of progress made in West Africa and
the Sahel concerning the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, the
discrimination against and marginalization of women
from political processes was once more highlighted.
During the event, which took place on 26 November in
Praia, Cabo Verde, it was noted that women comprised
fewer than 15 per cent of parliamentarians, for example,
in several countries of the region. My Office will
continue to work with all regional actors to strengthen
the role of women in the region.

The next cycle of elections in the region will be a
litmus test for the consolidation of democratic gains.
Ensuring an enabling environment for the full respect
of human rights will be key to the success of these
elections and to safeguarding stability in the region.
Furthermore, preparing the ground for elections through
support for inclusive dialogue and national conflict-
prevention capabilities will continue to constitute a
priority for the region and my Office.

The rising number of attacks and the increasing
sophistication in the tactics deployed by extremist
groups risk undermining our collective efforts in the
region. Military solutions, while necessary, are not
sufficient. I encourage all actors to ensure holistic
responses grounded in respect for human rights and the
socioeconomic needs of the population in the affected
areas. Through inclusive approaches predicated on
national ownership, we must continue to work hard
to address the governance deficits, extreme poverty
and lack of development that feed and sustain armed
violence and extremism.

In conclusion, let me assure the Council of the
continued commitment of UNOWAS to working with
all stakeholders in the region to promote peace and
stability in West Africa and the Sahel. I trust that we
can continue to rely on the support of the Council.

