Mr. Guillermet (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Like other delegations, I should like to thank Mr. Eide
for introducing the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/475) and to take this opportunity to
congratulate him and the entire staff of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
on the excellent work accomplished on the ground. I
also thank Mr. Spanta, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan, for his statement today and the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Turkey for his participation in
this important debate.

Costa Rica recognizes the great challenges
involved in the electoral process and the merits of
holding elections in Afghanistan. Undoubtedly, the
very fact that they were held was a genuine success.
That said, the prolonged wait for definitive results
jeopardizes the progress that has been made. That is
why we urge the swift and transparent conclusion of
the recount process in accordance with the relevant
legal procedures.

The number of complaints submitted to the
Electoral Complaints Commission is alarming and
gives rise to concern that the electoral process has not
been seen as fair and lacks legitimacy. That will have
adverse consequences for the consolidation of
democracy, security and peace for the Afghan people.

The international community must remain
committed to fair and transparent electoral processes as
a way to express unequivocal support for the Afghan
people in electing their authorities and determining
their own destiny. We hope that the lessons learned
from this process will serve to improve the planning
and holding of the 2010 parliamentary elections. This
experience should be utilized to ensure greater
legitimacy in future elections and to strengthen nascent
democratic institutions. The valuable lessons that can
be learned from this experience will undoubtedly
contribute to the future sustainability of the Afghan
State.

In the area of human rights, our country deplores
the increase in the number of threats and attacks
against women participating in public life, as well as
the continuing sexual abuse to which women and
children are very often subjected. In that context, we
recognize the signing of the law on the elimination of
violence against women as significant progress towards
gender equality and a promising step in the protection
of women and children against violence.

The recent adoption of the Shia Personal Status
law, which we believe discriminates against a minority,
is grounds for concern, as it legalizes practices that run
counter to women's rights established under the
Constitution and international treaties to which
Afghanistan is party, as indicated in paragraph 51 of
the Secretary-General's report. It is therefore necessary
to call on the authorities to respect the Constitution and
to honour their international obligations with regard to
the protection of women.

During the process of adopting resolution 1868
(2009) extending the mandate of UNAMA, Costa Rica
spoke in favour of including explicit provisions to
ensure that all parties comply with the provisions of
international humanitarian and human rights law in
order to safeguard the well-being of the civilian
population. It is thus crucial that measures be
implemented to protect civilians.

We agree that there is a need to adopt a broad
approach recognizing that the way to guarantee
stability in Afghanistan is not exclusively military. In
that regard, we welcome the new approach adopted by
the military forces on the ground, which will
henceforth focus their attention on protecting the
civilian population, as opposed to attacking insurgents,
according to the report before us today.

While there has been a shift in the military
approach to the situation, we are concerned by the high
rate of civilian casualties. As indicated in paragraph 54
of the Secretary-General's report, a significant
percentage of those casualties were caused by
pro-Government forces. We also regret the ongoing
attacks on humanitarian personnel, who have been
subject to acts of intimidation, burglary, abduction and
assassination, which impede access to humanitarian
assistance to those who most need it. We call on the
new Government of Afghanistan to make security
priorities on its agenda, and to take firm steps in favour
of long-term stability and improved conditions for the
sustainable development of the country.

My country is grateful for the work undertaken
by all the personnel of UNAMA, and recognizes their
valiant efforts to promote peace and stability in
Afghanistan. We wish in particular to acknowledge
UNAMA's recent efforts during the presidential and
Provincial Council elections. Costa Rica reaffirms its
support for the work of UNAMA and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.

Finally, I, too, wish to thank Norma Chan for her
commitment and professionalism throughout her long
career at the United Nations. On behalf of the
delegation of Costa Rica, I wish her a long life and
great happiness in her retirement.

