Mr. Moreno-Ocampo: I thank the Security
Council for the opportunity to report on the activities
undertaken by the Office of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court since the last briefing (see S/PV. 6230)

I will first provide a summary of the cases
investigated since the Security Council referred the
situation to the International Criminal Court. My
mandate is to end impunity for the most serious crimes,
in order to contribute to the prevention of future
crimes. We conducted three investigations on the
Darfur situation.

In our first case, we investigated a consistent
pattern of attacks against the civilian population during
the period of 2003 to 2005. Sudanese armed forces
would bomb villages in Darfur and surround them, and
then ground troops would move in to kill, rape and
pillage civilians in their homes. Those attacks forced
2
the displacement of a million civilians to a hostile
environment.

The evidence showed the role of the then
Minister of State for the Interior, Ahmad Harun, as
coordinator of the Government of the Sudan forces,
including recruiting into and the financing of the
militia/Janjaweed in the Popular Defence Forces. An
arrest warrant was also issued against a militia/
Janjaweed leader, Ali Kushayb.

On 27 April 2007, Pre-Trial Chamber I issued
arrest warrants against both individuals for war crimes
and crimes against humanity. This is the case that is
referred to in the note verbale (S/2010/265, annex), on
which the judges made their decision about the lack of
cooperation by the Republic of the Sudan.

In our second case, we investigated the
continuous involvement of the entire Sudanese State
apparatus in the attacks on the Villages and,
additionally, a different pattern of crimes committed
against displaced persons. Such attacks are calculated
to drive entire groups to inhospitable areas, where they
die immediately, or into camps, where they die slowly.

On 4 March 2009, Pre-Trial Chamber I issued an
arrest warrant against President Omer Al-Bashir for
war crimes and crimes against humanity, including the
crimes of extermination and rape. The judges found
that the obstruction of humanitarian assistance in
Darfur is more than a bureaucratic problem. It
constitutes the crime of extermination. After forcing
civilians out of their homes, Sudanese forces would
deny any meaningful assistance to those who reached
the camps for the internally displaced, forcing the
United Nations and others to set up the largest
humanitarian operation in the world, and yet
obstructing their life-saving efforts every step of the
way.

I must be clear: the crime of extermination does
not require killing by bullets. It consists of
intentionally inflicting conditions of life - inter alia,
the deprivation of access to food and medicine -
calculated to bring about the destruction of part of a
population. That is extermination.

In our third case, we are prosecuting the three
commanders of the rebel group that attacked
peacekeepers in an event that took place in Haskanita
in September 2007, causing the deaths of 12 African
Union peacekeepers and leaving thousands of people
10-40120
without protection. The Judges have found that the
attack constituted a crime under the Statute; however,
they found the evidence insufficient to establish the
criminal responsibility of rebel commander Abu Garda.
The Office will therefore present additional evidence.
We anticipate that a new confirmation hearing will then
be held in the near future. These are the persons
identified as most responsible for the most serious
crimes committed in Darfur over the past six years.
There is no other case at this stage.

Let me now turn to the main point of my briefing
today - cooperation. In the past, the Government of
the Sudan recognized the role of the International
Criminal Court and provided cooperation in other cases
before the Court, including for the execution of arrest
warrants. On 2 October 2005, the Government of the
Sudan, without this Council's involvement, signed an
agreement with my Office to implement the arrest
warrants issued by the ICC against Joseph Kony and
four leaders of the Lord's Resistance Army. This
cooperation was of critical importance to removing the
leaders of the Lord's Resistance Army from their safe
haven in the Sudan.

In the Darfur case, cooperation was forthcoming
for two years. Judicial records and other documents
were shared under article 53 of the Rome Statute,
Sudanese officials were interviewed in Khartoum,
including as suspects under article 55, and five
missions were undertaken to Khartoum, the last in
January and February 2007. In June 2007, the
Government of the Sudan accepted the notification of
the arrest warrants against Harun and Kushayb. Since
then, however, there has been a public and consistent
refusal to cooperate with the Court and to comply with
resolution 1593 (2005).

Therefore, on 25 May 2010, the Pre-Trial
Chamber issued its decision informing the Security
Council about the lack of cooperation by the Republic
of the Sudan. In the decision, the Pre-Trial Chamber
considers that the Court has taken all possible
measures to ensure the cooperation of the Republic of
the Sudan. The decision stresses that the obligation of
the Republic of the Sudan to cooperate with the Court
stems directly from the Charter of the United Nations
and resolution 1593 (2005). The Chamber concludes
that the Republic of the Sudan is failing to comply with
its cooperation obligations stemming from resolution
1593 (2005) in relation to the enforcement of the
10-40120
warrants of arrest issued by the Chamber against
Ahmad Harun and Ali Kushayb.

Under resolution 1593 (2005), the Security
Council decided that the "Government of the Sudan
and all other parties to the conflict in Darfur shall
cooperate fully and provide any necessary assistance to
the Court and the Prosecutor". The Government of the
Sudan, a sovereign territorial State, has the primary
responsibility and is fully able to implement the
warrants issued by the Court. It has not done so, and
the Judges have taken the step to make a decision and
notify it to this Council.

While cooperation from the Sudan is lacking, it is
noteworthy that, from all other actors, cooperation is
forthcoming. There are 111 States parties to the Rome
Statute with a legal obligation to enforce the Court's
arrest warrants. Additionally, the Security Council has
urged all United Nations Members to cooperate with
the Court. I wish to confirm that, as of today, no other
State Member of the United Nations and no other party
to the conflict has refused cooperation with the Court
in the Darfur situation. To the contrary, many States,
including non-States parties to the Rome Statute,
following up on resolution 1593 (2005), have taken
steps within their power to encourage cooperation by
the Sudan and to isolate and ultimately facilitate the
surrender of the individuals sought by the Court. They
have maintained and expressed public and diplomatic
support for the Court and have severed all
non-essential contacts with those subject to ICC
warrants.

Let me give a few recent examples. President
Jacob Zuma of South Africa emphasized on 4 June
2010 that South Africa would arrest anyone under an
ICC arrest warrant who travelled to South Africa. This
was a strong message of respect for resolution 1593
(2005) and of support for accountability. President
Nicolas Sarkozy took the unprecedented decision to
move the date and location of the twenty-fifth France-
Africa Summit to avoid meeting with a person who is
the object of an arrest warrant. This was a strong
message of respect for resolution 1593 (2005) and of
support for accountability. President Yoweri Museveni
recalled that he would abide by his ICC obligations
should President Omar Al-Bashir attempt to represent
the Sudan at the next African Union Summit in
Kampala. Kenya, on the occasion of the summit of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development held in
March in Nairobi, stated the same.
3

Non-States parties have also asserted that those
subject to an arrest warrant would need to face justice.
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has repeatedly
reiterated the need to comply with resolution 1593
(2005) and to respect the decisions of the Court. The
African Union and the League of Arab States, in
addition to the United Nations and other international
actors, have endeavoured for years to help to end
impunity in Darfur. The implementation of the Mbeki
Panel recommendations and the July 2008 Arab League
solution package would be important steps towards
ending crimes in Darfur.

In a statement on 23 March 2010, President
Mbeki, as the head of the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel, said, "there is a perfect
understanding between the Panel and the International
Criminal Court". President Mbeki explained that the
arrest warrants issued by the Court are a matter of fact
and can be reviewed only by the ICC Judges, but he
added that the rest of the crimes committed in Darfur
should be addressed by the Sudan domestically, and the
African Union Panel has formulated recommendations
in this regard.

All such complementary efforts show compliance
with the Security Council's resolution and the Court's
decision. Today, the Security Council has the
opportunity to further this collective effort. The
Council already reminded the Government of the
Sudan of its obligation to respect resolution 1593
(2005) during its visit to Khartoum from 16 to 17 June
2007.

The Security Council also, in adopting
presidential statement S/PRST/2008/2l, referred
explicitly to the transmission of the arrest warrants
against Harun and Kushayb, and urged the Sudan to
cooperate fully and to provide any necessary
assistance. I hope that the Security Council can build
further upon such efforts.

I should like to brief the Council on the alleged
crimes committed during the past six months. I would
have liked to report that the conditions in Darfur had
improved and that crimes had stopped. Sadly, the truth
is that attacks against civilians not participating in the
conflict continue.

In February, immediately after the signing of a
peace agreement and a public commitment to peace,
100,000 civilians were forcibly displaced by Sudanese
armed forces in the Jebel Marra. The modus operandi
was the same as the one used by Ahmad Harun from
2003 to 2005 - air bombardments followed by attacks
by the Sudanese armed forces integrating with
militia/Janjaweed. It was identical.

Sadly, the crime of extermination against the
millions displaced into camps continues to be
committed. Acts aimed at inflicting inhumane
conditions of life continue. Under-Secretary-General
Holmes reported to the Council last week on the
difficulties of accessing many areas and the problems
of finding interlocutors in Khartoum to address those
issues. Those are not technical or bureaucratic issues or
the result of disorganization. The decision to expel
humanitarian organizations and the accumulation of
obstacles constitute a policy - a criminal policy - of
identified Sudanese officials with the aim of
committing the crime of extermination.

Gender crimes remain unabated in Darfur. In his
report of 26 May, the United Nations independent
expert on the situation of human rights in the Sudan,
Justice Mohammed Chande Othman from Tanzania,
wrote:

"Acts of sexual violence, particularly
against female internally displaced persons, is
still of concern in Darfur. .. In most instances, the
perpetrators were identified as individuals or
groups of armed men often dressed in military
uniforms. In recent times, women living in close
proximity to military camps have also become
vulnerable to sexual attacks from soldiers The
military authorities deny the rape allegations,
claiming that the soldiers were engaged in
consensual relationships with the women."
(A/HRC/I4/4], para. 59)

Of even greater concern, the independent expert notes
that victims are increasingly discouraged from
reporting rape and sexual Violence because they know
they will not benefit from remedial action. Rapes are
not stopping; reporting is stopping.

This is consistent with the finding of the African
Union High-Level Panel that "faith in the criminal
justice system has been severely eroded", and with the
findings of others. This is in line as well with the 2009
report of the Panel of Experts established pursuant to
Security Council resolution 1591 (2005) concerning
the Sudan , which states:

"There appears to be an overwhelming apathy
towards, and unwillingness to investigate, acts of
sexual and gender-based violence." (A/2009/562, annex, para. 304)
10-40120

There is a need for an updated comprehensive
report by the Secretariat on the current situation in the
camps and villages. The fragmented information on
rapes and on the obstacles to humanitarian assistance
must be put together to allow the international
community to consider the current extent of the
suffering of the civilians in Darfur.

As I mentioned in my report, there is also an
opportunity for the Council, as it prepares for the
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000)
and for its special session of October 2010 under the
Ugandan presidency, to implement its groundbreaking
resolutions on gender violence in specific situations
where crimes are ongoing.

To conclude, five years ago the Security Council
considered that the Darfur situation constituted a threat
to peace and security and decided to refer the situation
to the Court as part of its efforts to find a global
solution to the conflict. Security Council members
presented the need to integrate four different tracks in
Darfur: humanitarian assistance, peacekeepers,
political negotiations and justice. The facts unveiled by
the Prosecution and adjudicated by the Judges shed
light on some of the problems faced on these different
tracks.

The impunity of Ahmad Harun and Ali Kushayb
is one of the main problems. It carries a price. Ali
Kushayb is a tribal leader who still exercises power in
his own area in South Sudan, and a clear example to
other Janjaweed that they can continue committing
crimes. There is impunity.

The case of Harun is even more serious. His
expertise is in mobilizing and using militias to attack
civilians and disguising his activities. He was allegedly
involved in the worst attacks against civilians in the
Nuba mountains during the 1990s. From 1997 to 2000,
he was Executive Director of the Peace and
Resettlement Administration in South Kordofan, which
was in reality a secret service organization that
collected information to prepare attacks on villages.
From 2003 to 2005, as Minister of State for the
Interior, Harun coordinated the attacks on civilians in
their Villages in Darfur. Between 2005 and 2009, Harun
was the Minister of State for Humanitarian Affairs,
managing the crimes in the camps for displaced
persons in Darfur.

In my December 2007 briefing (see S/PV.5789), I
highlighted to the Council that Ahmad Harun had then
been appointed to a committee on human rights
Violations and breaches of the Constitution in the South
and North. In my subsequent briefing in June 2008 (see S/PV.5905), I reported that, as a member of that
committee, Harun was sent to Abyei to manage the
conflict. And, as Council members know, Abyei was
burned down by tribal militias, with 50,000 citizens
displaced.

Normally fugitives from justice go into hiding.
Prosecutors have to unearth their whereabouts. This is
not the case here. We know where Ahmad Harun. He is
currently the Governor of South Kordofan, He should
be arrested before he commits new crimes in his new
position.

To conclude, I should like to clarify that any
discussion of the evidence presented by my Office or
of the charges included in the arrest warrants should be
conducted in the courtroom in The Hague. The Judges'
decisions will not be changed by political negotiations.

The decision on Sudanese non-cooperation in
relation to Harun and Kushayb was adopted by the
Judges and forwarded to the Security Council. The
means to secure compliance by the Sudan with its
obligations under resolution 1593 (2005) are a
prerogative of the Council. The Council has dealt
before with States' non-compliance in connection with
the enforcement of arrest warrants. I hope that the
Council can acknowledge the Judges' decision and
follow up on it between now and my next report in
December.

I would urge Council members to ensure that the
arrest of Ahmad Harun and Ali Kushayb be a request
that this Organization continues to insist on, through its
representatives and envoys in the Sudan, as a critical
condition for securing peace and stability in Darfur.
This meeting and the Council's meeting on Monday
offer a perfect opportunity for its members to integrate
the request for the arrest of Harun and Kushayb into
the general strategy relating to Darfur and the Sudan.
Resolution 1593 (2005), as well as all other related
Security Council resolutions, should be complied with.

