I speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member States. The candidate countries the Republic of North Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania, the country of the Stabilization and Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with this statement. Partnering with young people is in the DNA of the European Union. Some of our most emblematic programmes are all about youth, such as Erasmus+ and, more recently, the European Solidarity Corps. These programmes have enriched the lives of more than 10 million young people from Europe and beyond over the past three decades. All young people have the greatest stake in getting our policies right, for the present and for the future. They are among our most important interlocutors, change agents and leaders in implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, as well as in peacebuilding and sustaining peace. Today's global youth population, the biggest in history, carries a unique potential for, and is at the forefront of, driving problem-solving. Together, we need to speed up significantly our collective actions to accomplish transformation towards a sustainable world. Our efforts on sustainable development and on addressing climate change go hand in hand with our efforts to build peaceful, just and inclusive societies, based on gender equality and human rights. Each and every country and stakeholder must aim high. States, multilateral organizations and societal stakeholders, including young people, must strive for ever-closer partnership. Reinforcing partnerships with young people and their organizations is central to our efforts to strengthen rules-based multilateralism. The year 2020 marks a special moment for multilateralism. The United Nations is celebrating its seventy- fifth anniversary, and it is also the fifth anniversary of the youth, peace and security agenda. And, through the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the year 2020 has also brought a stark reminder of the fact that strong multilateral cooperation and strong multilateral organizations are more important than ever. As COVID-19 has the entire global community in its grip, we are reminded of the importance of solidarity, across borders and across generations. Young people are playing a key role in fighting the virus, including in delivering an effective COVID-19 response within conflict-affected communities. They are already contributing substantially to the well-being of their families and communities, shouldering additional tasks. Young people can be an important force in efforts to answer the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire. As for the EU's contribution to fighting the pandemic, our global response to COVID-19, the Team Europe package, will amount to more than €20 billion and will prioritize regions and countries that are home to the youngest populations, including in Africa. The EU welcomes the publication of the first-ever report of the Secretary- General on youth, peace and security (S/2020/167). We strongly support regular reporting to the Council and regular deliberations on this matter. We applaud the leadership of the Dominican Republic and of former Council presidencies on youth, peace and security. We urge future presidencies to keep the Council engaged on this issue, both as a thematic issue and mainstreamed into country-specific discussions. Young people do not need institutions to give them a voice. They have a voice. However, institutions can work harder to amplify the already strong voices of youth. Institutions can also work to ensure that their voices are taken into account in policies, decision-making and actions. That is central to the EU's approach to partnering with young people. And that is how we approached this open debate as well. We asked our United Nations youth delegates in the EU what they have to say to the Council on youth, peace and security. This is the message of European youth to the Council: "We call for a broader understanding of peace and security when solving security challenges, an understanding that incorporates all risks to human security. We urge Member States to boost financial support to youth-led peacebuilding initiatives, which contribute to peaceful societies. We ask that all United Nations bodies and States create an enabling environment for young people's meaningful and effective participation in conflict prevention and resolution, peacebuilding, post-conflict processes and humanitarian action. Young people must play a consultative role on security issues. The women and peace and security agenda is an inspiring role model in that regard. Activating the potential of young peacebuilders ultimately depends on the accessibility of knowledge and the sharing of information." Young people are making their voices heard. Youth-led civil society and environmental organizations, as well as young human rights defenders and peacebuilders - including indigenous youth - are playing a key role in calling out human rights violations and abuses, while demanding action to protect our people, planet and climate. It is our generational duty to deliver for them. Ensuring the full realization of human rights for young people and protecting and empowering young human rights defenders is part and parcel of the youth and peace and security agenda. The European Commission adopted a new EU Action Plan on Human Rights and Democracy for 2020-2024, with specific actions to support the inclusion of young people - particularly young women - and their participation in all efforts to prevent conflict and to build and sustain peace. New age- and gender-responsive actions will be put in place in order to increase the meaningful participation of women and youth in all spheres of public life. We will focus on addressing challenges faced by youth with disabilities and those facing multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination. The EU is particularly concerned about the rise of reprisals and attacks against young human rights defenders. The EU Human Rights Defenders mechanism, which has benefited 30,000 human rights defenders since 2015, is open to any young defender who is at risk. From the outset, the EU has been a frontrunner in implementing the youth, peace and security agenda. The EU was the first multilateral organization to join the Champions of Youth, Peace and Security group at the United Nations. In May 2018, the EU hosted its first-ever Conference on Youth, Peace and Security, held in partnership with the United Nations, civil society and young people. The Conference brought together 70 young change makers from 27 EU member States and 29 partner countries in an interactive dialogue with the leaders of the EU and the United Nations. Over the past years, we have been working with partner countries, multilateral institutions and young people and their organizations to jointly translate policy to practice in order to implement the youth, peace and security agenda on the ground. We have supported the creation of extended networks and initiatives with young people from Europe, Africa, the Middle East, Asia and elsewhere. We have established open channels of communication to discuss global, regional and local issues in order to connect young people and leaders from the EU and from our partner countries. Our Young Mediterranean Voices initiative connects civil society, educational institutions and policymakers across the Euro-Mediterranean region to promote mutual understanding and foster youth engagement and leadership in order to shape solutions to common challenges. Indeed, the EU delegation and the Permanent Mission of France to the United Nations just hosted an exchange with young leaders from the Young Mediterranean Voices community in order to jointly prepare for this open debate. The discussion confirmed that young people are part of the solution and must be given the platforms and tools to deliver, including with regard to their economic and physical safety. As summed up by a youth leader from Libya: "Younger people are asked to fight wars, but when it comes to creating peace they are excluded." In the Sahel, our programme entitled La voix des jeunes du Sahel has offered thousands of young people a chance to exchange views with policymakers and to co-create development policies that impact them. Our Erasmus+ Virtual Exchange programme connects youth in Europe and the Southern Mediterranean ina meaningful intercultural online experience to enhance dialogue, media literacy and active citizenship. Our network of Young European Ambassadors fosters cooperation and sustainable links between young people and youth organizations from the EU and our eastern neighbours, focusing on people-to-people contacts and dialogue-driven activities. We support the One Young World Peace Ambassadors initiative, dedicated to preventing and countering violent extremism, promoting peacebuilding efforts and resolving conflict through youth-led initiatives in vulnerable communities. We also support the European Youth Forum, a platform of over 100 youth organizations in Europe. Crucial to the success of the youth and peace and security agenda is our ability to make a difference on the ground for all young people and other generations. Presently, the EU spearheads nearly 30 crisis prevention and response initiatives on four continents in order to strengthen youth resilience and to promote youth- led peacebuilding. Many of them are run in cooperation with the United Nations. For instance, together with UNICEF, we are working with adolescents and youth in Rohingya refugee camps in Bangladesh to enhance peaceful coexistence, empower young people as agents of change and help prevent negative and violent behaviours. Also in cooperation with UNICEF, we have strengthened the resilience and civic engagement of adolescents and youth in conflict-affected eastern Ukraine. Together with the United Nations Population Fund, we are contributing to the stabilization of the Far North region of Cameroon by increasing the resilience of the most vulnerable young people - especially women and girls - in the face of violent extremism. One global action initiative with UNESCO aims to increase equitable access to quality education for children and youth in crisis situations by supporting the education sector in fragile and crisis-affected countries. Since last year, the EU has also been contributing to the Secretary-General's Peacebuilding Fund and welcomes its increased focus on empowering women and youth through the allocation of 25 per cent of its total funding to this issue for the period 2020-2024. We particularly welcome the recent call for proposals under the Gender and Youth Promotion Initiative 2020. The meaningful inclusion of young people is an important aspect of the 2020 comprehensive review of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture. In that context, we echo the call of youth delegates for the creation of a youth, peace and security strategy in the Peacebuilding Commission. We are inspired by the passion, conviction and energy of our millions of young people making their voice heard on our streets and in our hearts. It is young activists, young human rights defenders and young peacebuilders who bring the youth, peace and security agenda to life, including through their own initiatives. Working across countries and generations, we can achieve our ambitions for today and for tomorrow. We can win the fight against COVID-19, we can overcome the existential threats of climate and environmental degradation and we can transform our societies and economies in a way that unlocks the potential of all people, including those left farthest behind. And together, we can fulfil the promise of the youth and peace and security agenda.
