Mr. Niehaus (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): This is the second time that my delegation has
taken part in a meeting of the Security Council to
establish a peacekeeping mission. We are particularly
pleased to be approving this mission to Sierra Leone in
view of the fact that that country, after confronting a
chaotic situation, has embarked on the process of
rehabilitation and reconstruction with the assistance of the
international community.

I take this opportunity to reiterate the importance
Costa Rica attaches to the role played by the Council in
the transition towards peace and in the peace-building
process. We are particularly pleased, therefore, to note
that this has been the orientation of the new missions we
have approved this year.

The people of Sierra Leone have come a long way
since the military coup of 25 May 1997. We welcomed
the report on the swift progress achieved by the
Government of Sierra Leone in establishing constitutional
order and all of the efforts made to promote national
reconciliation. This case can serve as a model for many
of the initiatives and activities that are under way.

First, my country firmly believes in the importance
of regional and subregional organizations. In this case, the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
has played a crucial role, and the ECOWAS Monitoring

 

Group (ECOMOG) continues to be the body entrusted with
monitoring security and maintaining stability in Sierra
Leone. My country supports all the initiatives designed to
strengthen the links between the Security Council and
regional and subregional organizations in all areas, as well
as the establishment of direct and steady information
channels.

Secondly, Costa Rica supported the lifting of the
sanctions imposed under resolution 1132 (1997) when
conditions were appropriate. This demonstrated that
sanctions have a specific application and that they should
not be permanent. The change that was effected through the
adoption of resolution 1171 (1998) serves to demonstrate
that this mechanism can be used solely in order to punish
those who fail to comply with the resolutions of the
Council and threaten international peace and security.

Thirdly, Costa Rica supports the establishment of the
United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNOMSIL) for an initial period of six months to monitor
security throughout the country and assist the Government
and ECOMOG in disarmament and demobilization
activities, to monitor the demobilization of former
combatants, to monitor compliance with international
humanitarian law and to observe security conditions in
various areas of the country. This operation, which will be
under the authority of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, will depend upon civilian components whose
functions Costa Rica considers to be very important. The
preparation of an effective police force is vital for the
maintenance of security in Sierra Leone, which is why the
component designed to support such an effort is
indispensable.

The other civilian component forming part of the
mission will deal with human rights, and Costa Rica
considers this to be vital. The reports about attacks on the
civilian population by rebel forces, especially in the north
of the country, are extremely worrying. The numbers
reported of civilians who have been attacked, mutilated or
raped, and the number of deaths, continue to be extremely
high. For my delegation, this is the main problem that must
be considered and resolved immediately. In this context, my
delegation agrees with the view expressed in the report of
the Secretary-General that these actions must be
documented so that we can combat impunity. We also
support the recommendation of the Secretary-General that
the human rights component of the office of the Special
Envoy be enhanced, that it form part of the mission and,
furthermore, as indicated in the draft resolution before us,
that it help the Government of Sierra Leone enhance its
human rights institutions.

In conclusion, I should like to express my country's
concern about the situation of refugees and internally
displaced persons in Sierra Leone. Every day an
increasing number of civilians flee to camps in Guinea
and Liberia and the number of refugees increases.
According to reports of the Department of Humanitarian
Affairs, as many as 300 people set off for Guinea every
day to seek refuge, and it has been calculated that
150,000 people have already sought refuge in Guinea and
Liberia. Internally, the number of displaced persons has
reached a figure of more than 30,000. We hope that the
efforts of the international community and humanitarian
aid agencies will help reduce these alarming figures.

