Ms. Rodham Clinton (United States of America): I thank you, Sir, for the leadership that you
and Turkey have shown this year as Chair of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee. I also thank you for
bringing us here today to focus on what is a shared
mission to combat terrorism and Violent extremism. We
are called to this mission as individual nations and as a
community of nations to protect our citizens,
strengthen our security, foster stability in unstable
places and help to create the conditions for long-term
progress.

I want to thank the Secretary-General and his
staff here at the United Nations, because after all the
United Nations is our premier forum and is valuable
for sharing best practices and helping nations that
struggle with terrorism to build their capacity to
respond to threats. The United Nations has recently
taken steps to advance these goals by integrating
counter-terrorism throughout its work to address peace
and security challenges worldwide, while at the same
time promoting transparency and improving
coordination within the United Nations system and
with the national counter-terrorism teams on the
ground in communities around the world.

I want to speak briefly about the progress made
with one critical counter-terrorism tool - the sanctions
list of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
Associated Individuals and Entities. This list must
evolve as the threat posed by these groups evolves, so
we are pleased that the 1267 Committee actively
updates the list. So far this year, 45 names have been
removed and 17 have been added. We commend the
Committee for creating the post of Ombudsperson to
receive petitions for individuals and entities that want
to be de-listed. We applaud the inclusion of Al-Qaida
in the Arabian Peninsula and its leaders on the list, and
we encourage Member States to provide regular
updates to the Committee to ensure that the list remains
accurate.

This regime, as with all of our joint efforts, is
only as strong as our shared commitment. Today, let
me emphasize that the United States is committed to
working through multilateral institutions, including the
United Nations, to confront the threats posed. We are
also committed to strengthening this multilateral
architecture. We believe that it can do better, so
although we are very supportive we want to work with
all here to improve it, since we also believe that
countering terrorism is not a task that any country
achieves on its own. It is a global challenge. It calls for
all nations to be vigilant and creative, as well as
receptive to new ideas, willing to set aside failed
strategies, and be open with each other about the
threats we face and how we are addressing them. We
are far more likely to succeed in thwarting terrorist
networks like Al-Qaida and its syndicate of
organizations if we work together to track their actions,
share intelligence, disrupt their schemes, and put their
leaders out of action.

These groups have a global View, and we must
have one too. That begins with a shared understanding
of the big picture. Counter-terrorism demands a
comprehensive approach, as reflected in the draft
presidential statement that will be adopted at the
conclusion of today's meeting. Therefore, we need
intelligence operations capable of discovering terror
plots, military and law enforcement officers trained
and ready to stop them, border control officials who
can spot potential dangers, justice systems that can
fairly and effectively prosecute criminals, and
corrections systems that can then detain those who
have been arrest and/or convicted. We have to do more
to develop these institutions and capacities and help
each other by mobilizing expertise and resources.

But, at the same time, and beyond these
measures, we have to realize that countering terrorism
means more than stopping terrorists. It means stopping
people from becoming terrorists in the first place. That
requires addressing the political, economic and social

conditions that make people vulnerable to exploitation
by extremists. For people whose lives are characterized
by frustration or desperation, and for people who
believe that their Governments are unresponsive or
repressive, Al-Qaida and other groups may offer an
appealing View, but it is a View rooted in destruction
and we have to provide an alternative View that is
rooted in hope, opportunity and possibility.

That means enacting policies that create new
opportunities for people to build a better future for
themselves, strengthening our commitment to core
values, particularly human rights and the rule of law.
We cannot sacrifice those values in our zeal to stop
terrorists. Our values are what make us different from
those who are trying to tear down so much of the progress
that has been made over the course of history - and I
have to add, especially for women and girls.

So as we work to defeat terrorists worldwide, we
cannot abandon our values; we must defend them. Each
of our countries represented around the Security
Council table today has felt the impact of terrorism or
Violent extremism. Our citizens have been attacked and
our cities threatened, and those threats will,
unfortunately, continue. However, our determination to
protect our people and our common humanity are
greater than those who seek to harm us. I think that if
we are smart and thorough in our approach and
continue our work together, we can reduce and
eventually end the threat of terrorism.

I again thank both the Secretary-General, and in
particular you, Mr. President, for pulling us together to
talk about this today.

