Mr. Abdal Mahdi (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): First
of all, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting. I would also like to express
our appreciation for the two briefings we have heard,
by Mr. Ashraf J ehangir Qazi, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Iraq, and by Mr. Alejandro
Wolff, the representative of the United States speaking
on behalf of the Multinational Force in Iraq.

The political and constitutional process in Iraq
came to a conclusion in 2006, in accordance with the
provisions of resolution 1546 (2004). We hope that
2007 will be a decisive and very important year as
regards the reorganization of the Iraqi State, the revival
of a sense of national belonging and the achievement
of civil peace. In order to meet those aims, the
Government of national unity will focus on three
complementary aspects: security, the political area, and
economic aspects.

With regard to security, the Iraqi Government has
redoubled its efforts to combat terrorist, insurgent and
criminal movements, sectarian violence and militias.
With the assistance of the Multinational Force in Iraq,
the Government has adopted a security plan for
Baghdad called "Operation Imposing Law" in the
context of a comprehensive plan whose outcome will
be to ensure that Iraqi security forces assume
responsibility for security throughout the country by
the end of 2007. However, while we do not want to be
overly optimistic, some positive results have already
been achieved in the area of security. That is evidenced
by the marked reduction in the number of terrorist
operations, the level of insurgency and sectarian
violence. Although those developments have fallen
short of our expectations and ambitions, the Iraqi
people have begun to feel their results.

On the political front, the Government of Iraq has
adopted reconciliation as a strategic option. The results
to be achieved by following that option will have an
impact upon the attainment of security throughout the
country. In that connection, we have held numerous
conferences and meetings at the national level that
have brought together the various religious faiths and
tribal groups. In January 2006, the Prime Minister
presided over a meeting of political parties and powers.
At the beginning of this month, a reconciliation
conference for officers of the former Iraqi army was
held. The Government of Iraq is striving to broaden the
national reconciliation process to include parties and
groups that are not in the Government.

On the economic front, the Iraqi Parliament has
adopted a budget for 2007. Investment expenditures
account for about $10 billion of that budget. We also
plan to double allocations to the two most important
sectors, namely, education and health. Forecasts predict
that the new budget will make it possible to create
more than 135,000 new jobs. That will in turn
contribute to reducing the level of unemployment,
thereby producing a positive impact on security. In
addition, the Government has introduced the oil and
gas law for consideration and adoption by the Iraqi
Parliament. The adoption of the new budget and the
draft oil and gas law will give new impetus to the Iraqi
economy, which will in turn have a positive impact on
the services sector.

Nevertheless, Iraq cannot develop its economy by
itself and requires international assistance to
consolidate its development on a solid basis. That is
why we hope to receive international assistance in
rebuilding Iraq.

Two significant events will take place this month.
Tomorrow, at United Nations Headquarters here in
New York, a meeting will be held under the auspices of
the Secretary-General to promote the International
Compact with Iraq, an initiative that was launched by
the Government of Iraq to forge a partnership with the
international community with the aim of furthering
economic, political and social development in Iraq
over the next five years. We hope that at tomorrow's
meeting we will be able to set a time and place for the
final ratification the International Compact.

At the request of the Government of Iraq, the
fifth meeting of the donors to the International
Reconstruction Fund Facility for Iraq (IRFFI) will be
held on 19 March in Istanbul, Turkey. While we look
forward to the success of those meetings, we hope that
donors will demonstrate a greater commitment to the
process of rebuilding Iraq.

The new Iraq will regain its stability, be reborn
and relaunch its development only if it has the support
of neighbouring countries. Iraqi diplomacy has striven
mightily in recent months to organize bilateral and
multilateral meetings in order to bring Iraq's
neighbours to a meeting in Baghdad. Those efforts
have born fruit, resulting in a meeting held on 10
March in Baghdad. We hope that the results of the
conference will help us to enhance stability and
security in Iraq so as to prevent any interference in its
domestic affairs. In spite of the difficult conditions in
Iraq and the great challenge with which it is faced, my
country has demonstrated its ability to assist its
neighbours in turn by fostering dialogue and promoting
negotiations between large nations and neighbouring
countries, thereby reducing tensions in the region and
preventing an upsurge in violence.

As a result of security conditions and the efforts
of terrorists to provoke civil strife and ignite civil war,
Iraq has witnessed a large-scale internal and external
displacement of individuals. In the context of the
Baghdad security plan, the Iraqi authorities have
sought to provide security so as to ensure that
internally displaced families are able to return to their
homes. This, in fact, has begun to happen, and

hundreds of families have returned to their homes. The
number of returning families will rise as long as the
security plan is able to meet all of its objectives, as we
hope and expect it to do.

The International Organization for Migration and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) estimate that the number of
refugees currently stands at some 2 million, the
majority of whom are located in two neighbouring
countries, Jordan and Syria. The presence of those
Iraqis in the two countries is long-standing in certain
cases, due to the former dictatorial regime, and has
recently been augmented by the current precarious
security conditions in Iraq. It is believed that most of
the families will be able to return home once security
conditions have improved, and the Iraqi Government is
working to ensure that that will indeed be the case.

The most recent meeting of neighbouring
countries, held on 10 March, allowed us to establish a
joint commission between Iraq and other countries that
are interested in resolving the problem. We are fully
aware of the burden being borne by our two brotherly
countries, yet we hope that the Iraqi refugees will be
treated humanely and in accordance with international
law and international agreements. We also hope that
they will be granted legal residency and receive
adequate assistance until they return home.

We take this opportunity to thank those two
brotherly countries, as well as all others that have
assisted Iraqi refugees in these difficult times. We hope
that international organizations, and the UNHCR above
all, will fulfil their obligations in this regard. We
welcome announcement that the High Commissioner
has organized an international conference for 17 and
18 April and hope that it will allow us to put an end to
the suffering of the Iraqi refugees.

Finally, allow me on behalf of the people and
Government of Iraq to express our deep appreciation
for the efforts undertaken by the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) and Mr. Qazi,
whether in the political realm in the context of national
reconciliation efforts; or the constitutional realm, by
providing an appropriate climate for the work of the
Constitutional Review Committee; or the electoral
realm, by providing assistance in the formation of the
supreme electoral commission and the municipal
electoral commission; or in the reconstruction of Iraq.
We appreciate the role being played by the Special

Representative and hope that the United Nations will
be able to play an even greater role in Iraq. The Iraqi
Government will provide all possible support to ensure
that it does.

Once the security situation has improved, we will
call for the return of United Nations agencies currently
based outside Iraq and ensure that they are able to
resume their activities and fulfil their obligations
throughout my country. While we highly value the role
played by UNAMI, we should like to remind the
members of the Security Council that Iraq still
struggles under the burdens of other mandates for
which there is no longer any justification inasmuch as
the conditions that led to their creation no longer exist.
I am referring to the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC).

We also wish to thank the Multinational Force in
Iraq for the role that it has played in helping the Iraqi
forces provide security for the Iraqi people. Like many
others, including members of the Security Council, it is
our opinion that the termination or review of the
aforementioned Commission's mandate is both
desirable and required.

