Mr. Khiari (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for this month. I would
like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
briefing.

Israel is using all its land, naval and air military
capability to humiliate the Palestinian people, who
have now been besieged in Gaza for almost seven
years. The occupying Power is again demonstrating its
barbarity and cruel nature through its actions against
the Palestinian civilians in Gaza, including women,
children and the elderly. That has claimed more than
600 lives, injured thousands of people and given rise to
thousands of refugees. It has also led to the destruction
of infrastructure in all sectors of activity.

Like many representatives, I ask myself a number
of questions. How can we explain the fact that 70 per
cent of the victims of the aggression, according to
United Nations estimates, are civilians? How can one
justify the murder of unarmed civilians under the
pretext of protecting other civilians? What arguments
can possibly be used to justify the targeting of medical
teams and hospitals?

Israel is shedding Palestinian blood, which
compounds the other acts of violence that have been
inflicted on the Palestinian people for six decades.
The consequences of that slaughter linger in the
international consciousness. After the bloodbaths of
Sabra and Shatila, Qana, Haifa, Jenin and elsewhere,
this time it was the turn of the Shujaiya neighbourhood.
The occupying forces attacked it using rockets and other
ammunition, claiming 70 lives, the majority of which,
as always, were women, children and the elderly.

How long will Israel continue its aggression against
the Palestinian people? How long will it disregard
international law? How long will the international
community remain silent in the face of those acts,
limiting itself to weakly condemning Israel while
Palestinians are attacked on a daily basis in clear view
of the entire world? How long will a representative of
Palestine continue to read us lists of murdered innocent
children? That list is, of course, horrendous.

Israel believes that it enjoys some sort of immunity
that puts it above the law and allows it to violate
people's rights wherever, whenever and however it
wants to. It is not interested in the whole concept of
being accountable for one's actions. The whole concept
of criminal liability is what international law is based
on and we are about to commemorate the World Day for
International Justice. How can one use the pretext of
the fight against terrorism to carry out crimes against
Palestinians and to avoid any responsibility or liability?

It is important that the Council, as the body
responsible for the maintenance of international
peace and security, take measures to put an end to the
aggression. The Security Council held its first meeting
(see S/PV.7214) on Israeli aggression against Gaza on
10 July, before the number of victims was more than
just a few dozen. Following that meeting, the Council
issued a press statement (SC/11472). That is not what
the Palestinian people were waiting for. That statement
was certainly not in keeping with Israel's actions, which
undermine security throughout the region as a whole.

The situation has escalated significantly over the
past week, especially since the bloodbath of Shujaiya.
There are now over 500 victims. The Security Council
met in consultations yet again on 20 July, but failed to
take a firm position. Of course, some felt that this gave
a green light to the occupation forces to continue their
murder without being held responsible.

We reaffirm our condemnation of the Israeli
aggression and the military ground operations launched
by Israel against Gaza. The international community
and the Security Council must first assume their
responsibilities to put an immediate end to the military
aggression against Gaza.

Secondly, there is a need to lift the unjust blockade
on Gaza to put an end to the negative humanitarian, social
and economic impacts resulting from it. Palestinians are
deprived of their basic rights and their right to a decent
life. We also call for an opening of the crossing points
to ensure that the necessary humanitarian assistance is
provided to the people of Gaza.

Thirdly, there is a need to mobilize the efforts of
the international community to increase its delivery of
humanitarian assistance to Palestine. We must support
the efforts of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. For that
reason, we have decided to send medical aid to the Gaza
Strip and we have welcomed a number of Palestinians
into our hospitals.

Fourthly, we should support the call of President
Mahmoud Abbas to place the State of Palestine under
an international protection regime.

Fifthly, there is a need to put an end to the attacks
by Israel and Israeli settlers against the Palestinian
people and their assets, property and religious holy
sites. There is a need to begin an exchange of refugees
and to put an end to the colonialist activities ofIsrael in
Jerusalem and East Jerusalem, the West Bank and the
Gaza Strip.

Sixthly, there is a need to establish an independent
and sovereign Palestinian State based on the pre-1967
borders, in accordance with the Arab Peace Initiative,
the resolutions of international law, the concept of land
for peace and the Madrid terms of reference.

We welcome the international and regional efforts
and initiatives aimed at putting an end to the aggression
against Gaza. We also welcome the activities undertaken
within that framework. We reaffirm the importance
of achieving a lasting and just truce that would avert
renewed aggression by Israel against Gaza, and of
lifting the blockade on Gaza.

