Mr. Rosselli Frieri (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
We have requested the floor before the vote in order
to make two comments - one procedural and
one substantive.

With regard to the procedural issue, the draft
resolution was shared officially on Saturday.
Yesterday, the President was asked to put it in blue
and to schedule the vote for today, without having held
any negotiations or consultations on the contents of
the draft, with the exception of the meeting that just
concluded (see S/PV.8138), which also did not include
a detailed discussion of its contents. Just as we have
criticized permanent members of the Security Council
on previous occasions for similar practices that reduce
the transparency of the work of this organ and force
the membership to take decisions without being able
to participate in the drafting of the text, we must once
again affirm that this is not the right way to do things
in the Council.

As for the substantive issue, we reaffirm the
special status of the city of Jerusalem, pursuant to
General Assembly resolutions, particularly resolution
181 (II), adopted in 1947, as well as Security Council
resolutions. General Assembly resolution 181 (II),
which Uruguay voted in favour of and still supports to
this day, recommended the partition of Palestine into a
Jewish State and an Arab State, and the establishment
of Jerusalem as a corpus separatam under a special
international regime administered by the United
Nations. That is the basis for the special status of
Jerusalem in United Nations law and international law.
As such, it should have been referenced in the text of
the draft resolution.

In the meeting held earlier today, we welcomed the
recognition extended by many countries today to the
foundational nature of General Assembly resolution
181 (II) by referring to the separation of Palestine into
two States - one Jewish and one Arab - with a special
status for Jerusalem. That is particularly important
because at the time of its adoption, many States did not
support resolution 181 (II).

The final status ofJerusalem is unfinished business.
The sovereignty and boundaries of Jerusalem should be
agreed by Israel and Palestine in bilateral negotiations.
Therefore, any decision, measure or action that the
parties or any third State would take contrary to the
resolution to change the status of Jerusalem would
affect the peace process and the search for a two-
State solution - a goal shared by nearly the entire
international community for decades.

For seven decades, Uruguay has sought a fair and
lasting solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict based
on respect for international law. For those reasons,
despite a submission process of the document that
we view as flawed, my delegation supports the draft
resolution contained in document S/2017/1060 before
the Council.

