Ms. Dlamini-Zuma (South Africa): It does not refer
to age; it refers to station in life.

The Lusaka Agreement tries to offer a
comprehensive solution to a very complex conflict. It is
therefore important to note that the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is multidimensional,
and if one aspect of the Lusaka Agreement is left out in
its implementation, we may never see lasting peace in
that country. We therefore look forward to the speedy
adoption of a draft resolution that will move forward the
implementation of the Lusaka Agreement.

I believe we have made steady progress on some of
these issues, and we look to the concerned parties, as well
as to the Security Council, to help bring about lasting
peace in these troubled areas. Even in these difficult
times, I would like to say that it is incumbent upon all of
us to let our actions be guided by the realization that
there is an Africa quite distinct from the bloody killing
fields, and that we should not look at Africa as only a

 

place of conflict. There is an Africa where the seeds of
democracy and tolerance have fallen on fertile ground and
are bearing fruit that is healthy and sweet.

The majority of Africans now live under systems of
democratic governance and are free to elect those to whom
they entrust the responsibility of leadership and to
determine their own future. A large number of African
countries have recently conducted successful democratic
elections, and others are preparing to do so, thereby
providing democracy with a fair chance.

The people of Africa have become the torch-bearers of
a silent democratic revolution; they have cast their vote for
a future of democracy and peace. Not only do we hold
these noble values dear in their own right, but we nurture
them as the vital preconditions for a process of sustainable
development and a prosperous future. This, indeed, heralds
the dawn of the "African century", during which we believe
Africa will accomplish a lot.

It is a cruel reality, however, that as Africa is
gathering its strength and energy to prepare for its rebirth,
the scourge of HIV/AIDS, with its terrifying consequences
for Africa and the entire world, is ravaging our continent.
This is a health, social, economic and political challenge
that threatens to decimate Africa and other parts of the
world. Unless the epidemic is stopped, the "African
century" may not be realized. Many African countries,
including my own, have launched massive HIV/AIDS
awareness campaigns with the limited resources available.
Some of these have met with startling success, but in and
of themselves, they will probably not be sufficient to turn
the tide decisively. The international community must stand
shoulder to shoulder with Africa in the grim struggle
against this disease - a disease that recognizes no
boundary, be it geographic, political or economic.
The time has come for a strengthening of the
relationship between Africa and the international
community. It must be built on mutual cooperation and
respect, with the international community not only
involving itself in Africa in times of crisis, but engaging on
a long-term and sustainable basis in the development of
Africa. We salute the initiatives already launched by some
countries and organizations in this regard. However, much
remains to be done.

A closer partnership has to be forged between Africa
and the developed world in order to help build upon the
positive trends which we are observing in the continent, in
both the political and economic fields. The African
continent, however, needs sustainable development in the
long term so that everyone can enjoy a decent standard of
living.

The Security Council, in carrying out its mandate
for the maintenance of peace and security around the
world, can play a critical role in guaranteeing conditions
of peace and stability, which will allow for development
to take hold. This remains an enormous challenge. I am
convinced, however, that the United Nations and its
agencies can play an even greater role in the uplift of our
continent. We should thus all consider how this very
influential global body can maximize its efforts to this
end in the millennium that lies ahead of us. And I believe
that this "month of Africa" in the Security Council has
made a significant contribution towards achieving that
goal.

Once more, I should like to thank you, Sir, and to
wish the members of the Security Council and the
incoming President, Argentina, all the best in moving the
process of peace and stability in our continent forward.

