Mr. Clay (United Kingdom): I would like to begin
by thanking Special Envoy Kafando for his two and a
half years of service in Burundi. Like others, we want to
pay tribute to the important work of the Special Envoy
and his office. The Office ofthe Special Envoy plays an
integral role in helping to develop confidence-building
measures and supporting efforts to create conditions
conducive to political dialogue. I also want to take
this opportunity to thank Ambassador Lauber for his
detailed briefing.

I would like to welcome the latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/837), which provides a
valuable record of the current situation in Burundi.
The United Kingdom wants to underline once again,
as we and others in the Council have done before, the
importance of regular written reports to the Council on
the situation in Burundi that can inform our discussions.
As we look ahead to elections in Burundi in May next
year, the United Kingdom calls on all interested parties
in Burundi and the wider region to help ensure that
those elections are safe, credible and fully reflective of
the aspirations of the people. Citizens must have faith
in the electoral process if they are to accept the results
of an election. Well-organized and credible elections
are therefore vital for the stability of Burundi.

We encourage the East African Community to
redouble its efforts to push for an effective and inclusive
dialogue. A harmonized road map that all parties can
support and that preserves the gains of the Arusha
Peace and Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi is
crucial. We call on the Government and its constituent
parties to continue to engage in dialogue with the
region and thereby send a clear signal of their continued
commitment to resolving the ongoing political crisis.
We also urge the Government to finalize the status-of-
mission agreement with the Office ofthe Special Envoy.

We note the overall improvement in the security
situation, but the continuing incidents of violence and
violations ofhuman rights, some ofwhich targetpolitical
opponents, are deeply concerning. The latest report of
the Commission of Inquiry on Burundi (A/HRC/42/49)
records continuing serious human rights violations
committed in a general climate of impunity and of
intensified suppression of civil liberties. That must stop.
We are also concerned about the operating climate for
the media, particularly with regard to the BBC and the
Voice of America. A free press is essential to Burundi's
stability during the election process and beyond.

Turning to the refugee situation, we believe that
Burundian refugees should be able to return home,
but that must be done on a voluntary basis and while
ensuring that their ability to live in safety and dignity
on their return is assured. The Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and other
actors in Burundi must be allowed to monitor the
situation of returnees in Burundi, including their access
to necessary services and their continued protection.

With elections taking place next year amid the
fragile political and humanitarian environment and
the implications for the broader security of the Great
Lakes region, the United Kingdom believes that the
situation in Burundi continues to constitute a threat to
international peace and security. The United Kingdom
therefore firmly believes that Burundi must remain on
the Council's agenda.

