Mr. Gatkuoth: I am so grateful for the
opportunity to address the Security Council and to
present the views of the Government of Southern
Sudan. On behalf of the people and the Government of
Southern Sudan, I would like to express our
appreciation to the Council for its ongoing efforts in
support of the implementation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement (CPA).

In 2005, we all embraced the CPA as the
framework and road map for the resolution of the
conflict in the Sudan. The Government of Southern
Sudan remains committed to the full and final
implementation of the CPA in all of its aspects. The
CPA is a legal agreement binding on the parties, and
we must all collectively renew our efforts to implement
it in full.

We are concerned that recent violations of the
CPA by the Government of the Sudan through armed
attacks and destabilization efforts in the South, its
failure to work in good faith to complete
implementation of the existing agreements on Abyei's
final status, the stalling of efforts to define and
demarcate the North/South borders, and the failure to
conduct the popular consultations in Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile have put at risk the emergence
of two States at peace after 9 July 2011.

Today, we face a situation where the Sudanese
Armed Forces have taken Abyei and have violently
driven out its residents. The Sudanese Armed Forces
have now turned their attention to Southern Kordofan,
which, as a result, is experiencing a disturbing level of
violence, a humanitarian crisis and unnecessary
suffering. Khartoum has recently conducted aerial
bombardment of Agok, where many of Abyei's
displaced have fled, and has also conducted other
bombardments inside Southern Sudan, such as in the
area of Jau, in Unity State.

Despite suggestions to the contrary, it is
increasingly clear, given the speed and scale of the
operation, that the attack by the Sudan Armed Forces
on Abyei was part of a deliberate plan conceived prior
to 19 May 2011. While the Government of Southern
Sudan regrets the 19 May shooting incident that led to
an exchange of fire between the Sudan People's
Liberation Army (SPLA) and the Sudan Armed Forces
in the Abyei Area, the use of force by Khartoum in
Abyei has been completely unjustifiable and wholly
disproportionate. It is an attempt to circumvent the full
and final implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA) and to secure by force that which it
has not secured at the negotiating table or in the
binding award of an international tribunal.

The humanitarian impact of the violence in Abyei
has been catastrophic. Khartoum's actions have caused
enormous harm to innocent civilians, constituting a
serious violation of international human rights and
humanitarian law. Tens of thousands of NgokDinka
civilians have been driven from their ancestral homes
in Abyei, as the United Nations itself has confirmed.
The Sudan Armed Forces, accompanied by armed
Misseriya militia, have indiscriminately killed and
maimed civilians, torched people's houses, looted
property and possessions - including United Nations
humanitarian supplies - and facilitated and
encouraged the influx of Misseriya into northern parts
of the Area. We call on the United Nations to share its
more detailed reporting on these violations with the
international community.

This attempt to alter Abyei's demography by
force is unacceptable and must be reversed
immediately. The National Congress Party cannot be
allowed to defy its legal obligations under the Abyei
Protocol of the CPA or its obligations under
international law. Unless the NgokDinka civilians are
able to return to their homeland, it will be difficult to
hold the referendum required by the CPA.

Despite this disturbing context, I am pleased to
report that the parties have just signed an agreement in
Addis Ababa aimed at securing the immediate
withdrawal of the Sudan Armed Forces from Abyei and
the entrance of an Ethiopian brigade to protect
civilians. In this context, we are grateful for the
ongoing support of the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel, under the leadership of
President Thabo Mbeki, and to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Haile
Menkerios, and Prime Minister Meles Zenawi for their
efforts.
The Government of the Sudan has said that its
presence in Abyei is not forever. A timetable for the
North's full and unconditional withdrawal from Abyei
must now be implemented swiftly. The Government of
Southern Sudan welcomes and endorses the offer made
to the parties by the Government of Ethiopia regarding
the deployment of Ethiopian peacekeepers in Abyei
under a United Nations Security Council mandate and
operating under Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter.

The consent to this deployment by the
Government of the Sudan is consistent with its
commitments under the CPA. We strongly encourage
the Council to endorse a Chapter VII mandate for those
forces, and to supply them with the necessary resources
to ensure they are deployed within the next two weeks,
as outlined in the Agreement.

The Agreement we have just signed does not -
and indeed, should not - attempt to address or
prejudice any outcome on the final status of Abyei.
With the recent changes, we are confident that the
Agreement will be used only for its intended purpose
of restoring peace to Abyei, and not to fuel tensions or
to prejudice discussions on the final status ofAbyei.

In the interest of peace, my Government made a
number of other concessions on issues such as
transferring the leadership of the Abyei Area
Legislative Council to the National Congress Party, and
the composition and leadership of the proposed Abyei
Joint Oversight Committee.

Under the Agreement, the illegal claim over
Abyei on the part of the Government of the Sudan will
end. The Abyei Area will no longer have a special
administrative status under the presidency of the
Republic of the Sudan but rather will fall under the
supervision of both the President of South Sudan and
the President of the Republic of the Sudan. We reiterate
that Abyei belongs to both the North and the South,
and it will so continue until the people of Abyei decide
otherwise. The Government of Southern Sudan remains
fully committed to the negotiation process led by the
African Union High-level Panel and to reaching in the
near future an agreement on the definitive status of
Abyei that is consistent with the terms of the CPA and
with the PCA Award.
There are crucial obligations in the CPA that have
not yet been fulfilled and that are still subject to
ongoing implementation efforts - for example, the
Abyei referendum, the arrangements for the Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile States, and the finalization of
the definition and demarcation of the North/South
border.

With regard to the Two Areas - Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile - my Government denounces
the violent attacks of the Sudan Armed Forces on
populations in Southern Kordofan that have caused a
second humanitarian crisis in which tens of thousands
from the area have now joined the NgokDinka in their
flight to the South. We welcome the international
community's condemnation of those activities and its
assistance with humanitarian support for those
displaced.

We reject as unrealistic and inconsistent with the
terms of the CPA the insistence by the Government of
the Sudan that SPLA elements in the areas must disarm
or move to the South. It is that uncompromising
position - as articulated in the ultimatum presented
recently to SPLA elements in these areas to withdraw
southwards by 1 June or face action - that has led to
the recent violence. Khartoum cannot continue to
address political challenges with violence.

We contend that any forces deployed in the two
areas were deployed in accordance with the CPA, in
fulfilment of the requirement to form Joint Integrated
Units (JIUs). Under the CPA, these JIUs are to remain
in the areas until after the end of the interim period.
Therefore, any presence of SPLA forces in Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile is consistent with the CPA.
The forces in question are from the two areas and must
stay where they are. Additionally, over 45,000 SPLA
forces from the two areas are currently in the South,
and arrangements will need to be made for them to
return to the North.

The legitimate concerns of the local populations
of these areas, including those forces, must be
addressed through the processes agreed to in the CPA.
The popular consultations include not just a process of
assessing the will of the people of these two areas, but
also a negotiation with the national Government to
resolve outstanding concerns and grievances. The
implementation of this outstanding CPA requirement
will increase the likelihood of continued peace and
stability both along the shared border and within
Northern Sudan after 9 July. We are willing to engage
with Khartoum in support of those processes.

In the meantime, war is raging in Southern
Kordofan. We ask the Security Council to insist on the
immediate signature of an agreement to end hostilities.
Khartoum must also allow access to humanitarian
agencies to help those who have been displaced.
Without immediate and firm action on the part of the
Security Council, the situation in Southern Kordofan
risks degenerating into ethnic cleansing and possibly
genocide.

It is clear that only in the framework of the CPA
can peace in the Sudan be guaranteed. It is only
through the Security Council's insistence upon full
CPA implementation that threats to international peace
and security can be averted. While the interim period
of the CPA may end on July 9, the outstanding CPA
commitments regarding Abyei, the two areas and the
North/South borders live on. Resolution of those
outstanding issues is the cornerstone of maintaining
peace between the North and the South, and it is
critical to ensuring the mutual viability and security of
the two nations after 9 July.

Furthermore, the parties agreed in the CPA to a
United Nations mission to monitor the Agreement's
implementation. The parties agreed

"that the presence and size of the United Nations
peace support mission shall be determined by the
implementation timetable of [the] Agreement
and shall gradually phase out with successful
implementation of the timetables, increased
confidence building and commitment of the
parties towards the implementation of [the]
Agreement."

In accordance with the provisions of the CPA, the
Government of the Sudan's consent to an ongoing
United Nations mission cannot be withdrawn until such
a time as the obligations contained in the CPA have
been implemented in full by the parties, or only by the
mutual agreement of the two parties.

We reject any suggestion that the CPA has already
been fully implemented, and stress therefore that the
United Nations presence in the three areas of Abyei,
Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile - as well as in the
border areas between the North and the South - must
continue, pending the final resolution of the
outstanding issues under the CPA. It would also be
entirely inconsistent with existing Security Council
mandates and the United Nations commitment as a
signatory and guarantor of the CPA for the United

Nations mission to be withdrawn prior to the full and
exhaustive implementation of the Agreement.

An overriding concern of my Government is to
ensure the ongoing and unwavering support of the
United Nations for North-South security arrangements,
particularly in the border areas. We reiterate our belief
that the main objective of the United Nations should be
to support the full implementation of the CPA and to
avoid a security vacuum after 9 July. We welcome the
Security Council's support in its recent presidential
statement for a continued United Nations-mandated
presence in Abyei, Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile
after 9 July (S/PRST/ZOll/IZ), as well as its support
for United Nations assistance for the parties'
management of their shared border after the
independence of Southern Sudan.

In this context, we support the option of a
demilitarized buffer zone between the North and the
South that was discussed recently by the parties in
Addis Ababa. We note that the need for continued
third-party support for North-South security is separate
and additional to the peacekeeping tasks outlined in the
Secretary-General's recent special report on the Sudan
(S/2011/314).

We reiterate that this current situation must be
addressed by the Council in the context of the legal
framework agreed by the parties in the CPA. Any
premature movement away from the CPA would only
encourage the resolution of differences by brute force,
which would of course come at an enormous economic,
social and, above all, human cost. We therefore urge
the Council to call for the full and immediate
implementation of the agreement to withdraw all
Sudanese Armed Forces troops from Abyei; the
immediate return of the displaced populations to Abyei
under United Nations protection; the full
implementation of all CPA provisions with respect to
Abyei; the holding of the popular consultations in both
Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile states; the complete
demarcation of the North-South border; an immediate
ceasefire in Southern Kordofan; and the granting of
humanitarian access for United Nations and
international organizations into the area.

Our fundamental hope and desire is to see
peaceful coexistence between the two neighbouring
States of Sudan and South Sudan. We are striving to
build a future in which our two countries can work
cooperatively, live in peace with one another and strive

for the mutual viability of both of our two nations. We
look forward to South Sudan being welcomed next
month as a member of the international community,
and sincerely appreciate the international community's
efforts to help both the Sudan and South Sudan achieve
the peace and stability that our citizens desire and
deserve.

