Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
recent escalation ofconflict in the affected areas of Syria
has caught the attention of the international community.
We acutely feel the suffering of the Syrian people as if
it were inflicted upon us. China condemns all acts of
violence that target civilians and civilian property and
destroy innocent lives. China welcomes the Security
Council's unanimous adoption of resolution 2401
(2018), which is the result of Council members' patient
consultation and hard work to find consensus. The
resolution includes positive elements such as calling
for respect for Syria's sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity; demanding a cessation
of hostilities by all parties; easing the humanitarian
situation in Syria; supporting mine action throughout
Syria; and continuing to combat terrorism.

As an active party to the consultation process, China
made unflagging efforts and played a constructive role
in facilitating consensus-building in the Council. China
appreciates that, thanks to the concerted efforts of all
parties concerned, the Council arrived at a solution that
reflects the broadest possible consensus among Council
members. I would like in particular to thank Kuwait
and Sweden, as co-penholders of the resolution, for
their tireless efforts.

By speaking with one voice on the humanitarian
situation in Syria, the Security Council is helping to
alleviate the situation as a whole, helping to consolidate
the momentum towards a ceasefire, contributing to
counter-terrorism efforts in the country and serving the
overarching objective of arriving at a political settlement
of the Syrian issue. Going forward, the international
community should work together to ensure the full
implementation of resolution 2401 (2018), so that it
can play a positive role in improving the humanitarian
situation in Syria.

The only way to fundamentally improve the
humanitarian situation in Syria and to lift the people
of Syria out of their suffering is to find a political
settlement. The international community should
support the Syrian parties in seeking a swift solution
that is acceptable to all parties in the context of a
United Nations mediation through a Syrian-owned and
-led political process in order to end the suffering ofthe
Syrian people as soon as possible. China is keen for the
Council to remain united and forge consensus on the
Syrian issue. The Council must push the Syrian parties
to consolidate the momentum towards a ceasefire,
strengthen cooperation on combating terrorist groups,
advance the process towards a political settlement
and play a constructive role in maintaining peace and
security in Syria and across the region.

