Ms. Moules (Australia): Australia welcomes
Colombia's initiative in convening this open debate.
We consider it timely for the Security Council to have
further discussion of the question of small arms two
years after the item was first placed on the Council's
agenda and in the wake of the successful outcome of
the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in all Its Aspects.

The Programme of Action adopted by the United
Nations Conference provides a solid framework for
enhanced international cooperation in combating the
illicit small arms trade. We would like to take this
opportunity to congratulate the President of the
Conference, Colombia's Ambassador Camilo Reyes, on
his outstanding leadership and on his pivotal role in
forging the consensus that was achieved. Australia's
expectation is that the Programme of Action will serve
as a practical and dynamic point of reference for
further work at the national, regional and international
levels, including in relation to the Security Council's
role in this area.

We see continuing validity in the presidential
statement (S/PRST/1999/28) issued following the
Security Council's open debate on small arms in
September 1999, in particular in relation to: the
importance of regional cooperation in tackling the
issue of illicit trafficking in small arms; the call for
greater attention to be given to effective
implementation of arms embargoes; the call for
measures to discourage arms flows to countries or
regions engaged in or emerging from armed conflict;
the provision to peace negotiators of best-practice
guidance on the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of ex-combatants; the need for effective
national regulations and controls on small arms
transfers; and the importance of ecologically safe
destruction methods, in respect of which we welcome
the Secretary-General's report of November 2000
(S/2000/1 092).

Beyond the enduring importance of the 1999
presidential statement, several aspects of the recently
adopted Programme of Action on small arms have
particular relevance for the Security Council, namely:
the need to place particular emphasis on regions of the
world where conflicts come to an end and where
serious problems with the excessive and destabilizing
accumulation of small arms and light weapons have to
be dealt with urgently, and the importance of
mobilizing the political will throughout the
international community to prevent and combat illicit
transfer and manufacturing of small arms and light
weapons.

In addition, some of the more specific measures
recommended in the Programme of Action complement
the 1999 presidential statement. These include the call
for cooperation with the United Nations system to
ensure effective implementation of arms embargoes
decided by the Security Council, and the call for
consideration by the Security Council, on a case-by-
case basis, of the inclusion, where applicable, of
provisions for disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration in the mandates and budgets of
peacekeeping operations. In that context we would
emphasize also the importance of the safe and timely
disposal of surplus arms and of the secure management
of existing small arms stockpiles.

Since the start of international efforts to address
small arms problems, Australia has been a strong
advocate of developing practical, implementable
measures tailored to meet the specific needs and
capacities of each situation and region in which the
problems occur. For example, Australia has strongly
supported the development of model legislation on
weapons control for Pacific island countries and is
examining ways of improving procedures for effective
weapons safekeeping and accountancy in that region.
Ongoing efforts at the regional level provide a guide to
practical activities that can help to reduce the threat to
civilians and their livelihoods that can be posed by the
availability and circulation of small arms.

We see an important role for the Security Council
in ensuring that small arms issues are addressed as an
integral element of the Council's approach to conflict
prevention and resolution. Depending on the particular
circumstances of each situation, the Council is well
placed to develop practical recommendations for
addressing small arms issues, drawing on lessons
learned to date and on the Programme of Action where
applicable.

We welcome the fact that small arms issues have
been increasingly referred to in many of the Council's
thematic debates over the past two years. We welcome
also the Security Council's endorsement of the
Secretary-General's reporting on various missions,
including those which cover small arms issues, for
example in relation to weapons disposal in
Bougainville. This provides further ballast for
international efforts to combat small arms problems.

We urge the Security Council to continue its
active efforts to address small arms issues, with
particular reference to the spirit and objectives of the
Programme of Action.

For its part, Australia will continue to work
assiduously for effective implementation of the
Programme of Action, in particular in our own region,
as part of our global cooperative efforts to combat the
illicit trade in small arms and to alleviate the threat it
poses to international peace, security and development.

