Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): Allow me at the outset
to thank you, Madam, for convening this open debate on
the situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question. I also thank the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Robert Serry, for his
briefing and the representatives of Palestine and Israel
for their statements.

On the Middle East peace process, Azerbaijan
commends and supports ongoing diplomatic efforts,
particularly those undertaken by the United States,
to revive the negotiations and to contribute to greater
stability in the region. We are encouraged by the recent
announcement of the establishment of a basis for the
resumption of talks and by the decision of the parties
to return to the negotiating table. We also note the
continued interest of the regional stakeholders and
underline the importance of the Arab Peace Initiative,
which provides the necessary regional support for
the achievement of a comprehensive, just and lasting
solution. The Secretary-General has also stated that
the United Nations will support any endeavour towards
meaningful negotiations and to the achievement of a
comprehensive peace in the region.
Needless to say, the situation of insecurity in the
region has never required progress in the peace process
as much as it does today. It is imperative that the parties
demonstrate responsibility to sustaining international
efforts towards achieving the two-State solution and
that they avoid actions that would risk undermining that
objective. The parties must uphold their commitments
to the 21 November 2012 ceasefire agreement and
refrain from any action that would undermine it.

Settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory remain one of the biggest obstacles and threats
to the peace process. As a matter of principle and law,
Azerbaijan has consistently condemned and rejected
settlement practices. Regardless of whether settlements
are new or old, they are illegal under international law
and must be ceased immediately and completely.

The economic, financial and humanitarian
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory requires
continued international attention and assistance,
particularly in order to ensure the unimpeded provision
of humanitarian aid throughout the region.

On 11 June, Azerbaijan hosted a conference of the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation (OIC) on the establishment of an
Islamic financial safety net in support of Palestine, and
the donors conference in support of the city of Al-Quds.
The States members of the OIC and international
organizations attending the conference pledged to
contribute to improving the Palestinian economy, health
care and education and to the infrastructure projects of
the city of Al-Quds.

Palestinian unity and reconciliation is another
important issue to which we regularly refer. We support
the ongoing efforts to that end under the leadership of
President Abbas and express our hope that the May
2013 agreement between Fatah and Hamas to form a
unity Government will be implemented within the
agreed time frame.

Azerbaijan is deeply concerned about the continued
destabilization, violence and widespread human rights
violations in Syria. The conflict in Syria has inflicted
extensive damage on the country and its people, as well
as on the entire region. The regional implications of the
crisis are evident not only in its humanitarian impact on
the neighbouring countries but also in the participation
of foreign elements in the conflict and in the increased
military presence of third States in the immediate
vicinity of military action.

Those factors and, above all, the deepening
humanitarian disaster in Syria and beyond require,
first and foremost, urgent action on the part of the
international community with a view to bringing about
a negotiated solution to the conflict. We fully support
the Secretary-General's recent appeal to the parties
in Syria and their supporters to focus on the search
for a political solution, which remains the only way
out of the crisis. We very much hope that the second
Geneva conference on Syria will take place soon with
the best chances of success. There can be no doubt that
the failure of ongoing diplomatic efforts will further
exacerbate the situation and will have catastrophic
consequences, both inside and outside Syria.

