Mr. Bull (Liberia): The delegation of Liberia warmly
congratulates you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of November.

We pay deserved tribute to your distinguished
predecessor, Ambassador Ibrahim Gambari, for his effective
leadership of the Council last month. He has served
Africa's cause, and that of the international community,
with dedication and efficiency, and has remained a strong
advocate of the need for continued United Nations
support for the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) peace process in Liberia, in which his
country, the Federal Republic of Nigeria, remains one of
the preeminent actors. The Liberian people will always be
indebted to our African brothers for their sacrifice and for
their commitment to a peaceful resolution of the civil
conflict in Liberia.

For nearly six years the international community has
witnessed a human tragedy in Liberia. Today, there is
renewed optimism that, following the signing of the
Abuja Agreement on 19 August 1995 by the principal
faction leaders and their subsequent installation in a six-
member Council of State on 1 September, peace, which
had eluded the Liberian people for over half a decade, is
finally at hand. However, recent reports of cease-fire
violations by some factions have raised some legitimate
questions: Can the momentum in the peace process be
sustained? Are the leaders of the factions truly committed
to the peace process?

These issues have particular relevance given the past
failure of the faction leaders to honour their undertakings.
However, for the first time since the commencement of
the conflict in 1989, the faction leaders have themselves
taken on the responsibility of administering the affairs of
Government by serving as members of the Council of
State. The new leadership has publicly pledged its total
commitment to the peace process and declared it to be
irreversible. While deeds and not words alone will
ultimately determine the outcome, we believe in the
sincerity of the Liberian leaders, who have heard and
should respect the clarion call of the Liberian people to
end the senseless war and allow them to rebuild their
lives in an environment of peace, democratic governance
and the rule of law.

With regard to sustaining the momentum in the
peace process, it is my delegation's firm belief that the
support of the international community is indispensable
and must complement the efforts of the Liberian people
in order to facilitate the achievement of this important
objective.

In this connection we commend the Secretary-
General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, for his thirteenth
progress report on the United Nations Observer Mission
in Liberia (UNOMIL) in document S/l995/881 of 23

 

October 1995. We are grateful to him for his commitment
to and support for the peace process. We also express our
appreciation to his Special Representative, Ambassador
Anthony Nyakyi, and to all of the relevant United Nations
bodies which continue actively to provide invaluable
assistance for the realization of peace in Liberia and in
meeting the humanitarian needs of the many victims of the
conflict.

My delegation fully endorses the report of the
Secretary-General, which reaffirms the urgent need for
international support to assist the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) and its implementing arm,
the ECOWAS cease-fire Monitoring Group (ECOMOG),
fully to achieve its mandate, without which the
sustainability of the momentum in the peace process may
be adversely affected.

The report also identifies other areas of need in
Liberia, including that for providing humanitarian assistance
to victims, the repatriation of Liberian refugees and their
resettlement, the demobilization and reintegration of
combatants into civil society, and assistance to law
enforcement and the judiciary as well as to the electoral
process.

The Secretary-General's recommendations on a new
mandate and concept of operations for UNOMIL are fully
endorsed by my Government. It is our firm belief that the
implementation of the mandate will ensure more effective
coordination between UNOMIL and ECOMOG as they
discharge their respective duties.

The Government and people of Liberia have now
commenced the long but inevitable march towards the
disarming and demobilization of combatants and their
reintegration, the reconstruction of the country and its
economy, the restoration of peace, reconciliation and
democratic rule, and the holding of internationally
supervised elections in August next year.

Permit me to reiterate my Government's profound
gratitude to all Member States of the Organization as well
as to governmental and non-governmental organizations
which have offered assistance to Liberia since the
commencement of the civil crisis in December 1989.

As the Liberian people resolutely march towards a
better future, we need the continued support of the
international community if our legitimate aspirations are to
be realized. The Liberian people are determined to rebuild
their lives, and they appeal for your assistance. Liberia will
again become a respected and active Member of this
Organization, whose sterling principles have continued to
stand the test of time, as evidenced by our observance a
few weeks ago of the historic fiftieth anniversary of the
United Nations.
The delegation of Liberia fully supports the draft
resolution before the Council and requests its unanimous
adoption. The Liberian delegation also regrets that the
Council could not have adopted the draft resolution before
today, given the importance of its full implementation to
the peace process in Liberia.

