Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to join other speakers in thanking you,
Mr. President, for convening today's debate. We
welcome the international attention that Germany has
brought to this issue, both in its role as President of the
Security Council and in its chairmanship of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict. We
are grateful for the statement of commitment from the
Secretary-General this morning and for the briefings
from Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, his Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict, and
from Mr. Anthony Lake, Executive Director of
UNICEF. Let me express my particular appreciation for
the work of Ms. Coomaraswamy. We are very grateful
for her efforts to help children across the globe and for
the leadership that she has brought to this dossier.
I would like to focus on three topics - ambition,
practical action and the importance of addressing
attacks on education.

First, our ambitions for this agenda must remain
high. United Nations efforts to help children affected
by armed conflict can, in many situations, work and
work well. In the Sudan and Afghanistan, we look
forward to the implementation of new action plans to
release and reintegrate children recruited and caught up
in fighting.

We can highlight specific results, such as the
release of almost 3,000 children in Nepal in 2010 and
the reintegration of 191 children in Chad this year. But
there are also areas where progress has been much
slower. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we
need to generate far greater momentum to release child
soldiers, including those associated with the Forces
Armees de la Republique Democratique du Congo. In
Burma, the United Nations needs to be granted greater
access to monitor and report on abuses against
children, particularly in areas of ethnic conflict.

In the five years following the adoption of
resolution 1379 (2001), two-thirds of the world's child
population were living in the 42 countries most
affected by violence and conflict. In a series of
resolutions, Member States have demonstrated the
courage to tackle violations of children's rights
globally. Resolution 1998 (2011), which we have
adopted today, marks another important step forward,
but it should not mark the end of our ambition.

Secondly, we should continue to focus our efforts
on practical action. The preparation and
implementation of country action plans remain the
most effective tool for releasing children. It is here that
we should focus much of our effort. Of course, we
must carefully consider the context before deciding
which actions to take. No two countries are the same,
so the Working Group and country task forces must
constantly be searching for new and innovative
methods to make the maximum difference on the
ground. We welcome the increased use of field visits,
for example, which have been shown to be an effective
tool in informing the decisions of the Working Group
and bringing about increased local dialogue.
Thirdly, I welcome the focus of our new
resolution on addressing attacks on schools and
hospitals. Denying children access to education is in
itself a violation of their human rights; it also robs
them of the ability to understand and claim their wider
rights. Safe schools can deliver life-saving advice in
conflict zones. Attending school can keep children
from more dangerous livelihoods. It can help prevent
conflict in the longer term by reducing youth
employment and ensuring that young people are not
disenfranchised from society. We hope that this
addition will strengthen our efforts to reduce attacks on
children and improve their lives.

United Nations action on children and armed
conflict works, and it works best when we are
practically, not institutionally or theoretically, focused.
That is why it is right to maintain and increase our
ambition, including by expanding children and armed
conflict work to cover the important topic of attacks on
education, as we have done today.

