Mr. Fedotov: Allow me to begin by thanking the
Security Council for its continued attention to the
threats to international peace and security posed by
terrorism and organized crime.

While their objectives may differ, criminals and
terrorists share the need to operate in the shadows,
exploiting gaps in criminal-justice response in and
between countries and regions. Terrorist tactics can be
employed by organized criminal groups while terrorists
raise funds through criminal activities. Human
trafficking for sexual exploitation, child soldiers and
forced labour can be used not only to generate revenue
but to strike fear and recruit new fighters.

The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant has
profited a great deal from the illegal trade in oil,
trafficking in cultural property and kidnapping for
ransom. In the Sahel and the Sahara, smugglers and
traffickers are paying dues to gain the right of passage
to areas controlled by terrorists. We have also seen
piracy and organized crime flourish on the high seas,
including outside the jurisdiction of any single State
and beyond the capacities of many countries to patrol.
Abu Sayyaf kidnaps seafarers in the waters around the
Philippines, the Taliban benefits from the drug trade
across the Indian Ocean, Al-Shabaab supports piracy
and finances its operations with the trade in Somalia
of charcoal through the Gulf of Oman, and Al-Qaida
supplies its forces around the Arabian peninsula by sea.
Furthermore, expanding terrorist and criminal activities
online represent a clear transnational challenge to all
Member States.

To strengthen responses going forward, I should
like to highlight the following priorities.

First is the effective implementation of international
commitments, including the conventions on
transnational organized crime, corruption and drugs,
as well as the global instruments against terrorism
and the United Nations standards and norms on crime
prevention and criminal justice. The United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,
in particular, and specifically its three protocols,
address the issues of illicit firearms, human trafficking
and migrant smuggling. These agreements enjoy near
universal acceptance and should be better used to
promote coherence between domestic anti-crime and
anti-terrorism legislation and relevant national and
international instruments.

Secondly, much more resources must be channelled
into providing technical assistance in order to build up
specialized expertise and capacities. Those include
training for law enforcement agents, coastguard
personnel, border and airport officials, prosecutors,
judges, prison officers and other relevant officials.

Thirdly, we need to reinforce investment
in mechanisms for inter-agency, regional and
international cooperation, including information-
and intelligence-sharing. The United Nations clearly
has a role to play in encouraging and enabling such
networked responses. The United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) global Networking the
Networks initiative is enhancing the efforts of law
enforcement bodies to cooperate at the local, regional
and global levels. In West Africa alone, we promote
the Sahel Judicial Platform, the West African Network
of Central Authorities and Prosecutors, and the Asset
Recovery Interagency Network. Similar networks are
operational in Central Asia, West and Central Asia and
other regions.

UNODC also works with universities and other
institutions to advance knowledge about the linkages
between organized crime and terrorism under the
Education for Justice initiative. We are supporting
national law enforcement agencies in collaborating
on cross-border investigations and in identifying
and intercepting illicit movements of goods through
our Container Control Programme and Airport
Communication Programme. UNODC is also helping
to protect the world's busiest shipping routes from
exploitation by criminals and terrorists through our
Global Maritime Crime Programme.

Fourthly and finally, the international community
can do more to mainstream integrated action against
terrorism and crime across the pillars of the United
Nations work. United Nations-wide coordination is
key, and UNODC is working closely with such partners
as the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism
(UNOCT), the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED), the United Nations Development
Programme, the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights and UN-WOMEN.

In response to the Security Council's resolutions,
UNODC has stepped up its efforts to address
trafficking in persons in conflict situations. Among
other work, UNODC is helping to identify and protect
child-trafficking victims recruited by armed extremist
groups in the Niger, and supporting United Nations
police in strengthening detection and reporting on
human trafficking.

Prisons also present another potential link between
crime and terrorism. UNODC promotes good prison
management, in line with the Nelson Mandela Rules,
which can help in dealing with high-risk prisoners and
in preventing radicalization and recruitment. More
broadly, combating corruption and illicit financial
roles is crucial to strengthening responses to these
transnational threats. Furthermore, as criminals
and terrorists exploit new technologies, UNODC is
providing specialized law enforcement mentoring and
helping to bring offenders to justice through our Global
Programme on Cybercrime.

Illicit firearms can be used as a source of funding
for terrorists and organized criminal groups and to
carry out terrorist acts. UNODC is supporting Member
States in tackling firearms trafficking and we are
looking to develop a joint project with UNOCT and
CTED to address the terrorism-armed crime nexus.

The connections between terrorism and organized
crime are complex and shifting. More research is
needed. As the Security Council has repeatedly
recognized, addressing the linkages between
transnational organized crime and terrorism requires
the international community to work together to close
gaps in criminaljustice responses and to deny criminals
and terrorists any safe haven. UNODC stands ready, as
always, to support the Council's efforts.

