Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): 1 will make a short
statement here; the full text will be circulated.

As we have heard, the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory remains grim, perpetuated by the
disproportionate use of force and aggression by Israel,
the occupying Power, with complete disregard for the
lives of civilians. Malaysia condemns in the strongest
terms the acts of aggression and the ground invasion
launched by the occupying Power, and we demand the
immediate cessation of these illegal acts.

Since the start of the military airstrikes by Israel
on 8 July 2014, followed by the ground invasion, more
than 600 Palestinians have been killed and over 3,500
injured. Over 80,000 Palestinians have been displaced,
stretching the capacity of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East. The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs stated earlier that 80 per cent ofthe Palestinians
killed were civilians.

This includes the brutal killings of four Palestinian
boys last week who were doing what kids do, playing
by the beach, and who posed no threat whatsoever to
Israel. Over the weekend, a 6-year-old girl was badly
injured when eight of her family members were killed
by Israeli forces in their own home. Four of them
were children, including a seven-month-old baby. We
strongly deplore the senseless loss of innocent lives in
the conflict, and we take this opportunity to convey our
deepest condolences to the families of the victims.

The grotesquely disproportionate nature of the
Israeli-Palestinian situation means that Israel's claim
that its action was based on self-defence is simply
fallacious. Israel's assertion that the Palestinians were
using civilians as human shields is similarly perverse.
As Gaza is one of the most densely populated areas in
the world, civilians there cannot but be affected when
faced with a barrage of bombardments and military
aggression by Israel. These are not human shields; they
are simply civilians, in their own homes, going about
their daily lives. Israeli attacks on and bombardments
of civilians' homes, hospitals and schools constitute a
gross violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention that
amount to war crimes.

Malaysia urges the international community,
especially the Security Council, to act swiftly
and decisively to demand that Israel cease its
disproportionate and atrocious aggression against
Palestine. It is imperative that both sides immediately
restore calm to avoid greater destruction and further loss
of life, especially among the civilian population in the
Gaza Strip. In that regard, my delegation welcomes the
call by the Security Council for an immediate ceasefire
in Gaza. We urge all parties to commit themselves to
that end.

As a member of the Special Committee to
Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human
Rights of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the
Occupied Territories, we participated in a fact-finding
mission to Amman and Cairo last month. We heard
disturbing testimony from a number of witnesses,
non-governmental organizations, Palestinian
Government officials and United Nations agencies
operating in Palestinian territory and in the occupied
Syrian Golan regarding human rights and humanitarian
violations perpetrated by the occupying Power. It pains
us to see that all the warning signs that went unheeded
are being manifested in the violence we see today.

With complete disregard for the 2004 advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice, settlement
expansion throughout Israel's occupied territories has
continued at an alarming pace and on an alarming
scale, with new policies and procedures allowing for
the confiscation of Palestinian land and property. My
delegation notes that settler violence has become a
natural consequence of those illegal sites, especially
the destruction of Palestinian property, agriculture and
livestock with impunity, in the absence of protection by
the occupying Power.

To those who would condone Israel's action in
flagrant violation of the law, especially international
humanitarian law, and who have allowed Israel to
escape with impunity for the past six decades, I ask:
Where is their conscience? For far too long, the Council
has been quiet and paralysed in the face of aggression,
expansion and the lack of accountability on the part
of the occupying Power. The silence is deafening. The
Security Council should redeem itself and uphold the
responsibilities entrusted to it with respect to Israel's
failure to implement the numerous resolutions before
it and should take immediate measures to address that
great injustice.

As the occupying Power, Israel is responsible for
protecting the people under its occupation. Clearly,
Israel has failed to do so for the past six decades.
Regrettably, the United Nations remains paralysed. Its
key members, who are in a position and have the power
to act to rectify the situation, choose self-interest rather
than humanity and the rule of law, turning a blind eye
on Israeli aggression. That situation simply cannot
be allowed to continue in perpetuity. In that regard,
Malaysia supports the call by the State of Palestine
to place Palestine under the international protection
system of the United Nations. We also reiterate the
call to convene a conference of the High Contracting
Parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention to address
Israel's continued noncompliance with the provisions
of that instrument.

In conclusion, Israel's ruthless military attacks
on civilians are unwarranted and are a crime against
humanity. Malaysia therefore calls on the United
Nations, especially the Security Council, and on the
international community to take immediate action to
halt Israel's atrocities against the Palestinian people of
Gaza and to work to bring calm to Israel and Palestine.

