Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I would like to begin by
joining others in thanking the Italian presidency for
organizing this timely briefing on the security challenges
in the Mediterranean region. I thank Secretary-General
Guterres for his briefing and sharing his thoughts on
how to address such pressing challenges.

In this briefing, although there have been references
to issues that do not belong here, we prefer to stick to
matters that are relevant to the topic at hand. In our
view, attempts to exercise a monopoly on any area of
discussion does not contribute to peace. Ethiopia has
always been committed to a win-win outcome in all
engagements with its partners.
Armed conflicts in the Mediterranean region
continue to create space for terrorist organizations and
violent extremist groups within which to operate. They
have also created favourable conditions for organized
criminal groups engaged in trafficking in persons and
smuggling. Those trends have caused unspeakable
suffering for civilian populations, thereby resulting in
forced displacement in the Sahel, Middle East and North
Africa, as well as the large-scale secondary movement
ofpeople using the Mediterranean route. The large-scale
secondary movement coupled with the entrenchment
of organized transnational criminal groups continues
to pose serious challenges to maintaining peace and
security in the Mediterranean region, particularly in
front-line countries, such as Italy and Greece.

Restrictions on mobility are also among the
challenges facing the Mediterranean region, particularly
in the light of increased suffering faced by people on
the move, including tragic deaths, extortion, slavery
and sexual and gender-based violence, as well as other
serious human rights abuses at the hands of terrorist
groups and trafficking and smuggling networks. In our
view, those serious challenges require a comprehensive
and coordinated approach that could be based on the
following three pillars.

First, it is vital to intensify all efforts to address the
root causes ofconflicts, as well as respond to challenges
that might have resulted from the vacuum caused by
them, such as transnational organized crimes, terrorism
and violent extremism. The role of the Security Council
in resolving the root causes of conflict and responding
to challenges posed by terrorists and violent extremist
groups to the maintenance of peace and security and
countries affected by armed conflict continues to be
critical. In that regard, the Council should continue to
work towards finding a political solution to conflicts,
and use all the available tools at its disposal to that
end. Enhanced cooperation and coordination with the
African Union and subregional organizations would
also complement the Security Council's efforts in that
area. Our united efforts in addressing the root causes
of conflict will enable us to establish favourable
conditions for the sustainable, voluntary repatriation
and reintegration of refugees to their countries of origin
in safety, and prevent further secondary movements
to Europe.

Secondly, in countries emerging from conflict or in
post-conflict situations, justice and security institutions
struggle to manage the wider socioeconomic and

political challenges inherent to recovery processes. It is
important to redouble our efforts in supporting countries
emerging from conflicts in the Sahel, particularly with
regard to their institutions and efforts to sustain peace
and development.

Thirdly, serious protection challenges concerning
the humanitarian situation caused by armed conflicts
and terrorism in north-eastern Nigeria, Libya, Syria
and Mali, among others, and the lack of durable
solutions for refugees and internally displaced persons
from those countries continue to be the primary
cause of secondary movement via the Mediterranean.
For instance, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees has indicated that refugees
and migrants continued to risk their lives crossing
the Mediterranean sea during the first half of 2017.
Although I commend the generosity of countries of the
Mediterranean region that continue to open their borders
to refugees, I would like to underscore the importance
of facilitating regular, safe, accessible and orderly
mobility, particularly through expanded resettlement
opportunities, and visitor, family reunification, work,
resident and student visas, as well as other temporary
protection schemes. I would also like to re-emphasize
the need to redouble our support for refugees response
plans in first countries of asylum to respond to their
protection needs.

In conclusion, I would like to end my statement by
affirming our commitment to working in a coordinated
manner with all relevant actors to address the root causes
of the peace and security challenges in the Mediterranean
region, while encouraging countries in and beyond the
region to continue their generosity directed towards
refugees seeking international protection.

