Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
has consistently advocated a political solution to the
issue of Yemen to support the political process there,
with consideration for the long-term interests of the
Yemeni people.

China voted in favour of resolution 2451 (2018), on
Yemen. The adoption of the resolution safeguards the
unity of the Council and has provided new momentum
for the solution of the Yemeni issue. Recently the
Yemeni parties fully demonstrated their political will
and accomplished a breakthrough in the peace talks
in Sweden. China welcomes this and commends and
supports the Secretary-General and Special Envoy
Griffiths for their tremendous efforts. The international
community should doubly cherish the outcome of
the Sweden peace talks and effectively facilitate
its implementation.

The Yemeni political process is entering a crucial
stage. The Council should fully consider and respect
the views of the countries concerned and of those of the
region, and support the Yemen political process and the
good offices of the United Nations. The international
community should increase its humanitarian relief
measures for Yemen and support the country in efforts
to continue to improve the humanitarian conditions
there and meet the basic needs of its population.

We have taken only the first step in a 10,000-mile
journey. The Stockholm agreement and resolution 2451
(2018) are just the beginning but not the end. In the next
stage, the parties should focus on implementing the
outcome of the Sweden peace talks and, on that basis,
promote a sustainable and effective process of dialogue
and negotiations. The political route is the only way to
resolve the Yemeni issue.

The international community should safeguard the
sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity
of Yemen, and support efforts to reach an inclusive
political solution through dialogue and negotiations
on the basis of resolution 2216 (2015), the Gulf
Cooperation Council initiative and its implementation
mechanism, and the outcome of the Yemeni National
Dialogue Conference. To that end, China stands ready
to continue to play its constructed role.

