Mr. Okamura (Japan): I would like to join
other members in thanking the Chairs of the three
Committees, the Permanent Representatives of New
Zealand, Egypt and Spain, for sharing the activities of
their Committees with us, as well as for their excellent
work in serving as Chairs.

Today we face terrorist attacks all over the world
almost every week. I fully agree with the Permanent
Representatives of New Zealand and Egypt that
countering foreign terrorist fighters and terrorist
financing is the key to coping with the serious threats
posed by terrorists. The Security Council addressed
those issues in resolutions 2178 (2014) and 2253
(2015). The full implementation of those resolutions
is critical. Japan has been strengthening its border
security and counter-terrorist financing measures
to better implement the relevant resolutions. For
example, we have adopted and improved biometric
tools, such as fingerprint readers, with the operating
function of fingerprint identification for identity
certificates and passports and with facial images in
the identity certificates as tips to affirm a traveller's
real identification. In October 2015, we enacted new
legislation to better cover terrorist funds.

Based on those experiences, we urge all Member
States to fully implement the resolutions. Terrorists
exploit vulnerable countries that are short oflegislation,
equipment and training, which they use as loopholes.
Japan has been assisting countries on capacity-building
for enhancing the implementation of measures to plug
those loopholes. In particular, Japan has provided
assistance to various countries in the Middle East and
Africa amounting to nearly $28 million in just the past
two years.

Terrorists usually try to disguise themselves
and use forged travel documents when crossing
borders. To discover possible terrorists, Japan has
provided fingerprint readers together with training for
immigration officers. The officers can help to detect the
real identity of terrorists by matching their fingerprints
with those in databases. Similarly, in order to cut off
terrorist financing, we have provided assistance on
enacting laws on counter-terrorist financing and on the
building ofnetworks for confiscating criminal proceeds.
Those measures provide authorities in the region with
a basis for sharing information, freezing assets and
prosecuting terrorist financiers in a concerted manner.

To combat terrorism more effectively, I wish to
highlight the linkage between terrorist activities and
illicit businesses. Many terrorists draw profits through
illegal business, such as drug trafficking and human
trafficking, as well as oil smuggling, in close cooperation
with transnational organized crime. Therefore, we
need to take into account those connections between
terrorists activities and underground businesses when
we elaborate counter-terrorism measures. We must
highlight resolution 2195 (2014), which stresses the need
to work collectively to prevent and combat terrorism
benefitting from transnational organized crime.

Strengthening the international non-proliferation
regime - with resolution 1540 (2004) at its core - is
also a high priority for Japan. Capacity-building again
has a key role to play, and Japan is committed to
providing assistance in that field. For example, for more
than 20 years, Japan has hosted Asian export-control
seminars to share best practices among participants. It
is also important for the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) to
enhance cooperation with relevant international
organizations. It was very fruitful for the Committee
to have been briefed by the Secretary-General of the
World Customs Organization, Mr. Kunio Mikuriya, on
9 February. He said that, although developing countries
used to consider customs bodies as revenue-generating
agencies, they are now increasingly aware of the
customs role in border controls for national security. I
was very much encouraged to hear that remark.

Finally, in response to rapidly evolving methods
of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, it
is necessary to review, update and enhance resolution
1540 (2004). Japan is determined to actively engage
in the ongoing comprehensive review process under
the strong leadership of the Permanent Representative
of Spain.

