Mr. Zuma (South Africa): I thank the Council for
the comments made and the questions asked. I will try
to respond.

One of the questions that many members have
asked is how will the National Council for the Defence
of Democracy-Forces for the Defence of Democracy
(CNDD-FDD) and others be integrated into the
Transitional Government. All parties signed the Arusha
Agreement, but the Burundi Government has passed an
act stating that the parties that come in will have to
sign that act, committing themselves to participating.
Having done that, they have to come in.

The issue has been raised with the Burundi
Government, because if those parties were not there at
the installation of the Transitional Government, it
means that they are not party to the Government at the
moment. You have the Government and all the existing
institutions such as the Parliament. The question is:
how will those groups come in? I do not think that they
have any alternative to coming in; they have to come
in. First, if groups are party to an agreement, you
cannot envisage a situation in which, when some of the
provisions of the agreement are implemented, those
groups are not party to the decision-making or are not
part of the implementation of that decision. So, of
necessity, they have got to be part of the institutions.
There is no difficulty about it. They have got to
participate at the executive level, as well as in the
Parliament. And they have also made the point about
civil servants.

However, that raises a new challenge, because the
Transitional Government is, by nature, bigger than the
Government that has always existed in Burundi. It had
to accommodate all 19 parties. The inclusion of the
parties that have signed the agreement will mean
further expansion of that Government. The question is,
how can we support that? It will need resources as
well. You cannot have them sign the agreement and not
participate in planning and taking decisions on how the
Government will work. That is the challenge. There is
no difficulty having all sides agree that they are going
to participate. What is left is working out the details:
how it will be done and what percentage of the new
parties coming in will participate?

I would imagine that the support we are talking
about will certainly include that process of integration,
because for peace we do need the parties coming in to
participate. In fact, it might be more important for
those who came late to be shown the benefits of
signing and therefore of participating. I am also
optimistic that it will not be difficult for the
international community, the United Nations, to help in
this. Because of the three-year period that has been
allowed for this process in Burundi, there are actually
two years left. So, any financial support for this year
has a very definite time period within which you might
have to take action. I would imagine that, after
discussion among the parties, they will be able to come
up with very specific requirements on the material
support that they will need. But there is no problem in
everyone agreeing that this should happen.

One of the questions was how will the army
operate, given the FNL factor. I think that quite a
number of questions have arisen on that issue. It was
taken into account when the two parties were reaching
an agreement. That is why, on the question of the army,
while the army will take a clear, defensive posture and
will also have heavy armaments that were meant to
attack and deal with the armed groups, it will have to
be limited.

But the point is taken that, while FNL is there,
one will expect certain elements of the army to be
specifically charged with the task of dealing with that
issue. As to the details, they will be worked out, first,
by the army and, secondly, by the Joint Commission. In
fact, both parties agreed that they will collaborate and
work together to ensure that they are able to deal with
the issue of FNL.

The other question has been: How will the
CNDD-FDD forces that are outside the country come
back? Certainly, those are the details that are going to
be worked out together by the Joint Commission.
Those who are inside will move in a particular way to
the assembly points, as the Agreement stipulates, but
those who are outside will also have to be transported
back into the country. A mechanism will be worked
out, but, again, bringing those forces from outside is
one element that will need support. Of course, one
would imagine, whatever the forces may be - since
these are the two forces that signed before - that this
will cover all of them.

The other question is: What are the possibilities
of FNL coming into the process? I believe that the
possibilities are there. The call was made by the
summit very deliberately that FNL should come and
quickly conclude the agreement before 30 December
and that if did not do so - as this was the second
chance that was given to FNL - appropriate action
would be taken. I think there is a determination by the
region that we cannot have a situation in which the
peace process is undermined by one party, when about
22 parties have signed the Agreement. They all
committed to peace and this party that defines itself as
outside peace will be defining itself as anti-peace.

Therefore, decisions will be taken. Whether there
will be a summit or not I do not know, but it did not
seem that the heads of State wanted to call a summit on
this issue alone. I think they have, in a sense, a position
they would like to take, but they have felt it necessary
to persuade FNL to come into the process and have
instructed me to try my level best to persuade it to do
so. I have started communicating with FNL. I have a
hope that it will come in, because when we last met it
stipulated its preconditions. But the bulk of those
preconditions are actually the issues that are being
addressed already within Bujumbura. One example is
the issue of political prisoners, on which there has been
a lot of work done with the participation of the United
Nations.

So I believe that, now that the CNDD-FDD has
taken a decision to be part of this Agreement, that in
itself is going to impact positively on the FNL. We will
see in the course of December how that one goes. I do
not think one can give a categorical answer as to
whether it is going to come in or not, but since I have
engaged with FNL over two years, it has never said
that it was not committed to peace. All it has been
putting across is certain conditions, and I believe,
given the situation - and I think that, as a movement,
it must also be analysing the situation - that with the
signing by the CNDD-FDD, FNL has no other group to
stand with and refuse to sign. So I am hopeful that it
will sign and come into the process. It has been
reported that FNL has publicly welcomed this
Agreement and that in itself seems to me to be a
positive indication on its part.

The other question that has been asked by a
number of members is: What do we think the Security
Council or the United Nations could do to help? Well, I
think that this body is more experienced in matters of
this nature and will certainly know what it is that needs
to be done to help such a situation. But of course, I
think it would be fair to say that we are expecting a
number of things that we believe the United Nations
could do.

This agreement, as we explained, is not like a
classic kind of agreement that is reached, particularly
because we still have the FNL factor and the
combatants of the CNDD-FDD coming into the
assembly points. Only there are their arms taken from
them and stored within. That is precisely the reason
why the heads of State thought it was important to
come in with the African mission so that we could deal
with that situation and not ask the impossible from the
Security Council, given the rules that are in effect.

If we were to do that, however, we would
certainly need support, while understanding, as the
heads of State understand it, that this is a bridging
mechanism to open and clear the way so that we have a
perfect situation for the United Nations to come into. It
is going to need support because, as members know,
the African countries do not have all the resources.
Here, they are going to put the commitment into action,
but they are going to need support from the Security
Council to bolster that effort. One specific action might
be, for example, to airlift those forces, wherever they
are. That help will be necessary so that they are able to
arrive on time. Of course, that will mean not
necessarily that the Security Council will have to
commit troops, but that there will be that kind of
support.

There is also going to be the need for support to
feed the combatants who are going to be at the
assembly points. One member asked about the strength
of the CNDD-FDD. It is always difficult to give the
accurate strength of a movement of that nature, but
they are counted in the thousands. Some people talk
about 10,000 or more people who are going to emerge.
Certainly, the United Nations will have to support
them.

I think there will be other things to be supported.
One is something that I talked about - the process of
integration into the Transitional Government
institutions of the new people who are coming in and
assistance in strengthening those institutions as well.
But there are also the issues of technical support. As
members can see, the time frames are not long. The
African Union has not elaborated the manner in which
these things should be done in terms of how to deal
with peacekeeping if it has to do so from the
beginning. While the Constitutive Act of the African
Union says that this is what the continent must do, it is
still developing that capacity, so we will certainly
benefit from the expertise of the United Nations in the
process of planning and discussing the implementation.
We believe that this is among the things on which the
United Nations could help.

The United Nations could also call upon the
international community - particularly the donors
who have been holding the funds, since there has been
no ceasefire - to release those funds now that the
biggest group has signed the ceasefire Agreement.
They will be very helpful in terms of making the
country able to deal with the processes in which it is
involved.

Those are some of the areas that will need
support from the Security Council. We believe that it
should not be difficult for the Security Council to be
able to provide it. I take it that some of the questions
that have been asked were, in a sense, repeated and
that, in answering the few that I have answered, they
have actually dealt with that issue, including the
question on how the FNL sees itself, the agreement and
the process.

I think, at the end, I must express our gratitude
for the support that the Security Council has shown in
this matter. This is more than pleasing, more than
encouraging, particularly as we are dealing with a
number of problems in the continent. Take it from us;
we are very committed to dealing with those problems.
As I have indicated, the Constitutive Act of the African
Union specifically addresses the problems in the
continent. As you know, in the NEPAD we have also
identified the problems of conflict as the main obstacle.
Therefore, we are in the process of dealing with this.

Your support for this agreement is really
welcome, and in any case, this is what we expected
from this Organization, because it is in keeping with
the beliefs and, indeed, with the mission of the United
Nations. Thank you very much for the support. I am
convinced that from here on we will be in a better
position to work with confidence and understanding
that there is support by this body for what we are
doing. With the Council's support I am sure that we
will do more than we have.

The other possible thing that might be done to the
FNL - and the heads of State have talked about
this - is the possible sanctions. Of course, I must also
say that the FNL is not as big as the CNDD-FDD. It
operates more in rural areas of Bujumbura and has
been confined in one place most of the time, unlike the
CNDD-FDD.

So we believe that what is happening - and
particularly with the Council's support here, and the
call upon the FNL to come into the process - must

have an impact.

