Mr. Mitchell (Bahamas): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Government of New Zealand for this very
timely opportunity to discuss the peace and security
challenges of small island developing States (SIDS)
and to highlight in this forum some of their specific
vulnerabilities. My Prime Minister asked me, in
recognition of the special assistance New Zealand gave
to the Bahamas over the last year as it implemented its
new tax system, to attend today's meeting so we could
express our hopes for its success and support this
laudable effort. I would also like to say at the outset
that we align ourselves with the statements made by the
Prime Minister of Jamaica and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Antigua and Barbuda.

The Bahamas has stated in many forums that, for
our country, there are no higher priorities than the
environment, fighting crime and containing illegal
immigration. These matters for the Bahamas go to the
very root of our existence. That was the point I made
when I spoke in the general debate at the General
Assembly last year (see A/69/PV.20). I would now add
to that list of priorities the issues of unemployment and
the economy. All of our efforts are intended to go to
the root of peace and security. The main themes are
buttressed by our work to ensure that we have a safer,
more prosperous, modern, peaceful and ultimately
stronger Bahamas and region.

Climate change represents the most serious
global environmental and development challenge,
with far reaching security implications. As a country
particularly vulnerable to the adverse impacts of
climate change, the Bahamas believes that the security
implications of climate change must be primarily
addressed at the multilateral level by bodies that
are inclusive, representative and transparent. We
underscore that if urgent and ambitious actions are
taken to comprehensively address climate change in
this context, the security implications associated with
climate change will be reduced, thereby diminishing
the existential threat faced by some SIDS, including
those of us in the Caribbean Community.

The Bahamas is entirely convinced that the
international community must attach the highest priority
to completing ongoing climate change negotiations
within the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change on a new legally binding agreement
that results in the achievement of substantial emission
reductions in the shortest possible time frame and
significantly increases the level of resources available
to vulnerable developing countries, including SIDS, in
order to assist them in adapting to the adverse impacts
of climate change. What is important is that access to
these resources must for all SIDS and low-lying coastal
developing States be at the concessional rates and
not made available based on the determinant of gross
domestic product per capita.

The Bahamas has also been grappling with serious
crime in our society, related, in large measure, to the
inability of young males to settle disputes without
recourse to violence and the resultant proliferation of
gang activity and illicit drugs, small arms and light
weapons, and ammunition trafficking. The Bahamas
was therefore actively involved in the negotiations
leading to the successful adoption of the Arms
Trade Treaty (ATT) and considered that adoption a
landmark accomplishment for the United Nations.
Our Government believes the entry into force of
the ATT will contribute to peace and security in the
Bahamas. Accordingly, we deposited the instruments
of ratification of the Commonwealth of the Bahamas
to the Arms Trade Treaty on 25 September 2014. We
continue to fight the illegal drug trade and trafficking in
persons and have been investing in social intervention
programmes in order to fight crime.

I spoke earlier of the adverse effects of illegal
immigration on our national security. In this regard,
we have made serious efforts to stop the flow of
undocumented non-Bahamian nationals into our
territory. New policies are now in place and there will
be strict adherence to these measures in order to stop
that flow. Last year, the Bahamas entered into important
agreements with our immediate neighbours - Cuba,
the Dominican Republic and Haiti - to come to
terms with the vexing situations that impact our good
relations, including reaching accords on fishing and on
migration. We fully intend to bring illegal migration
under control.

A moment ago, I added unemployment and the
economy to the list of my country's highest priorities.
On that front, the Bahamas is now facing an existential
threat to good governance- the realization that,
if not properly managed, a single investor can seek
to destabilize the governance of a country through
dominance of its economy and deliberate and improper
interference in its local politics. Add to that the efforts
of various multilateral bodies and some Member
States to undermine the economies of many Caribbean
Community States by imposing mandates on the
financial-services sectors that are now an essential part
of our economies. Such imposed mandates are inimical
to fair trade. While these multilateral bodies and
Member States may see their zeal for tax collection as
a moral triumph on their part, the resulting destruction
caused by moving the goal posts and changing the rules
without consultation is a moral negative rather than a
triumph. If the economies of our countries collapse,
leading to our citizens' departure from their homes, the
migration that would cause could only be destabilizing
around the world. That is a threat to peace and security.

We have been asked today to consider the role that
the Security Council might play with regard to the
assistance provided to SIDS in addressing challenges to
the maintenance of peace and security, including those
I have highlighted. In response, the Bahamas would
say that while we see a role for the Security Council
in combating such threats and challenges as part of a
multifaceted and collaborative global response, it bears
repeating that those threats and challenges must be
addressed primarily at the multilateral level by bodies
that are inclusive, representative and transparent.
Finally, in that connection, I would conclude by
calling for reform of the Security Council, which we
support - a change that is long overdue, that would
reflect twenty-first-century realities, and that could see
a rotating seat for the small island developing States.

Once again, I am grateful for this opportunity to
address the Council.

