I would like to express my delegation's gratitude to you, Mr. President, for convening today's meeting. I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and Special Envoy Onanga-Anyanga for their enlightening briefings today. Allow me to make the following key observations on the political developments as well the status of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA). South Africa welcomes the positive political developments that have taken place both in the Sudan and South Sudan in the recent past, including those highlighted in the Secretary-General's report for the period of 16 October 2019 to 15 April 2020 (S/2020/308). With the positive developments that have taken place in the Sudan thus far, we emphasize the continued need for unity in the Sudan's ruling political coalition. We continue to urge the two countries to use the renewed rapprochement to finalize the outstanding issues with regard to Abyei. The tensions reported earlier this year highlight the volatility of the region and its potential to unravel the progress made to bring about stability in the Area. South Africa encourages the Sudan and South Sudan to continue inclusive political dialogue in order to implement their agreements on border issues and to meet the benchmarks previously set by the Security Council. With regard to the developments pertaining to UNISFA, South Africa appreciates and welcomes the importance of the stabilizing role that UNISFA and the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism (JBVMM) continue to play along the border between the Sudan and South Sudan. South Africa welcomes the progress that has been made by the JBVMM on benchmarks specified by resolution 2497 (2019). Furthermore, South Africa welcomes and encourages the continued work of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism and the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee. We note the Secretary-General's mention that, in this time of the coronavirus disease pandemic, engagement in the foreseeable future may need to take on new modalities. My delegation is encouraged by the UNISFA-facilitated meetings between the Ngok Dinka and the Misseriya on 16 March and 9 April to discuss putting an end to the intercommunal tensions. We welcome their renewed commitment to peace and security in Abyei. We hope that continued interactions between the two sides will lead to an agreement on resolving outstanding issues. Lastly, South A frica welcomes the progress that UNISFA has made in promoting the women and peace and security agenda in the Abyei region by promoting women's participation at all levels of decision-making, including in conflict prevention and resolution processes. We also thank Ethiopia for its continued efforts in contributing to the easing of security tensions in Abyei.
