Ms. Blocher: Allow me to extend the thanks
of Mr. David Malone, Rector of the United Nations
University, for the invitation to participate in this open
debate. Rector Malone regrets not being able to attend
in person, as he is meeting with the University's Global
Governing Council this week in Tokyo.

The United Nations University, established by
the General Assembly, exists to contribute through
collaborative research and education to efforts to resolve
pressing global issues and to do so by functioning as
a bridge between the academic community and the
United Nations. Our Charter, given to us by the General
Assembly more than 40 years ago, mandates us to work
with academia worldwide to address pressing global
problems of human survival, development and welfare.

It is hard to think of a more pressing global
problem of human survival than the risks entailed
by the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
Resolution 1540 (2004) provides an important
framework for cooperation in the crucial global effort
to prevent non-State actors from obtaining weapons
of mass destruction, one of the most pressing security
challenges of our time.

The occasion of this year's comprehensive review
of the status of the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), conducted under the able Spanish chairmanship,
provides an opportunity to step back and assess how
the United Nations response to this threat could be
strengthened. Academia has a special role to play in
assisting Member States in that important work. The
worldwide academic community has undertaken
significant research in the physical sciences and has
helped to disseminate technical knowledge, skills
and data. It can also help by identifying areas of
vulnerability and devising recommendations on how to
adjust response mechanisms.

Since the 2009 comprehensive review, the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) has made a concerted effort
to engage scientific expertise. In April, the United
Nations University was fortunate to be asked to
contribute to the effort, in cooperation with the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs, through the
organization of a formal dialogue between the 1540
Committee and academia and civil society. In June,
the dialogue continued on the margins of the formal
open consultations on the comprehensive review of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

Looking forward, we see important opportunities
for the Security Council to benefit from ongoing and
systematic engagement with academia and civil society
on these issues around the world. We also believe that
academic partners can provide valuable assistance to
Member States in their efforts to promote transparency
and awareness-raising on the purpose and content
of resolution 1540 (2004), as well as States' ensuing
obligations. We hope Member States and the Security
Council will avail themselves of these resources in
the months and years ahead. The need for effective
action is so great that such opportunities must be
carefully exploited.

Allow me once again to express my thanks for the
opportunity to address the Council here today.

