Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
would like at the outset to thank the Secretary-General
for his most recent report (S/2012/72) and Mr. Edmond
Mulet for his briefing on recent developments
concerning the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).

The Secretary-General's report tells us that,
during the period covered, the security situation in
Kosovo improved considerably compared with the
previous period. Nevertheless, as Mr. Mulet stressed,
there are continuing tensions in northern Kosovo that
may exacerbate the situation on the ground and
undermine the chances for progress in the substantive
negotiations.

We welcome the efforts being made by UNMIK
to reduce inter-communal tensions in Kosovo and to
avert the escalation of violence and confrontation
among them. We welcome the progress made in the
ongoing negotiations between Belgrade and Pristina
under the auspices of the European Union, particularly
in the joint management of border crossings, the civil
registry, freedom of movement, license plates and the
recognition of university diplomas. These efforts
represent an important stage in the negotiations
between the two parties, and it is our hope that this
trend will have a positive impact on the substantive
negotiations concerning the final settlement in Kosovo.

Morocco encourages the parties to pursue, in
good faith and with a determination to succeed, the
bilateral negotiations aimed at finding a final, political
settlement to this issue, in line with the parameters set
out in resolution 1244 (1999), and to act in conformity
with its provisions, without undertaking any unilateral
steps.

On another subject, my country is concerned at
allegations of trafficking in human organs, known as
the Medicus case. We note the determination of the
parties to cooperate in order to identify and bring to
justice those who responsible for these acts and to
avoid any recurrence thereof.

Morocco has always attached special importance
to peace in that region, as witnessed by the presence of
a Moroccan humanitarian contingent in the
multinational peacekeeping force in Kosovo. In the
Security Council, my country will continue alongside
other members to support engagement and dialogue
among the parties and the promotion of confidence-
building members among the communities and parties
of Kosovo so as to identify a definitive political
solution, in line with international law, that will
establish peace and security in the region.

