Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation welcomes the Defence Minister of
Argentina, Mr. Rossi, to the Council to preside over
today's meeting. I thank you, Sir, and other colleagues
for the words of welcome extended to me. I look forward
to close cooperation with all colleagues in the future in
our joint efforts to advance the work of the Security
Council. China also thanks Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Honore for her briefing on the
situation in Haiti.

The Haitian situation has continued to register good
progress. The Government has been making vigorous
efforts in implementing policies on employment,
education, the environment, energy and the rule of law, as
well as in enhancing its capacity-building. Remarkable
progress has been achieved in reconstruction after the
2010 earthquake. China welcomes those developments.

At the same time Haiti still faces challenges
in its political process, economic development and
the humanitarian situation. Peaceful reconstruction
remains an arduous task that requires the continuing
support and assistance of the international community.
I would like to focus on the following three points.

First, I should like to refer to the continuation of
the consolidation of a democratic stabilization process
in Haiti. We hope that all the relevant Haitian parties
will put the interests of the nation and the people first,
enhance their dialogue and political consultations,
achieve proper solutions of disputes, promptly reach
consensus on senatorial and local Government elections
and further promote the Haitian democratic process
and political reconciliation.

Secondly, MINUSTAH should to continue to
advance the economic development and reconstruction
of Haiti. We call on the international community
to effectively honour its pledges of aid to Haiti and
be constructively engaged in the country's national
reconstruction.

The cholera situation in Haiti remains grim. China
supports the Secretary-General's initiative, announced
in February, to eradicate cholera in the country. We call
on Member States to continue to provide resources and
technical support in that regard.

Thirdly, MINUSTAH should continue to play the
important role of the United Nations in Haiti. China
appreciates the efforts and contributions by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Honore
and MINUSTAH for the maintenance of peace and
stability in Haiti. We welcome the Secretary-General's
recommendation on a continued reconfiguration of
MINUSTAH and the extension of its mandate for an
additional year.
China hopes that MINUSTAH will continue to
implement Security Council mandates, help maintain
security and stability in Haiti, promote the political
process and strengthen the rule of law and the
capacity-building of Government institutions. In that
reconfiguration process, MINUSTAH would be well
advised to extensively heed the views of all sides and
proceed in a steady manner.

