Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): We would like to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Fall and Mr. Lezhnev for
their briefings. As the Special Representative said, the
political, security and humanitarian situation remains
very fragile in several States in Central Africa. I would
like to take this opportunity to make a few remarks.

First, we remain concerned about the situation
in Cameroon. While 9 February 2020, the date
scheduled for the next legislative and local elections,
is fast approaching, the situation is still complicated.
On the one hand, we commend the Cameroonian
authorities for holding a national dialogue and for the
recommendations that followed it and the release of
political prisoners. Those are encouraging signs. We
would also like to commend all the parties for their
commitment to Switzerland's mediation in order to
resolve the crisis in the English-speaking regions. On
the other hand, the situation on the ground has not yet
changed substantially. The English-speaking regions
unfortunately continue to be the scene of hostilities
and human rights abuses by all parties, while an entire
generation is at risk ofbeing denied access to education.
In addition, the recommendations of the national
dialogue have been neither endorsed nor implemented.

We therefore call on all the parties to work for
concrete results. That applies to both the national
dialogue and mediation. Only through dialogue and
negotiation can solutions be found. Nor should we forget
the other crises in Cameroon, on the humanitarian
front and with regard to the problem of Boko Haram's
terrorism. The lack of coverage of the humanitarian
plan, which has reached only 41 per cent, only increases
the country's challenges. We call on all partners to do
their best to contribute to that end.

Secondly, we would also like to take this opportunity

to revisit the climate and security issue. The report ofthe
Secretary-General (S/2019/913) notes several positive
developments. Among them are Gabon's adoption of
new penal and penal procedure codes that substantially
increase the penalties for environmental crimes, as well
as the adoption by the Economic Community of Central
African States ofa subregional common position on the
contributions of Central African forests to the fight
against climate change. We welcome the increased
attention to the effects of climate change, ecological
change and natural disasters on the stability of Central
Africa and encourage the mission to continue on that
path. As the report points out, we must recognize that
we can and must do more.

Lastly, the illegal exploitation of natural resources
remains a major issue in the region, and we should
therefore provide the various missions covering Central
Africa with a robust mandate to enable them to tackle
it. We should also work closely with regional partners
that are already active in that context, such as the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region.

As for Belgium, we are working closely with the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and the judicial authorities in Belgium have had
no hesitation in starting investigations of individuals
suspected of being involved in trafficking.

