Mr. She Okitundu (Democratic Republic of the Congo): (spoke in French): I should like to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month of August 2017, and to
welcome, through you, the friendly country of Egypt,
with which the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
enjoyed excellent relations for many years. I thank
you for this opportunity to address the Council at this
meeting, which is considering the final report of the
Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2017/672/Rev.1).

I also take this opportunity to express to the
Security Council the recognition of the people and
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
for the support and assistance they receive from the
United Nations and, more specifically, from the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).

Lastly, allow me to express my delegation's
appreciation to the Group of Experts, which continues
to devote itself courageously and tirelessly to the cause
of my country. The quality of its work, despite some
shortcomings linked to human nature, deserves to be
highly praised.

This is also the place to offer a solemn thought in
memory of the two United Nations experts, Michael
Sharp and Zaida Catalan, who were murdered in the
central Kasai region. The Government of my country
and the Congolese people as a whole strongly condemn
this despicable act, and I want to reassure the United
Nations that the perpetrators of this crime will be
severely punished.

I cannot continue my statement without addressing
myself to the parents of Michael and Zaida, who are
in the Chamber. On behalf of the Government of my
country, I would like to convey our deeply shared grief
for the immense loss of the dear ones whom they have
loved and whom nothing in the world can replace.
Our Government and our people wish to express our
compassion for the misfortune that has struck them and
reiterate our deepest condolences. Michael and Zaida
certainly worked in the service of the United Nations,
but also indirectly in that of my country, to which
they rendered valuable services by traveling across its
territory to denounce all obstacles to peace. They did
their work not only with passion, but also with love.
They paid with their lives so that the troubled regions
of my country might find peace. Our duty, in honouring
their memories and giving meaning to their sacrifice,
requires us to pool our efforts so that the peace they so
fervently desired and sought becomes a reality for our
people as a whole.

I take note of the essential nature of the final report
of the Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, and thank you, Sir, for the briefing you
have just given. I should have liked to limit my remarks
to the content of the report alone, but the Council's
attention to the situation in my country requires me to
speak on a number of questions that will surely be of
interest to its members. In that context, I shall briefly
review the political situation, the electoral process, the
security situation in general and particularly in the
Kasai region, as well as human rights issues.

The political situation, as members know, remains
dominated by the implementation of the political
agreement of 31 December 2016. Indeed, under the
aforementioned agreement, a Government of national
unity led by the opposition is already at work. Internal
disagreements within certain political parties of the
opposition, inherent in any political process, in no way
detract from the Government's legality resulting from
its investiture by the National Parliament. Moreover, the
recent seating of the members of the National Council for
Oversight of the Agreement and the imminent adoption
of the law on the organization and functioning of that
body will enable the process under way to continue its
progress towards the organization of elections. In this
regard, it should be noted that operations to update the
electoral register have developed to our satisfaction.
Indeed, out of the expected 42 million voters, the
Independent National Electoral Commission (CENI)
has already registered more than 39 million, that, 90 per
cent of the total number.

In the provinces of Kasai, which have suffered
heavy human and material losses as a result of the
crimes and violence perpetrated by the terrorist militia
Kamuina Nsapu, the deployment of equipment, with
the support of MONUSCO, and the training of electoral
agents have already begin. Registration operations
themselves will begin by the end of this month. As soon
as the enrollment process is completed, the Government
will request the urgent consideration of the revision of
the electoral law and the review of the distribution of
seats at the next parliamentary session.

My delegation wishes to reassure the Council that
the elections will indeed take place in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in accordance with the electoral
calendar to be published by the CENI. It goes without
saying that, in accordance with the agreement of
31 December 2016, the CENI, the National Council for
Oversight of the Agreement and the Government will
shortly evaluate the progress of the preparations to
assess the exact period of the three scheduled elections:
the presidential, national legislative and provincial
legislative elections.

With regard to the security aspect, the report under
review highlights the continued presence of some
foreign and national armed groups in the eastern part
of our country. To address this situation, the Forces
armees de la Republique democratique du Congo
(FARDC), with the support of MONUSCO, is pursuing
military operations against these groups. With
particular reference to Allied Democratic Forces, it
should be noted that since the dismantling of their main
bastions, their operational capacities have substantially
decreased. A certain lull has thus been observed in
what was their range of operation.

With regard to the Forces democratiques de
liberation du Rwanda, my delegation considers it
important to recall the case of the 340 combatants of
that negative force who voluntarily surrendered to the
FARDC three years ago. As Council members know,
these fighters remain to this day in transit sites at
Kanyabayonga in North Kivu, Walungu in South Kivu
and Kisangani in Tshopo. The repeated appeals to the
international community for their repatriation to their
countries of origin or resettlement in a third country
outside the countries of the Great Lakes region have so
far received no favourable response. My Government
calls once again on the international community,
which has always insisted on the eradication of that
negative force, to become involved in order to achieve
a definitive solution.

It seems to me important to recall here also the
situation of the combatants of the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement/Army in Opposition, which
MONUSCO has confined to Munigi in North Kivu
and Dungu in Haut-Ue'le. My country, which wishes to
live in peace and maintain good relations with South
Sudan, also calls on the United Nations to assume its
responsibility to resolve this situation by repatriating
these ex-combatants to their country or facilitating
their settlement in another host country.

As regards former members ofthe Mouvement du 23
mars, it should be noted that they continue, in violation
of the Addis Ababa Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region and the Nairobi Declaration, to freely
engage in their political and military activities in the
neighbouring countries to which they have fled. My
Government has never ceased to denounce the bad faith
of these ex-rebels. It condemns their military activism
and calls once again to the attention of the Council the
need to consider imposing sanctions on the leadership
of that movement. My Government reaffirms its
determination to continue to fulfil its commitments
and calls on other parties concerned to do the same for

sake of the stability of my country and of the region as
a whole.

In addition to all this, I must point out that the
illegal exploitation and plundering of natural resources
are also among the causes of the armed conflict and
instability that persist in the east of my country. My
Government has undertaken efforts to reverse this
situation, in particular by clearing mining sites and
setting up a national commission against mining
fraud. It will be agreed that these efforts alone are not
enough to end this situation. It is therefore important
for the neighbouring countries and the international
community tojoin in these efforts. My country is asking
the United Nations to take appropriate steps to develop
a sanctions mechanism for defaulting States, including
suspension or embargoes on trade in minerals, similar
to the measures taken under the Kimberley Process.

I cannot close this chapter without mentioning the
case of the terrorist insurgents Kamuina Nsapu. This
mystical-religious movement was born in August 2016
in the territory of Dibaya, in the province of Central
Kasai, following a conflict over customary power
created by a certain Jean Prince Pandi, alias Kamuina
Nsapu, who had declared himself to be atraditional
chef. He died on 12 August 2016 in clashes between
his militia and the security forces. His followers, who
spread terror and death in the provinces of Central
Kasai, Kasai, Kasai Oriental and Lomami, used
civilians, especially children and women, as human
shields after drugging them. They gather in small
groups to attack public buildings that symbolize the
authority of the State, such as police stations, army
facilities, administrative and CENI offices, as well as
the infrastructure of the Catholic Church.

Today, the authority of the State is virtually
restored throughout that part of the national territory.
Particularly after the tour carried out by the Head of
State to reassure the populations of all the affected
provinces of Kasai. The major remaining challenge
is of a humanitarian nature, related to internally and
externally displaced persons, whose management
requires the urgent mobilization of all partners for
substantial assistance.

In discussing the Kamuina Nsapu militia, I believe
it would be appropriate to give a brief overview of the
progress of investigations in the provinces affected
by that phenomenon. Following a deterioration of the
situation, the President of the Republic, His Excellency
Mr. Joseph Kabila Kabange, in his address to both
Houses ofParliament in Congress, expressed his resolve
to restore State authority in that part of the country,
stressing that the crimes committed by militiamen
against peaceful citizens, law enforcement officials
and the United Nations could not go unpunished and
that their perpetrators, who are the subject of judicial
investigations, should be punished in accordance with
the law. In order to give effect to his word, he signed
orders setting up an operational sector in Grand
Kasai and instructed the Minister of Justice to take
prompt steps to ensure that competent prosecutors and
prosecutors could initiate investigations where nothing
had yet been done, so that justice could be restored to
the victims. The Minister of Justice was also instructed
to expedite the investigations under way som as to
ensure that justice was rendered as soon as possible in
the areas where the militia continued to operate under
the Kamuina Nsapu label.

With regard to the allegations of serious human rights
violations against the Forces armees de la Republique
democratique du Congo in the Kasai area, a National
Board of Inquiry, led by senior military magistrates,
was created by the Government to shed light on this
situation. It was in that context that the Auditor General
announced the arrest of seven soldiers suspected of
war crimes by murder; war crimes by mutilation; war
crimes by cruel, inhumane and degrading treatment;
and denial of an offense committed by individuals
or military jurisdictions, committed in the Mwanza
Lomba massacre in Bena Tshikasu. The incriminated
persons were convicted in the first degree following
public hearings.

As for the mass graves, the joint MONUSCO auditor-
military investigations and audits are continuing.

Regarding the deaths oftwo United Nations experts,
the events leading to their assassination took place
in Bunkonde, a town 100 kilometres from Kananga,
the capital of Central Kasai province. Initiated by the
Auditor General of the Congolese armed forces, the
investigation into the murder of these two experts led to
the identification of 16 suspects, 9 of whom are already
in detention. Nineteen hearings have already taken
place, while the next, devoted to a visit to the scene of
the murder, is scheduled for August 21.

In these investigations, Congolese justice is
already working with the United Nations. As part of
this collaboration, MONUSCO provides logistical
assistance to the military prosecutor. In the same vein,
three international experts of Senegalese, Canadian
and Mauritanian nationality, were recently appointed
by the High Commissioner for Human Rights in
accordance with resolution 35/33 of 23 June 2017
of the Human Rights Council, in agreement with
the Congolese Government. These will be assisted
by 19 international experts and experts from the
African Union.

It goes without saying that these experts must be
deployed in strict compliance with the terms of reference
established in the resolution of the Human Rights
Council, namely, that the deployment must be in the
framework of assistance provided to the investigations
carried out the Congolese military justice system. In
the same spirit of openness and transparency, we note
the excellent technical cooperation between the judicial
authorities of my country and the experts from the
United States Federal Bureau of Investigation, at the
request of the American authorities.

As regards Sweden's request for cooperation to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, I should like to
reassure the Council that, just as we have been ready to
cooperate with the American authorities, the Congolese
Government agrees to cooperate with Sweden in the
investigations being conducted by the Congolese
judiciary, despite the fact that we do not have a formal
mutual legal assistance convention between our two
countries. The Minister of Justice has informed the
Swedish Ambassador to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo on this point. The Prosecutor General of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will agree on the
practical modalities for partnership \with his Swedish
counterpart, through appropriate letters rogatory.

In this tragic situation, my country, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, has suffered much loss of life.
Law enforcement officers and officials of the CENI,
administrative and customary authorities have been
beheaded. Ruthless militia have killed women, men and
children. All these innocent victims deserve justice.
That is why the Government of my country will spare
no effort to ensure that the perpetrators of all these
crimes are arrested and punished.

Before concluding, allow me to express the position
of my Government on two of the recommendations
formulated by the experts, as contained in the report
before us. I refer specifically to the recommendation
on the establishment of an independent international
investigation into the murder of the two experts and
that requesting the extension of the Group's mandate to
30 December 2018.

My Government does not think it is a good idea
to set up such an inquiry in that, in accordance with
35/33 of the Human Rights Council and for reasons
of transparency, we are already cooperating with
established United Nations mechanisms and with the
inquiries being conducted by the appropriate authorities
of the countries of origin of the two victims. As to the
request for an extension of the terms of reference of
the Group of Experts, my Government considers that
this issue has already been resolved in resolution 2360
(2017) of 21 June, which extended the mandate of the
Group until 1 August 2018.

I would like to conclude by expressing my gratitude
to the Chairman of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo for the work he has done since he
assumed his post. I would also like to thank the Group
of Experts for its commitment and determination in the
exercise of its mandate. To all members of the Council,
I reiterate the gratitude of the Government and people
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The meeting rose at 12.05 pm.
