Mr. Tuomioja (Finland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The following
countries also align themselves with this statement:
Bulgaria, Romania, Turkey, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Albania, Iceland,
Liechtenstein, Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova.

The dramatic developments that we witnessed
during the past few months have again demonstrated
the urgent need to move from violence and hatred to
peace and confidence. I would like to thank the Arab
League for its initiative in convening this session, as
the European Union also sees that the most pressing
issue is to end the current stalemate in the peace
process. There are no military or unilateral solutions to
any of the challenges and problems of the Middle East.
Lasting peace and security in the region can only be
ensured by a comprehensive settlement with, at its
core, a negotiated two-State solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict.

The urgent need to change developments in the
region is dictated first and foremost by the fact that the
situation on the ground is deteriorating and we must
urgently take measures to alleviate the situation of the
Palestinian people. The economic and humanitarian
situation is severe in the Palestinian territories: 70 per
cent of the population live under the poverty line, most
of them children deprived of their basic needs.

The European Union has mobilized more
resources than ever before to meet the urgent needs of
the Palestinian people, including through the temporary
international mechanism for assistance to the
Palestinian people. This mechanism has allowed
substantial resources to be channelled directly to the
Palestinian people during the past few months, and it
has now been extended. We encourage donors and
others in the region to make full use of this mechanism.
The European Union repeats its call on Israel to resume
transfers of withheld Palestinian tax and customs
revenues. These resources are needed in order to
improve the severe situation of the Palestinians.

The humanitarian situation is directly connected
to the question of access and movement. That is a
major problem in the Palestinian territories in general
and in Gaza in particular. The European Union has
stressed in its contacts with Israeli counterparts that the
border crossings such as Rafah and Karni be opened
and remain open. We urge the parties urgently to take
concrete steps to implement their obligations under the
Agreement on Movement and Access, and, in that
regard, the European Union reiterates its continued
commitment to the European Union Border Assistance
Mission in Rafah.

The viability of an agreed two-State solution is
threatened by the continued enlargement of settlements
and the continued building of the separation barrier on
Palestinian land. The European Union will not
recognize any changes to the pre-l967 borders other
than those agreed by both parties.

The European Union demands that Palestinian
militants cease all violence directed towards Israel or
other Palestinians. The Israeli soldier must be released
immediately and unconditionally. The detained
Palestinian ministers and legislators must also be
released. The European Union also urges Israel to
abide by its obligations under international
humanitarian law, including its obligation to protect
civilians and not to use disproportionate measures.
Security is not an exclusive matter for one party - it
matters for everyone in the whole region.

The European Union stresses the need to solve
underlying problems by political means. Therefore, we
welcome the announcement by the Palestinian
President, Mahmoud Abbas, on an agreement to form a
Government of national unity. The European Union has
expressed its hope that those negotiations will be
rapidly and successfully concluded and that the new
Government's political platform will reflect the
Quartet's principles and allow for early engagement.

There is also a need to proceed on a diplomatic
path regionally. That is why we need support for the
peace process from all regional partners. The ultimate
goal is to reach a comprehensive and sustainable peace
in the Middle East. It is imperative to create a new
dynamic towards that goal.

The European Union welcomes the statement of
the Quartet issued yesterday, which reaffirms the
commitment of the Quartet to the road map. The road
map has as its aim the creation of two States living side
by side in peace and security. In order to achieve that,
all parties must respect their obligations under the road
map. The European Union gives its full support to the
Quartet's intention to meet on a regular basis in the
coming period, as well as to engage actively with the
parties and other regional partners to monitor
developments and to discuss the way ahead.
