Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Ambassador Murmokaite, Ambassador
Oh Joon and Ambassador Quinlan for their briefings.
China appreciates the work of the three Committees
under the leadership of those three representatives.

I would like to focus my statement on the question
of anti-terrorism. Terrorism is the common enemy
of humankind. Recent violent terrorist attacks in
Nigeria, China and other countries have once again
demonstrated that any terrorist act, regardless of when,
where, by whom or for what motive it is committed, is
a grave and inexcusable crime.

The international community must adopt a zero-
tolerance attitude in the face of terrorism, separatism
and extremism and firmly oppose and counter them.
The United Nations should play a greater role in counter-
terrorism. The Organization should apply clear-cut
criteria on the question of counter-terrorism, oppose
double standards and encourage the international
community to enhance counter-terrorism cooperation
in accordance with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter and international law.

China opposes efforts to link terrorism with
any specific country, ethnic group or religion and
supports enhanced dialogue among civilizations and
the elimination of the breeding grounds for terrorism
by various comprehensive means. China believes that
terrorists and terrorist groups are currently using new
information and technology, including incitement,
recruitment, financing and planning through the
Internet. The international community should be highly
vigilant on this issue and seek appropriate solutions to
it.

The Eastern Turkestan terrorist forces, led by the
Eastern Turkestan Islamic Movement, are the most
serious terrorist threat to China's national security.
The Chinese Government will continue to take
resolute action against those terrorists. We have the
determination, the confidence and capability to fight
them. These terrorists will never succeed, regardless of
the purpose of their attacks.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee bears a very
important responsibility in the fight against terrorism,
and we support its implementation of its mandate and its
continuing efforts to improve the implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions through measures
such as the preliminary implementation assessment
and by organizing relevant meetings and country
visits. We hope it will continue to maintain a dialogue
and communication with Member States, enhance its
coordination and cooperation with other United Nations
entities, and continue to help Member States build their
capacity. China will continue to participate actively in
international cooperation within the framework of the
Council in order to fight the phenomenon of terrorism.

The Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities represents an important tool
for the United Nations and the Council in combating
terrorism and imposing sanctions. We support its
efforts to enhance communication with the countries
concerned in listing and de-listing names and to
review the sanctions lists as scheduled, in order to
promote implementation of resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 2083 (2012) and fulfil its mandate effectively.
China supports the work of the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team under the Committee's
leadership, and we have taken note of the efforts of the
Office of the Ombudsman to enhance the impartiality
and transparency of the sanctions regime. We hope the
membership will continue to support the work of the
Committee and work together to maintain the authority,
effectiveness and impartiality of the United Nations
sanctions regime.

Resolution 1540 (2004) was the first Council
resolution to be assigned the important role of
preventing non-State actors from acquiring nuclear,
chemical, biological and other weapons of mass
destruction. This year marks its tenth anniversary, and
earlier this month the Council held an open debate (see S/PV.7169) at which it adopted a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2014/7) that reflected the determination
and commitment of the international community
with regard to non-proliferation. The next step for
all countries should be promoting the universal,
comprehensive and balanced implementation of the
resolution, and the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) should do its part in that regard.
China supports the work of the Committee in collecting
reports from Member States, summarizing useful
experiences in the implementation of the resolution and
promoting international assistance and cooperation in
accordance with its mandates. China is ready to work
with all parties to enhance global governance in the
area of non-proliferation and advance the international
non-proliferation process in the interests of promoting
universal security.

