The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Germany.

Let me first say that, from our national point of
view, everything in my statement has already been
said so I will refer to what was said earlier. First of
all, I would like to welcome the Foreign Minister of
Haiti. I thank him for being here. I would also like to
thank his delegation for the very good cooperation we
had in preparation for today's meeting. I would like to
thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his intervention. His
dashboard was widely praised. I think that it is very
good. I will give him the floor a little later because
there were a few questions put by the representative of
the United Kingdom and other speakers. Also listening
around the table to our Chinese and Equatorial
Guinean colleagues, as well as the representatives of
Kuwait, France and others, I think that the Secretary-
General's report (S/2019/198) and his proposal with
regard to a special political mission as a follow-up was
widely praised.

I would like to thank in particular Ms. Bachelet
for her presence and for her briefing. From a German
perspective, I would just like to highlight her phrase
when she said that the promotion and protection of human
rights is a foundation to stability and development. I
hope that we will be able to give the necessary support
with regard to the special political mission. I am also
very happy to have heard that she is working with the
Haitian Government regarding a stand-alone presence.
Perhaps the Haitian Foreign Minister could say a few
words about where Haiti stands with regard to that and
to such an office.

Let me also thank Ms. Viaud for what she said in a
very impressive way about inequality, sexual and gender-
based violence and women's political participation.
These are key issues. We fully support what she said,
and, as she has seen, many around the table also
back what she said. Our colleagues from France, the
United Kingdom and the Dominican Republic noted
how important this is for the stability of society and
of the country. Again, I do not wish to overburden
the Minister, but perhaps he can say something in his
intervention about the promotion of the issues that were
raised, the protection of women and the fight against
sexual and gender-based violence. Our French colleague
mentioned the fact that only one of the 12 seats on the
Supreme Court is held by a woman, so perhaps that
issue can be addressed.

Briefly, I would say that the remarks all went in
pretty much the same direction. As our American
colleague said, Haiti is on a positive trajectory, and
there are many examples of where things went well,
but, of course, there are still some deficits. There is one
issue where I personally do not see this as clear, where
Jonathan said that we should not link the length of the
mission to the elections. Elections in Haiti have always
been a case involving problems related to the duration.

On the substance of the special political mission
there, I would fully support what our Belgian, French
and Russian colleagues said concerning maximum
assistance, so we should do everything with the special
political mission to support the Government. I would
also add to the list what my colleagues from Belgium
and the Dominican Republic said with regard to the
Peacebuilding Fund. South Africa, Poland and Cote
d'Ivoire stressed the need to hold a dialogue with civil
society. Our Russian colleague said that there has to
be an inclusive national dialogue; I think that it is very
important to include civil society in the way forward.

Let me conclude by echoing what the Ambassador
of the Dominican Republic said: we should not rush
ahead or endanger what has been achieved, and so we
must move carefully ahead. We are on a good trajectory,

but it is fragile. I think that the Minister will take away
from the Security Council that there is a strong wish to
support him.

I think that I did not overstep my five minutes.

I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Haiti. With my colleagues' permission, he
can have some extra time.

