Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): It is an
honour and a pleasure to see you, Mr. Foreign Minister,
presiding today over this very important debate that has
brought us together.

France welcomes the important report that the
Secretary-General has transmitted to us. We also
welcome the initiative taken last July by Jamaica.
Given the discussions on this theme that were
conducted in 1999 and then in 2000, this is a good
occasion to take stock of the situation on the basis of
the assessment, conclusions and concrete
recommendations of Secretary-General Kofi Annan,
for which we thank him.

Sweden will be making a statement in due course
on behalf of the European Union, to which my
delegation, of course, fully subscribes. I would like to
make a few comments on the points that seem to me
particularly essential.

The report of the Secretary-General and the
discussion that will be taking place in the Council and
in the General Assembly come at a good time. While
the Brahimi report and the Millennium Summit have
paved the way for the necessary reform of
peacekeeping and the daily management of United
Nations operations make us think increasingly of
strategies for crisis resolution and post-conflict peace-
building, it appears urgent to gear our strategies also
towards the prevention of armed conflict.

Given the considerable United Nations efforts in
peace operations to deal with conflicts, usually at a
moment's notice and in urgent circumstances, it is
necessary and legitimate to wonder whether the
international community should not make an extra
effort in order better to anticipate and prevent conflicts
while there is still time to do so. Certainly this is the
least costly solution - whether in human, political,
economic or financial terms. Above all, it is the most
suitable way to establish conditions for lasting peace.
In the countries middle of an acute crisis - and we have
several examples of such crises in Africa - the United
Nations and the donors face the worst possible
conditions in war-torn and occupied countries, with
their resources sometimes plundered, and with a lack of
clear political prospects for restoring trust among the
people. In these conditions, to start implementing the
economic and social development programmes that are
necessary for bringing about a lasting resolution to the
crisis is a considerable challenge. Moreover, these
countries are marginalized by a world economy that
has left them behind. Post-conflict peace-building,
although it draws largely on the same resources and
instruments as prevention, is consequently a more
difficult and uncertain kind of action. Unfortunately,
we see confirmation of this every day. If we really want
to implement fully the primary mandate of the United
Nations, which is "to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war", we must therefore take more
account of the need for prevention in our work, while
respecting the principles of the Charter. All actors -
Member States, United Nations organs, agencies and
programmes, donors, regional organizations and civil
society have their role to play.

The report of the Secretary-General gives us an
assessment and useful avenues for reflection and
action. I wish to highlight three points that emerge
from the report and that reaffirm ideas brought out in
previous discussions.

First of all is the need to develop a true "culture
of prevention", that takes a much longer View of action
than is the case today, and that is sufficiently well
established across the entire United Nations system,
while also bringing in external actors to a greater
extent.

It is important, as stressed by the Secretary-
General, that not only the United Nations bodies - the
Secretary-General, the General Assembly, the Security
Council and agencies and programmes such as United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) - but
also the Bretton Woods institutions, the World Bank
and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and
private actors - non-governmental organizations and
enterprises - all acquire a true preventive reflex either
to identify and follow up on reliable indicators to
mobilize the attention of the international community,
or to better design and guide their own actions based
on a clear goal of conflict prevention.

Efforts already made and described in the report
should be encouraged. The increased trend in UNDP
activities towards encouraging good governance and
the rule of law, in order to make development projects
part of harmonious and sustainable economic and
social development, is a step in the right direction.
Awareness within the Bretton Woods institutions must
also be developed. The United Nations organs could
also usefully draw on the proposals contained in the
report to create the structures for dialogue and
discussion about specific conflict-prevention problems.
France hopes that such structures will soon emerge. In
due course France will be making its contribution,
particularly in the Economic and Social Council, in the
General Assembly, or in the Security Council.

Secondly, there should be increased coordination
among the various actors in conflict prevention. Given
the diversity of the actors involved in the various
aspects of conflict prevention policies, coordination is
decisive. This is more difficult to promote than
peacekeeping or peace-building, because to a certain
extent the aspect of gravity or urgency that spurs action
is lacking. Mobilizing energies for conflict prevention
will depend both on the culture of prevention that I
referred to, and on good coordination among the
various actors.

Here we must not limit ourselves to the
distinction that is sometimes drawn between
"operational" measures and "structural" measures for
conflict prevention. It does describe the whole range of
possible measures within specific time frames.
However, in practice, cooperation among all actors
concerned will be necessary and proper coordination
mechanisms must be established, in particular with the
regional organizations and the Bretton Woods
institutions.

The third very important point concerns the
specific roles played by the Secretary-General and the
Security Council. It is important to note that the
Charter entrusts special roles in conflict prevention to
the Secretary-General and the Council, and it is
important to lend our support to the specific proposals
made in the report on this subject. The Secretary-
General is authorized to bring to the attention of the
Security Council, pursuant to Article 99 of the Charter,
any given situation that may threaten the maintenance
of international peace and security. The periodic
reports of the Secretary-General on regional or
subregional situations will provide an opportunity to
nurture dialogue on this point with the Security
Council. There is also a need to strengthen the early
warning, reaction and analysis capacities of the
Secretariat, so that the Secretary-General can be in a
better position to perform this function.

Proposals on this were made in the report of the
Secretary-General of 1 June 2001 (A/55/977) on the
follow up to the Brahimi report, and they deserve every
attention and support on our part. The Security Council
has at its disposal a whole range of means that it should
use as and when appropriate. Here I would recall
Security Council missions, proposals or support for
peaceful resolution of disputes, preventive
disarmament, preventive arms embargoes, combating
illicit trafficking in mineral resources, diamond
embargoes, the creation of demilitarized zones and the
preventive deployment of peacekeeping operations,
including in the civilian police area. These are all very
important avenues.

In conclusion, I wish to say that today's debate is
a useful opportunity to recall the shared concerns of
Council members on a question that directly affects us
all as we discharge our mandate and that should be
translated into action and decisions in the months to
come. We hope that soon this report will be taken up in
the General Assembly so that all competent bodies can
be fully involved in this useful and necessary effort.

