Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I would like to thank the
Force Commanders for their briefings - General
Bosco Kazura of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
General Carlos Alberto dos Santos Cruz of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and General Iqbal
Singha of the United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force. I would also like to thank General Maqsood
Ahmed, Military Adviser for Peacekeeping Operations,
for his remarks.

For the past five years, the Security Council has
organized this annual meeting with Force Commanders,
which we find very useful, given the challenging
peacekeeping environment that a number ofour missions
are currently operating in. The meetings provide an
opportunity for us to gain a better understanding of the
perspective from the field, particularly on operational
issues. As the Council, we have a huge responsibility to
ensure that the mandates we authorize set clear tasks
for the missions and their leadership, including where
timing and design are concerned. As His Excellency
President Paul Kagame of Rwanda said two weeks ago
at the high-level summit convened by the United States
on United Nations peacekeeping. Rwanda believes
that "nothing matters more than saving innocent lives
when they are at stake". It is first and foremost a host
country's responsibility to protect its own civilians, but,
unfortunately, that does not always happen. And that is
where United Nations peacekeeping missions have to
intervene, when required, in order to make a difference
on the ground. That is also part of our responsibility to
protect.

As new threats emerge and peacekeeping tasks are
transformed, peacekeepers should be trained, prepared
and equipped to use force to protect their own lives
and those of innocent civilians. Contingents that do
not fulfil those requirements should not be deployed
to peacekeeping missions, as they may put civilian
lives, and their own, at risk. At the very least, we must
conduct proactive long-range patrols, and missions
must be equipped to carry them out from the first
moment their boots are on the ground. When civilians
are brutally attacked just a few kilometres or miles from
a United Nations camp, United Nations peacekeeping
operations rightly lose credibility on the ground,
thereby undermining our work around the world.

That applies to what General Bosco Kazura said
in his briefing about expectations from our military
contingents in challenging security environments. In
Mali, our peacekeepers are dealing with asymmetric
threats that completely transcend traditional tasks and
requirements. An increasing number of peacekeepers
have been in killed in that country in recent weeks,
among them a Chadian contingent that paid the greatest
price. On Tuesday, in fact, a Senegalese peacekeeper
was killed, following the deaths of nine troops from the
Niger killed on Friday in an ambush in Gao, in one of
the deadliest attacks on peacekeepers in Mali to date.
I would like to once again offer our condolences to the
peacekeepers' families and Governments. Those brave
souls made a noble sacrifice, and it is a reminder that we
are not adequately equipped or prepared to confront the
challenges of transnational terrorism and the presence
ofjihadist groups in Mali. I have a few questions about
this for General Ahmed and General Kazura.

Peacekeeping involves taking risks and losing
human lives, but not to the extent we have seen in Mali.
We also know and acknowledge that there were failures
during the establishment and rehatting of the Mission,
but again, that cannot continue to be an excuse nearly
16 months later. What, in concrete terms, can be done
to address this alarming situation? Related to that, we
all know that MINUSMA is a peacekeeping mission.
It is not mandated to carry out offensive operations,
although, to be very clear, that should not prevent
the Mission from protecting itself and defending its
mandate. Last year, the Council mandated that the
French forces of Operation Serval, now replaced by
Operation Barkhane, should support peacekeepers
whenever operations were beyond their mandate and
capability, particularly in relation to counter-terrorism
activities. In that regard, I should mention what our
colleague from Mali said yesterday at an informal
dinner, which is that unfortunately, as of now, armed
groups are continuing to gain and occupy new territorial
positions and are setting up parallel administrations,
going against both the letter and the spirit of resolutions
2100 (2013) and 2164 (2014) and of the relevant political
and ceasefire agreements in Mali.

The Council's reaction to those blatant violations of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the secular
Republic of Mali seems weak and ineffective. While
the world's eyes and efforts are turned towards the
essential fight against the Islamic State in Iraq and
Syria, we should not lose sight of the growing threat of
terrorism on the African continent and of the serious
risk of radical and terrorist groups within Mali linking
up with similar organizations such as Boko Haram and
Al-Shabaab, and thus paralysing the entire region. I
would like to ask General Maqsood if the situation I
have just described in Mali is going beyond Operation
Serval's control, considering the mandate given by
the Security Council. I would also like to know what,
in General Kazura's View, should be corrected or
improved before the situation gets out of hand. In that
context, there are additional assets, such as all sources
information fusion units and drones, which have been
deployed to help with intelligence gathering. We would
like to hear from the MINUSMA Force Commander to
what extent those assets are being utilized, and if they
are useful.

As Rwanda has said before, while the political
dimension of that conflict should not be underplayed,
a more robust mandate for a reconfigured mission is
essential to the safety and security of our peacekeepers
and for operational efficacy. The Council needs to
have a serious discussion on what that reconfiguraton
would entail and what it would look like. We need to
change how we do business because we are no longer
doing business in the same markets. We cannot avoid
that debate. We believe that no national interest of any
Council member should be pursued at the expense of
the security and safety of the affected populations.

Before I conclude, I wonder if General Dos
Santos Cruz could say something about the recent
reports that more than 100 demobilized fighters and
their families, including women and children, have
died from starvation and disease in a military camp
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Does he
think that that could affect the planned disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and resettlement or
repatriation operations? How can we prevent such
inhumane treatment of those who surrender?

