Mr. Akbaruddin (India): 1 thank the United States
presidency for having convened the present debate on
the situation in Afghanistan. I also thank Ambassador
Mahmoud Saikal, Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, for his thoughtful presentation; young
Ramiz Bakhtiar, the first youth envoy of Afghanistan,
for his passionate call to the Security Council to support
the aspirations of Afghanistan's young people; and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Yamamoto, for his briefing.

The recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/824) and the statements made earlier today
portray the deteriorating security situation resulting
from the growing insurgency, linked with criminal
and terrorist networks. The challenges posed by the
deteriorating situation do not mean we should simply
accept the death toll as inevitable. Rather, they should
stir us to strengthen our collective spirit of support to
the Government and the people of Afghanistan and the
brave Afghan National Defence and Security Forces
to counter the inhumanity of those who have banded
together to ruthlessly brutalize the lives of the ordinary
people of Afghanistan.

The Security Council deals with multiple conflict
situations. Many of them are addressed many times
over each quarter. The situation in Afghanistan, by
any measure, now warrants that the business-as-
usual approach followed to date be reviewed. The
Council's manner of addressing the issue through
quarterly debates and an annual resolution may have
served the purpose in the past. The present situation
requires greater attention to examine whether it is
commensurate with the danger to regional peace and
security emanating from the conflict in Afghanistan.

During the past few months, we have followed with
hope and anticipation the various peace efforts and
overtures by the Government and people of Afghanistan
towards bringing peace to their war-torn country. The
Taliban, unfortunately, have rejected the recent calls
for a ceasefire by the Afghan Government and civil
society, including various religious leaders. In fact,
they have tended to treat such overtures with growing
disdain and have increased their offensive operations as
the country prepares for parliamentary elections.

All of us know and believe that there is no military
solution to the issue. Yet the Taliban, aided by its
supporters, continue to pursue military operations and
to perpetrate violence and destruction, such as the recent
attack in Ghazni, over several parts of Afghanistan.
Those offensives are planned and launched by those
who are harboured in safe havens in the neighbourhood
of Afghanistan. Those sanctuaries have provided
safety for years for the dark agendas of ideologically
and operationally fused terror networks like the
Taliban, the Haqqani Network, Da'esh, Al-Qaida and
its proscribed affiliates, such as the Lashkar-e-Tayyiba
and Jaish-e-Mohammed. The agendas of those
organizations draw financial sustenance not only from
extortion and forced levies and taxes, but also benefit
significantly from criminal networks operating drug
cartels and stealing Afghanistan's natural resources. By
some estimates, 60 per cent of the Taliban's revenues
are from the drug trade. Poppy cultivation is said to be
the largest cash crop in Taliban-controlled areas.

Resolution 2405 (2018), adopted earlier this year,
focuses on linkages among extremism, terrorism, drug
production and illegal exploitation of Afghanistan's
natural resources. However, it falls short of expectations
in striving to cripple the Taliban's drug trade. The
Secretary-General's current report also fails to address
that very key issue in an adequate matter.

Let us not forget that templates are available for
curbing illicit trade by terrorist networks. For example,
it is estimated that, when targeted, the Islamic State's
oil revenues fell over by nearly 90 per cent over three
years, from a monthly high of $50 million to just
$4 million. By contrast, the opium produced in Taliban-
controlled areas is estimated to account for 85 per cent
of global illicit production, valued between $1.5 billion

and $3 billion. We feel it is time for the Council to try
to replicate the success of the international community
against the Islamic State's illicit business in Syria and
Iraq by similarly crippling the Taliban's illicit drug
trade. We hope that this important subject will be
addressed by the Secretary-General in his next report,
and by the Council thereafter.

India is willing to work with all countries in the
region and beyond, while keeping Afghan priorities at
the forefront, so as to bring about a lasting solution for
the situation. Afghans should lead those efforts, not
only between Governments but with civil society and
business as stakeholders. India stands ready to support
Afghanistan in every way it can. Our focus remains on
the economic pillar of stability and reliable connectivity
for the people of Afghanistan. We strongly believe that
the lack of connectivity directly impacts the economic,
security and political situation in Afghanistan, and we
want to address that crucial issue for the benefit of the
Afghan people.

For its part, it is time for the Council to look beyond
routine consideration to chart a more innovative way
forward, so that the spiral of violence that is affecting
the life of common Afghans is reversed.

