Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): My delegation wishes to make the following
points.

First, 100 years since the beginning of the First
World War, the atmosphere surrounding international
relations is not promising. It does not give the
impression that the States involved in that war learned
anything from the history of that catastrophe, since the
First World War was followed by the Second World
War, which was more destructive and more painful.
The same policies now seem to govern most
international relations, leading towards chaos and
what could be called a third world war waged by the
same colonial States in the same spirit of opportunism.
However, this time, the agents are present in many
conflict zones around the world.

Regrettably, the establishment of the United Nations
did not lead to the noble goal for which it was created- to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
as is stated in the preamble to the Charter. Our peoples,
whose voices joined those of the peoples of the United
Nations in calling for the condemnation of war and for
the prevention of its scourge on humankind following
the Second World War, have suffered more than ever
before from the effects of wars that have caused great
harm to the world, in particular our Arab region, and
that we still feel today. In our history, the suffering of
our peoples has redoubled owing to the ongoing armed
aggression and the various forms of armed military
invasion, especially against Syria, Iraq, Libya and
Gaza.

It is truly ironic that the end of the First World War
in Europe was followed directly by the painful path
of European colonial wars against other peoples. As
soon as the weapons of war fell silent in that war, the
Governments of France and Britain drafted the Sykes-
Picot Agreement. It was a deplorable agreement that
divided the States and peoples of the region into areas
of influence and occupation and opened the way for
the Balfour Declaration of 1917, which sowed Zionist
settler colonization in occupied Palestine and led to the
unprecedented injustice and Israeli settler occupation
of Arab and Palestinian land that continue today. The
Sykes-Picot Agreement also opened the way for the
French occupying authorities that took Iskenderun from
the lands of the Syrian Arab Republic and handed it to
Turkey, which still occupies it today, in order to bribe
Turkey's then-rulers not to enter the Second World War
on the side of Nazi Germany.

What many States see in the crises in the Arab
region compels us to question who benefits from such
crises. That is particularly the case given the fact that
we have seen organized and coordinated actions in our
Arab region by many States, one after the other, with the
same participating States and regional and local actors
using the same tools, slogans, schemes and resources,
leading to the killing of millions ofinnocent people and
destruction on a unprecedented scale.

The peoples of the region are paying the price of
the military invasion of Iraq in 2003, which took place
following unilateral claims that were rejected by the
Security Council and the Secretary-General at the time.
That led to the tragedies of which we are all aware.
The Libyan people are also paying the price of direct
military intervention, which has destroyed the country
and put it in the hands of armed groups and Takfiri
gangs that threaten the peace and security of every
Libyan. We have now seen terrorists and weapons sent
to my country, Syria.

Perhaps it is time to talk about the destruction of
the State in Somalia and in other African States. The
United Nations is called on to bear its responsibilities
and to discharge the role entrusted to it by the States
Members of the United Nations under international law
and the Charter of the United Nations, in particular with
regard to equality, sovereignty and non-intervention.
The maintenance of international peace and security
and preventive action to stop conflicts and to achieve
their settlement are not limited to vying to condemn
terrorism and to justify it with expressions such as
"spring", "revolution", "popular uprising" and "peaceful
movements". There is a clear policy of double standards
in the Organization that continues to frustrate the hopes
of our peoples.

