Mr. Mugoya (Uganda): We welcome the
participation in today's debate of the United Nations
Special Envoy for Haiti, President Bill Clinton. We
also welcome and thank the Prime Minister of Haiti,
Mrs. Pierre-Louis, for her briefing. We also thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
head of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH), Mr. Hedi Annabi, for his briefing
on the situation in that country.

We are encouraged by the progress that has been
made in Haiti and commend the Government and
people of Haiti for that progress. We congratulate the
people of Haiti and the new Provisional Electoral
Council on having held peaceful and well-run Senate
elections on 21 June this year. Despite the
organizational challenges during the elections, we are
convinced that they were an important milestone in
efforts to restore democracy to Haiti and to achieve
lasting stability and progress in that country.

The Secretary-General rightly observes in his
report (S/2009/439) that the Haitian people have the
primary responsibility for ensuring progress in that
country. It is incumbent upon the leadership of that
country to continue its remarkable efforts in
establishing the institutions of Government, restoring
the rule of law and revitalizing the economy.
We commend the role that MINUSTAH has
continued to play in coordinating international action
and assistance in support of the Government to
strengthen its institutional capacity. We have noted the
progress achieved in border management, expanded
border facilities and the upgraded customs data system.

Although the security situation in the country
remains generally calm, it is still fragile and continues
to face such potential threats as resumed activity of
gangs, criminals and other armed groups. There is a
need to counter these threats, including cross-border
child trafficking. The Government of Haiti requires
increased support in institutional capacity-building,
and certainly in the security sector, as soon as it can
take effective control over its entire territory. We
commend the progress achieved in bringing stability to
Cite Soleil and Martissant, and call for the
consolidation of stability in the rest of the country.

We welcome the commitment of the Government
of Haiti, with the support of the United Nations
Development Programme and the World Bank, to
developing a post-disaster national preparedness
strategy during the hurricane season. However, given
the extreme vulnerability of Haiti to natural disasters
that endanger much of the country's population and
agricultural potential, we call on the friends and
development partners of Haiti to offer more substantive
assistance to the Haitian authorities to improve their
capacity to manage disasters and place Haiti on the
path to recovery and sustainable development.

The success of national development efforts in
Haiti will critically depend on the availability of
adequate and predictable resources. There is a need to
continue consolidating peace and stability in Haiti
through peacebuilding.

There is also a need to intensify efforts to
mobilize additional resources for the country,
especially by broadening the donor base and
strengthening partnerships with the private sector.
Uganda therefore welcomes the cancellation of Haiti's
$1.2 billion multilateral debt with international
financial institutions and the subsequent cancellation of
the country's entire bilateral debt owed to the Paris
Club.

We believe that this debt relief will drastically
lessen Haiti's international financial obligations and
hence facilitate the channeling of funds to various
internal investment and development projects critical
to the country's economic recovery. In this regard,
Uganda would like to commend the work of the United
Nations Special Envoy for Haiti, former United States
President Bill Clinton, towards mobilizing public and
private investment and improving the lives of the
Haitian people.

Finally, Uganda commends the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the staff
of MINUSTAH for their work and commitment to the

stabilization of Haiti, and we support the
recommendations of the Secretary-General for the
extension of the mandate of MINUSTAH until
15 October 2010.

