Mr. Kuchynski (Ukraine): First of all, I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting on the issue of international terrorism, which
has become a subject of growing concern to the world
community. My delegation also wishes to commend the
Russian Federation for the continuous attention it has
given to this problem and for its important contribution
to the cause of eliminating the scourge of international
terrorism. In recent years, your country, Mr. President,
has suffered enormously from the most brutal sorts of
terrorist attacks directed primarily against innocent
civilians. As a result of those attacks hundreds of
people have died or received severe injuries. We mourn
with you the victims of those barbarous acts and share
your pain and indignation.

I would also like thank Under-Secretary-General
Hans Corell for his informative briefing and for his
comprehensive note on follow-up measures to
resolution 1269 (1999).

The increasing attention given by various United
Nations bodies, including the Security Council, to the
phenomenon of international terrorism is not
surprising. During the last decade we have witnessed
an unprecedented outbreak of terrorist acts in different
parts of the world. No State - be it big or small, rich
or poor - can feel safe against the threat of terrorism,
which knows no boundaries and makes no distinction
between children and military targets or between
diplomatic and humanitarian missions. Not only does
terrorism cause civilian deaths, it also threatens the
territorial integrity and security of States and
undermines confidence in relationships between
nations, thereby endangering international peace and
security. In that connection, I wish to underline the
particularly close connection that exists between
terrorism and aggressive separatism, ethnic intolerance
and religious extremism.

Conflict situations create favourable conditions
for the activities of terrorist groups. Of particular
concern is the fact that the activities of terrorist
organizations are financed through other criminal
activities, including arms smuggling and the
production of, and trafficking in, drugs. Nowadays,

S/PVAZAZ

 

terrorists use new and more sophisticated means of
terror. They have increasingly profited from the
benefits of the information revolution. In an era in
which there is growing importance of, and dependence
on, information and communications systems, there is
an increasing risk of the use of computer technologies
by potential terrorists to destroy essential infrastructure
and undermine the security and well-being of nations
and countries.

We are convinced that the intensification of
international efforts to combat terrorism needs a more
concentrated focus on the underlying causes of this
extremely complicated international phenomenon and
its deep socio-economic roots and conditions. The
roots of terrorism are very similar to those of
international conflicts, namely, poverty, inequality and
oppression. Their Virtual elimination would therefore
ultimately be conducive to a decrease in terrorist
activity.

I would also like to underscore another important
aspect of the concerted efforts by the international
community to fight terrorism. Terrorist attacks
constitute a clear Violation of recognized norms of
international law. The main purpose of most of them is
to undermine international stability and to provoke
another cycle of violence in international or inter-
ethnic relations. The international community should
not, under any circumstances, give in to such
provocations. All actions taken at international,
regional or national levels must be in full conformity
with the existing rules of international law, including
international humanitarian and human rights law, and
not run counter to the fundamental principles of the
United Nations Charter.

Ukraine has repeatedly condemned, in the
strongest possible terms, international terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations, no matter what
considerations of a political, philosophical, ideological,
racial, ethnic, religious or any other nature might be
invoked to justify terrorist acts. We have consistently
supported the concerted efforts of the international
community in combating this scourge. My country has
ratified most of the instruments of a universal character
in this field. Earlier this year, Ukraine signed the
International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism. The International Convention
for the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings is to be
ratified in the near future. We consider adherence to
and full implementation of the relevant international

instruments by Member States to be an essential
contribution to the maintenance of international peace
and security. At the same time, we realize that legal
instruments alone are not sufficient; there is a need for
a strong commitment by States and genuine
cooperation between Governments and their law
enforcement agencies in fighting terrorism.

My delegation would also like to reaffirm the
central role of the General Assembly in addressing the
issue of international terrorism. Its work in this area is
fully commendable and represents an example of how
the efforts of individual States can successfully be
pooled to achieve tangible results. We hope that this
spirit of cooperation will continue to prevail in the
activities of the Assembly, in particular in its work on
the draft convention on nuclear terrorism and draft
comprehensive anti-terrorism convention. We
recognize the important contribution made by the
Security Council to the collective efforts to combat
terrorism, in particular where it represents a challenge
to international peace and security. We underline the
need to preserve the established balance of
responsibilities between these two bodies, as provided
for by the United Nations Charter.

Finally, I wish to also mention the need to further
strengthen the capacity of the United Nations in
preventing and combating terrorism. As noted by the
Legal Counsel, the Terrorism Prevention Branch of the
Office for Drug Control and Crime Prevention engages
in research activities on terrorism and carries out other
important work to promote international cooperation in
this field. In this context, the initiative regarding the
establishment - after reviewing existing possibilities
within the United Nations system - of an international
anti-terrorism centre deserves further attention. This
initiative was supported during the Millennium Summit
by the Presidents of the GUUAM. - Georgia,
Uzbekistan, Ukraine, Azerbaijan, Moldova - Group of
States.

