Mr. Pleuger (Germany): Germany remains fully
committed to the fight against terrorism within the
broadest possible international coalition.

We fully subscribe to the statement to be made
later by the presidency of the European Union, and I
will therefore limit my intervention to three specific
points.

First of all, I would like to thank Ambassador
Arias for the able way in which he has maintained and
improved, in his four initial months as Chairman, the
continuity and momentum of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee's efforts. We support the Committee's new
work programme in all its aspects. We especially
welcome its ever-growing emphasis on technical
assistance, and that leads to my second point.

Germany maintains technical assistance
programmes with more than 30 countries worldwide,
primarily in the fields of the police, customs, law
enforcement and financial law and practice. We are
thus responding to the needs of many developing
countries, as has been reiterated in today's discussion
by our colleagues from Guinea, Angola and China.
Together with our partners in these projects, we strive
to strengthen the rule of law through efficient judicial
and law-enforcement structures. Our common fight
must respect national and international law, human
rights and the Charter of the United Nations. In our
view, the rule of law must always prevail.

My third point is that we want to draw attention
to the plight of the world's least developed countries.
Some days ago, the United Nations High
Representative for the Least Developed Countries
stated that 11 per cent of the world's population live on
less than $1 a day. It is obvious that this extreme
poverty makes them vulnerable to exploitation by
terrorist activists. This is one of the reasons why the
fight against poverty, social injustice and other
breeding grounds of terrorism must remain high on the
international agenda.

In conclusion, let me assure you, Mr. President,
that Germany is determined to remain an active and
reliable partner in the international coalition against
terrorism, within the framework of the Charter and of
international law.

