Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank Mr. Stephen O'Brien, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, and Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, for their briefings. I take this opportunity
to reiterate Uruguay's full support for Mr. Mladenov in
his work.

Uruguay has been following the evolving situation
in the Middle East and is extremely concerned about
the increasing number of conflicts in the region and the
lack of progress that has been made in reaching lasting
solutions. This Organization has been trying to find a
path to peace in the Middle East since its creation more
than 70 years ago, and yet that goal still seems a long
way off.

Uruguay once again reiterates its support for the
right of Israel and Palestine to live in peace within
secure, recognized borders, free of any threat or action
that would disturb peace in their territories. To that
end, we support a solution based on two independent
States, in the firm belief that is the only option that will
enable Israel and Palestine to live in peace, side by side.
We also believe it is crucial to urge the international
community to step up its efforts to support that
process and to encourage the parties to return to the
negotiating table with the goal of achieving a peaceful,
just, negotiated and lasting solution that takes into
account the interests of both sides, in accordance with
international law. In that context, it is essential to
ensure that both parties create the necessary conditions
for resuming direct negotiations and that their actions
and policies demonstrate their commitment to a two-
State solution.

Uruguay welcomed the report of the Quartet
(S/2016/595, annex), which makes a significant
contribution to identifying measures to enable progress
to be made on resolving the Middle East peace process.
In that regard, we are concerned about the report's
conclusion that if the current situation continues, a two-
State solution will no longer be viable, owing to the
continuing violence, terrorist attacks and incitement
to violence; the continued policies of expansion and
settlement building; the designation of land exclusively
for Israel's use and the denial of development for
Palestine; and the increase in illicit weapons and
militant activity, the continued lack of Palestinian unity
and the problem of the humanitarian situation in Gaza.

In that regard, Uruguay remains concerned about
the Israeli authorities' decisions to keep building
houses in settlements, the most recent of them
announced on 4 October for the occupied Palestinian
territory in the West Bank. The settlements are illegal
under international law and contrary to the Quartet's
recommendations. Uruguay therefore reiterates its call
on the parties to refrain from unilateral decisions that
present obstacles to dialogue and to compliance with
their international legal obligations, and urges the State
of Israel to stop building illegal settlements.

Uruguay reiterates its firm condemnation of terrorist
attacks, in the belief that terrorist and violent extremist
attacks on the life and dignity of innocent civilians
should not be tolerated anywhere. In that regard, we
condemn the attacks on 9 October that took the lives of
two Israeli citizens. Similarly, we lament the numerous
cases of Palestinians who, despite being unarmed, have
died at the hands of Israeli security forces. We welcome
initiatives, including those of France and the Russian
Federation, that can enable us to make progress in the
quest for solutions to the Middle East peace process.

However, none of those actions can replace the sole
genuine path to peace represented by direct negotiations
between Palestinians and Israelis. In that regard, and
in conclusion, I am very proud to cite the hopeful
message that has arisen in my own region, specifically
in Colombia. Colombia is showing us that peace is

possible, but it requires leaders to display the belief
and courage needed to take risks in the cause of peace.
The four years of negotiations were not easy and even
now there are still clouds on the horizon, but the leaders
on both sides continue to risk their personal prestige
and political legacies in their stubborn and relentless
commitment to peace, truly a lesson that hopefully can
serve as an example to others.

