Mr. Thaci (spoke in Albanian; English text provided by the delegation): It is my pleasure to address
the Security Council today on the latest developments
in Kosovo.

Let me begin by thanking Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his unflagging efforts for peace and
progress in Kosovo and the Balkans. His first visit to the
Republic of Kosovo, last month, reaffirmed our shared
values, mutual interests and common efforts towards a
prosperous Kosovo. As the Secretary-General was able
to see during his visit, my country is among the most
successful examples of State-building in the context of
various peacebuilding missions in different parts of the
world over the past few decades. Therefore, let me say
at the outset that both the United Nations and Kosovo
should be proud of that significant achievement.
Our determination and the immense support of the
international community have produced a modern
and viable State with a main goal of integration into
Euro-Atlantic institutions.

The status of Kosovo has been determined; it was
decided on in February 2011. Allow me to inform
the Council that I will be focusing on the following
matters of importance regarding the consolidation
of Kosovo's statehood: the end of internationally
supervised independence, the situation in the northern
municipalities, the technical dialogue between the
Republic of Kosovo and the Republic of Serbia and
Kosovo's prospects for European integration.

It is a fact that since February 2008 Kosovo has built
a cohesive State and has strengthened its multi-ethnic
and democratic institutions. As the Prime Minister of
the Republic of Kosovo, I am honoured to report on
the recent State-building progress as the result of the
historic decision by the International Steering Group
to end the supervised independence of Kosovo. Five
years ago, Kosovo declared its independence, based
on an internationally designed process by the United
Nations led by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, President Martti Ahtisaari. As a result of
the implementation of the Comprehensive Settlement
Proposal, Kosovo was transformed into a functional,
democratic and multi-ethnic State.

The adoption and implementation of the
Constitution, the decentralization of power to
municipalities across the country, the establishment
of six new municipalities for the Serb communities
and the election of 24 members of Parliament from
the communities, out of which 13 are from Serb
communities, in our 120-seat Parliament - those are
only a few examples of the significant transformation
of my country. In my Government, three Kosovo Serbs
serve as ministers, including a Deputy Prime Minister.

Essential to that process has been the establishment
of an elaborate system of minority rights, to bring all
of Kosovo's citizens, regardless of their ethnic identity,
into the political structures of the new State. The entire
legal framework covering the public sector's legislation
guarantees equal rights and the representation of all
ethnic groups in Kosovo. My Government has built a
strong foundation and multilayered system of rights
that meet, and at times exceed, international norms.
Our unwavering commitment to those principles further
demonstrates that Kosovo is a multi-ethnic State based
on European values and standards, where the principles
and the spirit of the Ahtisaari plan will forever be part
of our State and society.

In the recent months we have adopted 21 important
laws and amendments related to the ending of
supervised independence, on community rights, on
decentralization, on cultural and religious heritage
and on dealing with the past and reconciliation. Some
of them are in the implementation stage as we speak.
During the reporting period I made the decision to
appoint a language commissioner and a director for
channel 2 of Kosovo's public broadcasting system,
which is exclusively for Serbs and other communities.
As the report of the Secretary-General (S/2012/603)
says, the respective laws and amendments are intended
to strengthen the protection of the Serbian Orthodox
Church and other cultural heritage sites. We are proud
to preserve 45 religious, historical and cultural objects
listed as special protective zones. My Government
recently approved a list of cultural heritage monuments
and sites under temporary protection. We are very
mindful of, and committed to, the safeguarding of
all religions. The Kosovo police is fully prepared to
take over the responsibilities of providing protection
for monasteries and other structures currently the
responsibility of the Kosovo Force (KFOR).

At a time when many countries are coping with
economic problems, ethnic strife and governmental
deadlock, the case of Kosovo can offer lessons in
State-building. The end of internationally supervised
independence has opened a new chapter in Kosovo's
statehood by establishing viable democratic institutions,
a free-market economy, modern infrastructure and
justice as well as a public administration, education
and culture. We have continued to advance public
administration reform, based on the recommendations
of the European Commission progress report,
towards an independent, effective and multi-ethnic
administration, by incorporating the practices of
democratic governance.

Kosovo has the most stable institutions in the
region, and it has maintained its macroeconomic and
fiscal stability in spite of the European financial and
debt crisis. This year we foresee an economic growth
of 5 per cent. The end of the supervised independence
reflects the international community's confidence that
Kosovo, with the support of its current leadership and its
people, will successfullyjoin the European Union (EU)
in the coming years. My Government is very committed
to, and focused on, the rule of law and the fight against
corruption and organized crime. The European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) has played
a crucial role in the past few years. Based on our
achievements, we fully endorse reconfiguration and
downsizing by about 25 per cent. As the EULEX report
(S/2012/603, annex I) confirms, Kosovo's rule of law
institutions have made great progress and EULEX
will continue to be a strategic partner of the Republic
of Kosovo. The end of supervised independence and
the reconfiguration of EULEX are complementary in
consolidating statehood and are a clear sign ofKosovo's
overall progress.

We fully acknowledge EULEX's role in the rule of
law and in the EU integration process. Accordingly, we
remain committed to adopting a new legal basis in the
context of the extension of the EULEX mission until
mid-June 2014. The outcome of the negotiations will
be adopted by the Kosovo Parliament as a bilateral
agreement between Kosovo and the EU.

In the past month, the number offormal recognitions
of Kosovo's independence has continued to increase in
what has proven to be an unstoppable process. I would
like to thank the Republic of Chad and the Republic of
Mali for their recent decisions to recognize Kosovo's
independence.
Almost half of the States Members of the United
Nations have now recognized the Republic of
Kosovo, and we expect additional recognitions in the
coming weeks and months. We firmly believe that
non-recognition endangers our stability, undermines
European and international investment in State-
building efforts andjeopardizes prospective integration
throughout the region. Implementing the provisions of
the Comprehensive Settlement Proposal and ending
supervised independence will be enormous milestones
in building a multi-ethnic, vibrant and diverse Kosovo.

I am pleased to inform the Council that a growing
number of communities are requesting various services
from my Government. More than 50,000 Kosovo Serbs
have been issued personal identification documents
and passports of the Republic of Kosovo, including
numerous Serbian religious and community leaders.

Our commitment to the promotion and protection of
the rights of communities and their members, including
the right of return, remain central to our domestic
policy. My Government has allocated over €8 million
for 2012, and over the next three years will allocate
more than €21 million solely targeted towards the rights
of returns and communities.

Numerous viable strategies and action plans have
been adopted and new municipal offices for communities
and returns have been established to promote and protect
the rights of non-majority communities, displaced
persons, returnees and repatriated persons, as well as
to ensure equal access to public services and coordinate
the returns process.

On 30 April, my Government reached an agreement
with the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe to enable Kosovo Serbs with dual citizenship to
vote in the recent Serbian elections. The dual citizenship
principle is enshrined in the Constitution ofthe Republic
of Kosovo in accordance with European standards.
The turnout of Kosovo Serbs in those elections was
approximately 30 per cent, which was smaller than
the turnout in the most recent local and parliamentary
elections organized by Kosovo institutions.

It is important to emphasize that for the first
time since the end of the war, Serbia has agreed not
to organize elections in Kosovo, thus accepting the
legitimacy of the constitutional order of my country.

In the current period, a security incident occurred
on 28 June in Pristina at the Merdare/Merdare crossing
point. A total of 32 Kosovo police officers were injured
as a result of direct clashes with Serbian protestors,
who threw stones and attempted to remove a Kosovo
border marker.

The response by our police force, which was
established in 1999 by the United Nations, was
measured and non-violent. Today the Kosovo police is
the leading security sector institution, with minority
communities accounting for approximately 15 per cent
of the force - a number that is exemplary by all Balkan
standards.

A criminal act occurred on 6 July. We strongly
condemn the murder of two Kosovo citizens in the
village of Tallinovc/Talinovac in Ferizaj/Urosevac
municipality. Kosovo authorities consider that murder
a criminal act contrary to the values of our society and
State. Our swift response indicated that such violence
is intolerable, and the authorities were required to
investigate the case to ensure that the perpetrators
would be brought to justice as soon as possible.

Allow me to note that credible data illustrates
that ethnically motivated crimes in Kosovo have
significantly declined during the post-independence
period. Nowadays, Pristina is safer than most
regional capitals. In that context, according to the
survey launched by the United Nations Development
Programme in July, Kosovo Serb satisfaction with
security institutions has experienced a positive trend
upward. The survey also confirmed that personal
security is no longer considered a prevailing issue.

I am pleased to inform the Council that, on
4 June, my Government announced the establishment
of the Interministerial Working Group on Dealing
with the Past and Reconciliation, which signals the
Government's commitment to that important initiative.
The point is not to punish, but to establish a reparations
programme for victims and their families and to
prosecute perpetrators, so that members of every ethnic
community can move forward towards reconciliation.

Let me reiterate here that my country has made
enormous progress in integrating the Serb community
at both the central and local Government levels. We are
committed to, and have succeeded in, integrating more
than 100,000 Kosovo Serbs throughout Kosovo and in
our institutions. They now enjoy self-governance in the
Gracanica/Gracanice, Novo Brdo/Novoberde, Klokot/
Kllokot, Ranilug/Ranillug, Partes/Partesh and Strpce/
Shterpce municipalities.
However, we have been unable to achieve the same
results in three municipalities in the northern area
of Kosovo, where there are only 30,000 local Serbs.
At the same time, Serbia has attempted to exercise
administrative control over those municipalities
through its illegal police and security structures,
which are led, financed and directly controlled by the
Government in Belgrade. Serbia has not allowed local
Serbs to cooperate with the international presence,
KFOR, EULEX or Kosovo institutions.

My Government's position is clear on the issue
of the north. We are against the ideas of partition,
border alteration or exchanging territories. As a result,
my Government has recently decided to establish
an administrative office in northern Mitrovica. The
office will provide all services to the citizens of that
part of Kosovo and will coordinate the Government's
engagement and investments in that area. Initially,
the office will include seven directorates and 55
employees and will be headed by a community activist
in northern Mitrovica. That is another important step
towards establishing the northern municipality of
Mitrovica as stipulated by the Ahtisaari proposal. The
office will provide up to 80 new jobs and will have a
budget of about 64 million per year for basic services
to the community and for infrastructure projects in
northern Mitrovica. We have received positive feedback
from local citizens, measured by the thousands of
applications for employment that have been received by
the administrative office.

This year I announced the launching of a dialogue
between my Government and the Kosovo Serbs of
the northern municipalities, in order to address the
situation in that area. We have already developed a
plan on how to integrate that area with the rest of
Kosovo. In addition, in the progress report for the past
year in Kosovo, the European Commission required
an integration strategy covering the three northern
municipalities. We must insist on the rule of law in
that part of Kosovo, the withdrawal of Serbia's illegal
police and security forces; freedom of movement for all
people; economic development and support; the return
of displaced persons; and reconciliation.

On behalf of the Republic of Kosovo, we have
pledged to communicate and cooperate with every single
Serb leader elected in the northern part who respects
the institutions of my country. We are ready to find the
best solution for integrating Kosovo's Serbs politically,
economically and socially with the rest of Kosovo.
However, we will never compromise the independence,
sovereignty, territorial integrity or constitutional order
of our State.

Kosovo believes in dialogue as a democratic value,
and in that spirit we began a technical dialogue with
the Republic of Serbia in March 2011. That dialogue,
held under European Union facilitation, as stipulated
by the General Assembly, has resulted in considerable
progress and has produced seven important bilateral
agreements. Some of those agreements are in the
process of implementation; however, the majority
remain on paper only.

The agreement on integrated border management
was concluded on 2 December 2011, but the technical
protocol has still not been signed by Serbia. Serbia
refuses to implement the agreement on regional
cooperation. We believe that true progress in the
dialogue can be made only if the agreements are fully
implemented; that is why the Republic of Kosovo has
proved itselfto be constructive and effective in reaching
and implementing the agreements. The credibility of
the technical dialogue is at stake, and we call on Serbia
to deliver on what was agreed during this process.

At the same time, let me reiterate here that the
normalization of relations with Serbia is our priority.
We are aware of the fact that the absence of normal
relations and border demarcation between Kosovo
and Serbia is a major impediment to the achievement
of stability, security and prosperity throughout the
Balkans.

I wish to reaffirm here very clearly that while we
are very dedicated to dialogue, at no time and in no
circumstances will the territorial integrity of Kosovo
ever be put into question. The Kosovo State is a political
and juridical fact.

I firmly believe that both nations should not remain
hostages to political tensions, especially since the past
and the future of our countries are deeply intertwined.
We will advance our Euro-Atlantic aspirations and
move ahead towards membership in the European
Union and NATO.

The main agenda of my Government, along with
political stability and economic development, is
membership in the European Union. Since 1999, the
EU has been an integral part of the international effort
to build a new future. We continue to cooperate closely
with the EU Office in Kosovo, EULEX and with the
representatives of EU member States in Pristina.

During the reporting period, Kosovo made progress
in the process of establishing formal relations with the
European Union. Through a feasibility study, we have
established a path towards starting negotiations on the
signing of a stabilization and association agreement
with the EU. In addition, on 14 June we officially
received the visa liberalization road map adopted
by the European Commission, and we have formally
entered into a structured dialogue regarding the rule
of law. Furthermore, this autumn the EU will publish
a feasibility study on Kosovo's readiness to negotiate
a stabilization and association agreement with the
European Union. That will be a historic moment that
will open a new phase in EU-Kosovo relations.

Kosovo deserves to advance within the European
integration process. Our history, culture and geography
make us European; we already share core European
values and will continue to practice them.

On behalf of the institutions and the people of
the Republic of Kosovo, let me conclude here by
re-emphasizing the fact that for my country, the
consolidation of statehood and the strengthening
of international recognition are our main priorities.
Today our optimism is fuelled by the fact that we are a
modern, viable and multi-ethnic State moving towards
integration into Euro-Atlantic institutions. We are and
will remain a full, proactive and responsible member
of the international community by being an exporter of
peace, stability and prosperity in the Balkans and in
Europe.

