Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank the Security Council for this
opportunity afforded us to share our points of View
and assessments of the work undertaken by the
two subsidiary bodies that I have had the honour of
presiding over during my country's mandate as a
Council member. I will begin by addressing the work
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions, which I have had the
honour to preside over during the past two years.

The Working Group was established in 1993. We
all know that it does not address substantive issues, but
it has the important task of considering proposals and
making recommendations to the Council in order, on
the one hand, to improve the efficiency of this organ
and, on the other, to make the work among the Security
Council members more democratic and to enable the
Council to respond to the need to be a more responsible
and transparent body, as well as more open to dialogue
and consultations with interested Member States and
other bodies.

During the two years of Argentina's chairmanship,
the Working Group concluded the drafting of six
notes by the President of the Council, with the aim
of complementing note S/2010/507. Note S/2013/515,
initiated by Australia, aimed at improving dialogue with
Members of the United Nations that are not members
of the Council and with other bodies. Note S/2013/630,
presented by the chairmanship, seeks to strengthen
consultations with troop- and police-contributing
countries to United Nations peacekeeping operations.

Allow me to underscore one aspect on which
there is a need for cooperation from the Secretariat.
The Secretariat should provide the troop- and
police-contributing countries with copies of the reports
of the Secretary-General with enough lead time,
as possible, to ensure that preparations and timely
meetings are held with said countries prior to the
consultations on the relevant draft resolutions.

Another important note (S/2014/268) during our
chairmanship had to do with penholders. I emphasize
this because it shows the manner in which some topics
that initially gave rise to resistance could become
acceptable for all Council members when it was made
clear that at issue was a potential matter for worthwhile
action, and furthermore when there was an attempt to
favour more democratic and egalitarian participation
among Council members without giving rise to a
revolution in the Council's methods by doing so. The
co-penholdership came about in practice prior to the
adoption of the note, and the more harmonious manner
in which the practice was implemented facilitated its
incorporation into note S/2014/268.

With regard to dialogue among Council members,
the initiative of Pakistan is another aspect ofa reiterated
call by the non-permanent members of the Council to
make the work more democratic 4 and it was taken up
in note S/2014/565.

The Group also agreed on presidential note
S/2014/739, concerning the list of speakers in the
Council - an initiative of the Russian Federation
seeking to clarify this issue based on Council practice.
The Group also considered the issue of the translation
of sanctions lists into all of the official languages of
the United Nations, at the behest of the President of the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities, on the initiative
of Argentina. The Council resolved the issue in its
resolutions 2160 (2014) and 2161 (2014). Further,
there was an agreement to request that the Secretariat
implement a new practice for the issuance of edited and
concorded versions of the resolutions and presidential
statements adopted by the Council.

Finally, very recently we considered the issue of the
production ofthe verbatim records of Council meetings
so as to make clear to members - not just Council
members but the wider membership - how we can all
cooperate with the objective of ensuring the accuracy of
the verbatim records of the Council. We hope to be able
to adopt a presidential note in the next few days, before
we conclude our term as a non-permanent member of
the Security Council.
What matters remain pending for the next Chair and
for incoming members? There is a draft on the Arria
Formula, submitted by the Russian Federation, and one
on the report of the Security Council, submitted by
Lithuania. Regarding the issue of the Arria Formula,
which will be addressed by the Working Group next
year, I should like to recall that even though Council
members participate in this, it is not a Council activity.
We are talking about a concept that was born of the
need for flexibility, and because of that it can evolve
constantly, as needed.

Regarding the report of the Council to the General
Assembly, which will also be addressed in the year
ahead, I should like to touch on an issue that I stressed
in my capacity as Chair of the Group. The report to
the General Assembly is not a mere formality; rather, it
has a specific objective: accountability, as required by
Article 24(3) of the Charter. It is possible to improve
the way in which the report is prepared, including
the timetable for its drafting, but I am convinced
that shortening it or replacing it with the content of a
webpage does not seem to be the right path to take. The
report of the Security Council has value as a document
in the context of accountability to the plenary body of
the Organization, and also historical value. The cost of
document production is not a consideration that applies
in this case; the content of a web page represents not
documentation but dissemination and hence cannot
substitute for a Charter obligation.

Lastly, allow me to refer to the importance of
ensuring continuity in the work ofthe subsidiary bodies.
All of those bodies are presided over by non-permanent
members. It think that it is essential that the Security
Council continue to undertake efforts in two areas: first,
in naming the Chairs of the subsidiary bodies as soon
as possible, so that they can begin to get a handle on the

work of the organ over which they will be presiding,
and so that they can work with the outgoing Chairs in
this process. That would facilitate the transition. Note
S/2014/393, submitted by the Argentine presidency, has
the goal of contributing to such continuity.

I should also like to highlight an aspect related
to the democratization of the work of the Council.
Note S/2012/937, adopted under the Portuguese
chairmanship of the Working Group, stresses the
importance of consultations with respect to the
appointment of the Chairs of subsidiary bodies. We
hope that the idea will continue to gain ground that
holding transparent consultations with incoming
members on the chairmanship of the subsidiary organs
does not mean undermining the role of the permanent
members; rather, it adds to the role of elected members,
given that, after all, the Security Council is an organ
made up of 15 members.

I conclude by expressing my conviction that to
achieve reform of the working methods of the Security
Council within and outside the informal Working
Group, the best way is that of dialogue. It is a matter
of preserving that which is legitimate and effective
and of creating what is missing. We must promote
harmonization and minimize opacity and arbitrary
aspects, recognizing that working methods are valid
when they are validated by results. We must base our
practices and procedures on normative legitimacy,
practical validity, ethical legitimacy and political need.
In assuming the chairmanship of the Group, Argentina
had no other ambition than that of contributing to a
joint task.

Lastly, I would say to the non-permanent members
that will be coming on board that they can bring about
transformation; they have can influence. I should like
here to assure the delegation of Angola, which will
succeed Argentina as Chair of the informal Working
Group, of our full cooperation and best wishes for
success in 2015.

Now, if I may, I will address the work of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan and our
responsibility in having chaired this group over the past
two years. In the final report of December 2012, the
outgoing Colombian Chair of the Committee advised
a deepening of direct dialogue between the Committee
and the authorities of the Sudan, in order to improve
the understanding of the impact that the sanctions
regime could have on the peace process in Darfur and
to exchange views on remaining concerns regarding the
measures imposed by the Security Council.

That is a recommendation that as Chair I wish to
see implemented, because the deepening of dialogue
and the strengthening of trust, cooperation and
transparency are goals of Argentina's foreign policy. It
is for that reason that we could not overlook them in
taking on the chairmanship of the Group.

Much of our efforts went towards bringing about two
concrete initiatives that we deemed important. First, we
undertook the Committee's first visit to Khartoum and
Darfur, from 20 to 24 January 2014. We had an intensive
working agenda, meeting with interlocutors from the
Government of the Sudan as well as the Joint Special
Representative of the the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), diplomatic
representatives of States members of the Security
Council in Khartoum, the Resident Coordinator of the
United Nations and the United Nations country team in
the Sudan, and representatives of the African Union,
the European Union and the donors community.

On 24 November, we held the first meeting since the
establishment of the Committee with representatives
of the Sudan and countries of the region, in order to
identify shortfalls in the area of information and
address the need for capacity-building in the context of
the implementation of the sanctions.

The most recent 90-day report of the Chair of the
Committee was submitted for the first time publicly in
this Chamber. We call for this to continue with respect
to the submission of future reports of the Committee.
All of these initiatives, as I see it, contribute to
bringing about a greater culture of dialogue, allowing
for the building of trust, and for this reason contribute
to the effectiveness of the Committee. I would recall
that one of the challenges that we faced in assuming
the chairmanship was that of facilitating access to the
Sudan for the Group of Experts. The timely issuance of
visas and entry permits for Darfur had been a recurring
limitation, whereas now we can underscore that there
has been an improvement in the cooperation between
the Group of Experts and the Sudanese authorities.

1 should like to avail myself of this opportunity to
underscore the professionalism of the experts that have
made up the Panel over the past two years. I should like
also to underscore the valuable cooperation provided
by UNAMID under the leadership of Mr. Chambas to
the Group of Exprts and the Committee.

I should like to take this opportunity to express
here a few ideas that are not new but that I have been
formulating over the past two years.

The first observation concerns the high level of
confusion that seems to prevail between the sanctions
imposed by the Security Council, which consist of a
targeted arms embargo on Darfur, a travel ban and the
freezing ofassets for individuals and entities specifically
designated in the Committee's sanctions list, and, on
the other hand, the unilateral sanctions imposed by
member States. Along these lines, it is important to
us that the Committee undertake a pedagogical task to
raise awareness and clarify the content and scope of the
sanctions imposed by the Security Council, as well as
their objective, which is not that ofpunishing the Sudan
or its people. Rather, they are an instrument - not
the only instrument and perhaps not even the most
appropriate - for promoting a peaceful solution to the
conflict in Darfur.

A second observation is that certain difficulties
remain with respect to the implementation of the
sanctions imposed by the Security Council. I say that
in all lucidity. Darfur is plagued by weapons, and the
arms embargo imposed by the Security Council is not
being implemented.

A third observation is that the sanctions in place
against the Sudan are having a significant impact on the
well-being of the population. The sanctions imposed
by the Security Council, although targeted, may have
legitimized the unilateral sanctions that were already
in place. This has contributed to confusion between
the multilateral sanctions regime, on the one hand, and
those imposed by Member States individually, on the
other. Both regimes have an impact on the resolve of
countries and private donors to provide humanitarian
or other types of assistance and to make investments
in Sudan.

During my visit to Darfur, I had the opportunity
to visit one of the largest refugee camps, Zamzam, just
kilometres from El Fasher, the capital of the Northern
Darfur state. I met there with primary leaders of
the various ethnic groups. They described the great
suffering imposed by their situation, and laid out their
demands for the international community. I underscore
their yearning to work and to exercise their human
rights to a healthy life and to education. I believe
that the matter of the refugee camps - which clearly
goes beyond the issue of the Sudan - requires deep
reflection on the part of our entire Organization in the
post-2015 period.

Ultimately, I believe that the Security Council
needs to undertake, and that the people of the Sudan
and its Government deserve, a full review of the
way the international community is managing the
situation in Darfur and addressing the peace process,
and in particular of whether the sanctions, at least
as currently conceived, are the ideal tool, or whether
they point to the need to find a solution to this historic
conflict in Darfur. It is important, we believe, for the
members of the Security Council, in particular its
permanent members, to reflect upon the situation in the
Sudan, setting aside their differences. Darfur, given
not only its geographical situation, but also its many
natural resources and its people with their remarkable
millennial history, deserves nothing less. Peace in
the region, particularly in light of the new conflicts
in South Sudan, the Central African Republic and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, depends to a large
degree on peace in Darfur.
I should like to pay homage to the troops of the
United Nations who have fallen in the line of duty. I
should like to underscore that all attacks on the United
Nations and its personnel are unacceptable and should
be investigated. Those responsible should be brought
to justice.

The people of Darfur are part of the United Nations.
In 1973 Darfur had 1.3 million people; now it is believed
to have 7.5 million. It has grown enormously, but 52 per
cent of the population of Darfur is under 16 years old,
and they have never known anything but conflict. The
United Nations has forecast that the population growth
is expected to continue. Two million of them live in
refugee camps. Forty-eight per cent of women are
illiterate. The children represent half of the population
in the camps; 700,000 children are living in a culture of
conflict, if we can call it culture.

What can I say? The international community
needs to extirpate this logic of war entertained among
the primary political stakeholders. We need to follow
the worrisome humanitarian situation in Darfur very
closely. We should not compete among our organizations;
we should cooperate. We have to improve the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur programme because it is
not working. In the past, inter-ethnic clashes between
nomads and farmers were resolved through traditional
justice, thanks to a consensus among the traditional
chiefs, but in 2003 we saw the rise of militarization and
a build-up ofweapons. Dialogue was not used to resolve
problems among the tribal leaders; the survival of the
fittest became the norm, and whoever had the most
weapons was the strongest. This context of regional
insecurity requires us all to be fully responsible for
resolving the situation in Darfur once and for all.

I reiterate, all international stakeholders must work
hand in hand. Your country is attempting to do just that,
Mr. President. We have to craft measures that create
incentives for the people of the Sudan to seek peace.
We need to make it clear to the younger generation
that weapons are not the way; studies and work are the
way. We also have to consider lightening the Sudan's
debt burden and lifting unilateral sanctions. The
Security Council should perhaps undertake other types
of activities, and speak and work with the General
Assembly. Above all, we must listen to the African
Union when former President Mbeki, who is leading
the African Union High-Level Panel on Darfur, calls
upon us time and time again to deepen our diplomatic
efforts, and not merely our punishments.

