Mr. Kelapile (Botswana): We congratulate the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea, Mr. President, on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of February. We thank you for convening
this very timely high-level debate on a theme that is
very important to the African continent. We also
thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, the African Union (AU) High
Representative for Silencing the Guns in Africa and
the Founder and Executive Director of the African
Centre for the Constructive Resolution of Disputes for
their briefings.

Botswana places great importance on the overall
objective ofachieving durable peace and stability on our
continent. We support the necessarily ambitious goal of
silencing the guns in Africa by 2020, which demands
the collective efforts of Africa and the assured support
of the international community and other relevant
stakeholders. We therefore welcome the unanimous
adoption by the Security Council of resolution 2457
(2019) on this matter.

We believe that creating an environment conducive
to addressing the root causes of conflict would obviate
the need to place peacekeepers in harm's way, thereby
avoiding further loss of life among innocent civilians
caught up conflict situations. As we begin to approach
the year 2020, the deadline set by the AU, our delegation
finds this to be a rationale for engaging in a self-
evaluative exercise to assess progress made in achieving
a conflict-free Africa. This debate is an important step
towards taking the corrective measures required within
the remaining time that we have leading up to 2020.

The questions raised in the concept note
(S/2019/169, annex) are therefore critical to enabling
us to re-strategize to ensure that Africa has its own
tools to do the job, and if not to adopt new strategic
partnerships to effectively dissuade our communities
from engaging in violence and criminal activities. It
is the difficult choices that those communities have
to make that in themselves generate the high demand
for guns. A proper diagnosis of the factors that create
human insecurity is key to addressing the root causes of
conflict on our continent.

The bigger picture of what constitutes Africa's
existing challenges is already known. The intensity of
conflict has shown a decline; however, measured against
the Fragility States Index, the continent remains prone
to conflict, and global alert levels are significantly
high. We have observed marked improvements in
certain countries, while others show a slight decline.
Indications from comprehensive inequality studies
conducted by such competent United Nations bodies
as the United Nations Development Programme have
identified ungoverned territories that are pockets of
hardship and constitute conflict hotspots - big income
gaps and multidimensional poverty are among the
factors that drive conflict in Africa.

But to be fair, we must also acknowledge the positive
indicators on which we can build. There is no doubt
that Africa has great potential beyond its abundant
natural resources. Although growth has not always
been accompanied by meaningful social progress and
inclusiveness, in recent years we have seen a sizeable
number of African countries in the lead as some of the
fastest-growing economies in the world.

Africa is also home to a good number of
middle-income economies, including our own country
Botswana, following sustained development efforts.
The continent is blessed with a large population of
young people, who, if properly harnessed, constitute
a demographic dividend that is key to sustaining
additional strong economic growth for our continent.
We therefore share the concern that, if we do not
manage those contradictions well, dissatisfied groups
in our communities - including young people - will
make the wrong choice of resorting to arms.

A mix ofprudent measures, ranging from leveraging
the potential of technological innovations to investing
in proper education, is essential to create an enabling
environment for peace. We must empower women and
youth as agents of peace and development by promoting
participatory and accountable governance.

For Botswana an important part of achieving
effective governance and development is through the
effective management of the mineral sector as a catalyst
for economic and social development. We therefore
welcome the fact that, through the AU's Africa Mining
Vision, Africa has recognized the need to work in
unison in this area, thereby providing an ideal platform
to share experiences. As the concept note before
us indicates, the task of silencing the guns cannot
always be delinked from the effective management of
natural resources.

In order to maintain the momentum on legitimate
trade in precious minerals, such as diamonds, our
delegation takes this opportunity to encourage keen
interest in the forthcoming Kimberley Process-driven
General Assembly discussions on the role of diamonds
in fuelling conflict. Action is expected on a draft
resolution on 1 March.
Overall, our delegation agrees that Africa is doing
its utmost through the AU and its regional mechanisms.
For instance, beyond establishing some early-warning
mechanisms and some standby forces, as I mentioned,
Africa itself has also acknowledged the need to harness
its demographic dividend through investing in youth.
The adoption of such relevant instruments as Agenda
2063, the fiftieth anniversary solemn declaration and
the AU Master Roadmap ofPractical Steps for Silencing
the Guns in Africa by 2020, among others, represent
significant commitments. The ongoing implementation
of institutional reforms and the enhanced effectiveness
of AU peacekeeping operations are also key to the
sustainability of the efforts to promote and maintain
peace and security on the continent.

But beyond the existing threats that continue to fuel
conflict, a significant emerging threat is climate change,
which exacerbates conflict in Africa. We therefore
welcome the recently updated multi-year appeal for the
period 2018-2019 issued by the Department of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs. The acknowledgement
of this linkage is very important. Our delegation
encourages continued attention by the Security Council
to climate-related peace and security challenges.

In conclusion, the African Union and individual
African countries cannot silence the guns by
themselves. In addition to existing partnerships, we
welcome the recently concluded frameworks between
the AU and the United Nations on peace and security,
as well as on the Agenda 2063 and the 2020 initiative.
We wish to also highlight and express our appreciation
for the support of the United Nations for the AU Peace
and Security Council initiative to declare September of
each year until 2020 as Africa Amnesty Month for the
surrender of illegally owned weapons and arms, in line
with the Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative.

