Mr. Menzione (Italy): My delegation will vote in
favour of the draft resolution extending the mandate of the
United Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan
(UNMOT) by six months, essentially because we take a
positive View of the developments of recent weeks, despite
the shadows still hanging over some areas of the inter-Tajik
negotiating process.

The two primary factors allowing the mandate to be
extended are firstly, the renewal of the agreement on a
temporary cease-fire until 15 August 1995, and secondly,
the decision by the Council of Heads of State of the
Commonwealth of Independent States to extend the
mandate of the Peace-keeping Force until the end of 1995.

Italy is confident that the truce may actually last
longer than the currently agreed period. In our View, the
necessary conditions for the UNMOT Mission are the
existence of the cease-fire and the maintenance of a certain
momentum in the negotiations. Whatever their highs and
lows, the inter-Tajik negotiations as a whole - since the
first round - have seemed to follow a rather positive trend.
Now they are enriched by the proactive participation of
neighbouring countries and of the two organizations most
directly interested, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the Organization of the
Islamic Conference.

The conditions that the parties had set at various for
continuing the negotiations - regarding, for example, the
agenda and the venue for the talks - appear to have
become less stringent over the past two months. We should
not underestimate the work done by the Secretary-General' s
Special Envoy in facilitating, at various junctures, a
dialogue that has finally been consolidated, especially
through the meeting in Kabul between President
Rakhmonov and the leader of the opposition, Mr. Nuri.

While the fourth round of negotiations in Almaty did
not produce the breakthrough that many had hoped for, it
still scored strong points in favour of national
reconciliation. Firstly, both sides seemed to have displayed
a more flexible attitude, at least in the initial phase.
Secondly, the session was characterized by broad
participation, both governmental and intergovernmental,
which showed how, in some cases, formulas that expand
consensus are not necessarily an impediment to the
momentum of negotiations. Thirdly, the political
commitment of the parties, along with confidence-building
and humanitarian measures, contributed to re-establishing
what is, in our opinion, a very important factor: overcoming
the psychological barriers between the leaders, who have
shown that they can establish a concrete and direct
dialogue.

That this was the case in the meeting between the
President of the Tajik Republic and the leader of the
Islamic Revival Movement of Tajikistan is demonstrated
by the communique they issued, which stated that they
had committed themselves to continuing search for a
solution to the problems that determine the fate of
Tajikistan.

My delegation takes note of this commitment, which
is the best response to the appeal to the parties by the
Head of State of the Russian Federation and by all the
Central Asian republics, which emphasized that, while it
is clear that the principal responsibility lies with the Tajik
parties themselves, the burden of mutual mistrust and
enmity complicates efforts to achieve real national
reconciliation.

In Kabul in mid-April and in Almaty in mid-May,
steps were indeed taken in this direction. The international
community, starting with the United Nations, is
committed to democratic rehabilitation in Tajikistan. A
significant contribution can be made by the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the
regional organization that in our opinion has a particular
vocation to the promote democratic institutions and
human rights. The excellent work being performed by the
OSCE Mission in Dushanbe and the participation of the
OSCE in the fourth round of negotiations in Almaty are
further signs of this commitment.

